
SCHEME BOOKLET
In relation to a proposal from Teranga Gold Corporation (Teranga) to buy all of the 
issued shares in Gryphon Minerals Limited (Gryphon) that it does not already own.
VOTE IN FAVOUR
The Gryphon Directors unanimously recommend that you vote in
favour of the Scheme in the absence of a Superior Proposal
FINANCIAL ADVISER
LEGAL ADVISER
Gryphon Minerals Limited 
ACN 107 690 657
This is an important document and requires your immediate attention.  You should read it carefully and in its entirety 
before deciding whether or not to vote in favour of the Scheme.  If you are in doubt as to what you should do, you should 
consult your legal, financial or other professional adviser.  If you have recently sold all your Gryphon Shares, please ignore  
this document.
1
E
c:
©
@
@2)
3
@3
§
©
@
Rﬁ.
@
Q
&.
©

&


IMPORTANT NOTICES
GENERAL
Shareholders are encouraged to read this Scheme Booklet 
in its entirety before making a decision as to how to  
vote on the Scheme Resolution to be considered at the 
Scheme Meeting.
PURPOSE OF SCHEME BOOKLET
The purpose of this Scheme Booklet is to explain the 
terms of the Scheme and the manner in which the 
Scheme will be considered and implemented (if approved) 
and to provide such information as is prescribed or 
otherwise material to the decision of Shareholders 
whether or not to approve the Scheme. This Scheme 
Booklet includes the explanatory statement required to be 
sent to Shareholders under Part 5.1 of the Corporations 
Act in relation to the Scheme.
RESPONSIBILITY FOR INFORMATION
The information contained in this Scheme Booklet  
(other than the Teranga Information and the Independent 
Expert’s Report) has been prepared by Gryphon and is the 
responsibility of Gryphon. None of Teranga, its directors, 
officers or advisers assume any responsibility for the 
accuracy or completeness of the Gryphon Information.
The Teranga Information has been provided by Teranga 
and is the responsibility of Teranga. None of Gryphon, its 
directors, officers or advisers assume any responsibility for 
the accuracy or completeness of the Teranga Information.
KPMG Corporate Finance has prepared the Independent 
Expert’s Report in relation to the Scheme contained in 
Annexure A and takes responsibility for that report. None 
of Gryphon, Teranga nor their respective directors, officers 
and advisers assume any responsibility for the accuracy or 
completeness of the Independent Expert’s Report.
ASIC AND ASX
A copy of this Scheme Booklet was provided to ASIC under 
section 411(2) of the Corporations Act and registered 
by ASIC under section 412(6) of the Corporations Act. 
ASIC has been given the opportunity to comment on 
this Scheme Booklet in accordance with section 411(2) 
of the Corporations Act. ASIC has been requested to 
provide a statement, in accordance with section 411(17)
(b) of the Corporations Act, that ASIC has no objection 
to the Scheme. If ASIC provides that statement, it will be 
produced to the Court at the time of the hearing on the 
Second Court Date. Neither ASIC nor its officers take any 
responsibility for the contents of this Scheme Booklet.
A copy of this Scheme Booklet has been lodged with ASX. 
Neither ASX nor its officers take any responsibility for the 
contents of this Scheme Booklet.
COURT
The Court is not responsible for the contents of this 
Scheme Booklet and, in ordering that the Scheme Meeting 
be held, the Court does not in any way indicate that the 
Court has approved or will approve the terms of the
Scheme. An order of the Court under section 411(1) of the 
Corporations Act is not an endorsement of, or any other 
expression of opinion on, the Scheme.
FUTURE MATTERS AND INTENTIONS
Certain statements in this Scheme Booklet relate to the 
future. These statements involve known and unknown 
risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other important 
factors that could cause the actual results, performance 
or achievements of Gryphon, Teranga or the Combined 
Group to be materially different from future results, 
performance or achievements expressed or implied by 
those statements. Such risks, uncertainties, assumptions 
and other important factors include, among other 
things, general economic conditions, exchange rates, 
interest rates, the regulatory environment, the price 
of gold, anticipated costs and mining, operational and 
development risks. These statements only reflect views 
held as at the date of this Scheme Booklet.
Other than as required by law neither Gryphon, Teranga 
nor any other person gives any representation, assurance 
or guarantee that the events expressed or implied in any 
forward looking statements in this Scheme Booklet will 
actually occur. You are cautioned about relying on any 
such forward looking statements in this Scheme Booklet. 
Additionally, statements of the intentions of Teranga 
reflect Teranga’s present intentions as at the date of this 
Scheme Booklet and may be subject to change.
NO INVESTMENT ADVICE
This Scheme Booklet does not constitute financial product 
advice and has been prepared without reference to the 
investment objectives, financial situation and particular 
needs of individual Shareholders. This Scheme Booklet 
should not be relied upon as the sole basis for any 
investment decision in relation to the Scheme or your 
Shares. Before making an investment decision in relation 
to the Scheme or your Shares, including any decision to 
vote for or against the Scheme, you should consider, with 
or without the assistance of a financial adviser, whether 
that decision is appropriate in the light of your particular 
investment needs, objectives and financial circumstances. 
If you are in any doubt about what you should do, you 
should consult your legal, financial or other professional 
adviser before making any investment decision in relation 
to the Scheme or your Shares.
GRYPHON ORE RESERVES AND  
MINERAL RESOURCES
The information in this Scheme Booklet that relates to 
the exploration results at the Banfora Gold Project is 
based on and fairly represents information which has 
been compiled by Mr Sam Brooks who is a member 
of the Australian Institute of Geoscientists. Mr Brooks 
has sufficient experience relevant to the styles of 
mineralisation and type of deposit under consideration 
and to the activity that is being undertaken to qualify 
as a Competent Person, as defined in the 2012 Edition 
of the “Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration 
Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves”. Mr Brooks 
is a full time employee of Gryphon and has consented 
to the inclusion of the matters in this Scheme Booklet
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
i
based on his information in the form and context in 
which it appears. This information was prepared and 
first disclosed under JORC Code 2004. It has not been 
updated since to comply with the JORC Code 2012 
on the basis that the information has not materially 
changed since it was last reported.
The information in this Scheme Booklet that relates to 
the Mineral Resources at the Nogbele and Fourkoura 
Deposits, Burkina Faso is based on information compiled 
by Mr Sam Brooks who is a member of the Australian 
Institute of Geoscientists. Mr Brooks has sufficient 
experience relevant to the styles of mineralisation 
and type of deposit under consideration and to 
the activity that is being undertaken to qualify as a 
Competent Person, as defined in the 2012 Edition of the 
“Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, 
Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves”. Mr Brooks is a full 
time employee of Gryphon and has consented to the 
inclusion of the matters in this Scheme Booklet based on 
his information in the form and context in which  
it appears.
The information in this Scheme Booklet that relates 
to the mineral resources at the Stinger and Samavogo 
Deposits, Burkina Faso is based on information compiled 
by Mr Dmitry Pertel who is a member of the Australian 
Institute of Geoscientists. Mr Pertel has sufficient 
experience relevant to the styles of mineralisation 
and type of deposit under consideration and to 
the activity that is being undertaken to qualify as a 
Competent Person, as defined in the 2012 Edition of the 
“Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, 
Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves”. Mr Pertel is a full 
time employee of CSA Global Pty Ltd and has consented 
to the inclusion of the matters in this Scheme Booklet 
based on his information in the form and context in 
which it appears. This information was prepared and 
first disclosed under JORC Code 2004. It has not been 
updated since to comply with the JORC Code 2012 
on the basis that the information has not materially 
changed since it was last reported.
The information in this Scheme Booklet that relates 
to Gryphon’s Ore Reserves Estimate for the Banfora 
2 Mtpa Heap Leach Operation (see section 4.2(a)) is 
based on information compiled by Mr Quinton de Klerk 
who is a member of the Australasian Institute of Mining 
and Metallurgy.  Mr de Klerk has sufficient experience 
relevant to the styles of mineralisation and type of 
deposit under consideration and to the activity that is 
being undertaken to qualify as a Competent Person, as 
defined in the 2012 Edition of the “Australasian Code 
for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources 
and Ore Reserves”. Mr de Klerk is a full time employee 
of Cube Consulting Pty Ltd and has consented to the 
inclusion of the matters in this Scheme Booklet based on 
his information in the form and context in which  
it appears.
TERANGA MINERAL RESERVES AND  
MINERAL RESOURCES
The technical information contained in this Scheme 
Booklet relating to Teranga’s open pit mineral reserve
ii
estimates is based on, and fairly represents, information 
compiled by Mr William Paul Chawrun, P. Eng who is a 
member of the Professional Engineers Ontario, which is 
currently included as a “Recognised Overseas Professional 
Organisation” in a list promulgated by the ASX from 
time to time. Mr Chawrun is a full time employee of 
Teranga and is not “independent” within the meaning of 
National Instrument 43-101 – Standards of Disclosure for 
Mineral Projects (NI 43-101) of the Canadian Securities 
Administrators. Mr Chawrun has sufficient experience 
which is relevant to the style of mineralization and type 
of deposit under consideration and to the activity which 
he is undertaking to qualify as a Competent Person as 
defined in the 2012 Edition of the “Australasian Code for 
Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and 
Ore Reserves”. Mr Chawrun is a “Qualified Person” under 
NI 43-101. Mr Chawrun has consented to the inclusion in 
this Scheme Booklet of the matters based on his compiled 
information in the form and context in which it appears in 
this Scheme Booklet.
The technical information contained in this Scheme 
Booklet relating to Teranga’s mineral resource estimates 
is based on, and fairly represents, information compiled 
by Ms Patti Nakai-Lajoie. Ms Nakai-Lajoie, P. Geo., is a 
Member of the Association of Professional Geoscientists 
of Ontario, which is currently included as a “Recognised 
Overseas Professional Organisation” in a list promulgated 
by the ASX from time to time. Ms Nakai-Lajoie is a full time 
employee of Teranga and is not “independent” within 
the meaning of NI 43-101. Ms Nakai-Lajoie has sufficient 
experience which is relevant to the style of mineralization 
and type of deposit under consideration and to the activity 
which she is undertaking to qualify as a Competent Person 
as defined in the 2012 Edition of the Australasian Code 
for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources 
and Ore Reserves. Ms Nakai-Lajoie is a “Qualified Person” 
under NI 43-101. Ms Nakai- Lajoie has consented to the 
inclusion in this Scheme Booklet of the matters based on 
her compiled information in the form and context in which 
it appears in this Scheme Booklet.
The technical information contained in this Scheme 
Booklet relating to Teranga’s underground mineral 
reserves estimates is based on, and fairly represents, 
information compiled by Mr Jeff Sepp, P. Eng who is a 
member of the Professional Engineers Ontario, which is 
currently included as a “Recognised Overseas Professional 
Organisation” in a list promulgated by the ASX from 
time to time. Mr Sepp is independent of Teranga and 
is a “Qualified Person” as defined in NI 43-101 and a 
“competent person” as defined in the 2012 Edition of the 
Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, 
Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves. Mr Sepp has 
sufficient experience relevant to the style of mineralization 
and type of deposit under consideration and to the 
activity he is undertaking to qualify as a Competent Person 
as defined in the 2012 Edition of the Australasian Code for 
Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and 
Ore Reserves. Mr Sepp has consented to the inclusion in 
this Scheme Booklet of the matters based on his compiled 
information in the form and context in which it appears in 
this Scheme Booklet.
Teranga’s disclosure of mineral reserve and mineral 
resource information is governed by Nl 43-101 which 
incorporates the guidelines set out in the Canadian 
Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum (the CIM) 
Standards on Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves, 
adopted by the CIM Council, as may be amended 
from time to time by the CIM (CIM Standards). CIM 
definitions of the terms “mineral reserve”, “proven 
mineral reserve”, “probable mineral reserve”, “mineral 
resource”, “measured mineral resource”, “indicated 
mineral resource” and “inferred mineral resource”, are 
substantially similar to the 2012 JORC Code corresponding 
definitions of the terms “ore reserve”, “proved ore 
reserve”, “probable ore reserve”, “mineral resource”, 
“measured mineral resource”, “indicated mineral 
resource” and “inferred mineral resource”, respectively. 
Estimates of mineral resources and mineral reserves 
prepared in accordance with the 2012 JORC Code would 
not be materially different if prepared in accordance with 
the CIM definitions applicable under Nl 43-101. There can 
be no assurance that those portions of mineral resources 
that are not mineral reserves will ultimately be converted 
into mineral reserves.
SHAREHOLDERS OUTSIDE AUSTRALIA
This Scheme Booklet complies with the disclosure 
requirements applicable in Australia, which may be 
different to those in other countries. This Scheme Booklet 
and the Scheme do not in any way constitute an offer of 
securities in any place where (or to any person who) it 
would not be lawful to make such an offer.
A Gryphon Shareholder who is recorded in the Register 
at the Record Date as having a registered address outside 
Australia, New Zealand and Canada will be a non-resident 
Gryphon Shareholder for the purposes of the Scheme. 
Non-resident Gryphon Shareholders should refer to 
section 3.9 of this Scheme Booklet to determine whether 
they are Ineligible Shareholders.
Ineligible Shareholders will not be able to receive Teranga 
CDIs or Teranga Shares under the Scheme. Instead, 
Ineligible Shareholders will receive the net proceeds from 
the sale of the Teranga Shares which they would have 
otherwise received. Ineligible Shareholders should refer to 
sections 3.9 and 7.4 for further information.
FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The financial information including the pro forma financial 
information relating to Gryphon included in this Scheme 
Booklet has been prepared, or derived from financial 
statements prepared, in accordance with International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by the 
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and is 
presented in an abbreviated form and does not contain 
all the disclosures that are usually provided in an annual 
report prepared in accordance with the Corporations Act.
The financial information including the pro forma financial 
information relating to Teranga or the Combined Group 
included in this Scheme Booklet has been prepared, 
or derived from financial information prepared, in 
accordance with IFRS and is subject to Canadian auditing 
and auditor independence standards.
TAXATION IMPLICATIONS OF THE SCHEME 
Section 9 provides a general outline of the Australian 
income tax, capital gains tax, GST and stamp duty 
consequences for Gryphon Shareholders who dispose of 
their Gryphon Shares to Teranga in accordance with the 
Scheme. It does not purport to be a complete analysis or 
to identify all potential tax consequences nor is it intended 
to replace the need for specialist tax advice in respect 
of the particular circumstances of individual Gryphon 
Shareholders.
Gryphon Shareholders who are subject to taxation outside 
Australia should also consult their tax adviser as to the 
applicable tax consequences of the Scheme in the relevant 
jurisdiction.
NOTICE TO CANADIAN SHAREHOLDERS
The Teranga Shares to be issued as part of the Scheme 
Consideration have not been qualified by a prospectus 
prepared and filed in accordance with Canadian securities 
laws. Those Teranga Shares will be issued pursuant to 
an exemption from the prospectus requirements of 
applicable securities laws of the provinces and territories 
of Canada under section 2.11 of National Instrument 
45-106 and will generally not be subject to any resale 
restrictions under Canadian securities laws provided 
that (i) Teranga is and has been a reporting issuer in a 
jurisdiction of Canada for the four months immediately 
preceding the proposed resale or other trade; (ii) the 
trade is not a control distribution (as defined under 
National Instrument 45-102); (iii) no unusual effort is 
made to prepare the market or to create a demand 
for the security that is the subject of the trade; (iv) no 
extraordinary commission or consideration is paid to 
a person or company in respect of the trade; (v) if the 
selling security holder is an insider or officer of the issuer, 
the selling security holder has no reasonable grounds to 
believe that the issuer is in default of securities legislation, 
and (vi) such holder is not a person or company engaged 
in or holding itself out as engaging in the business of 
trading securities or such trade is made in accordance with 
applicable dealer registration requirements or in reliance 
upon an exemption from such requirements. Gryphon 
Shareholders should consult with their own financial 
and legal advisors with respect to any restrictions on the 
resale of Teranga Shares issued as part of the Scheme 
Consideration. As a reporting issuer in Canada, Teranga 
is required to comply with Canadian statutory financial 
and other continuous and timely reporting requirements, 
including the requirement for certain insiders of Teranga 
to file reports with respect to trades of Teranga securities.
PRIVACY 
Gryphon, Teranga and their respective registries or  
agents may collect personal information in the process  
of implementing the Scheme. The personal information 
may include the names, addresses, contact details and 
security holdings of Gryphon Shareholders and the  
names of persons appointed by Gryphon Shareholders  
as proxies, attorneys or corporate representatives at  
the Scheme Meeting. The collection of some of this 
personal information is required or authorised by the 
Corporations Act.
iii
In certain circumstances, Gryphon may provide  
additional disclosure to Gryphon Shareholders in relation 
to the Scheme after the date of this Scheme Booklet.  
To the extent applicable, Gryphon Shareholders should 
have regard to any such supplemental information in 
determining how to vote in relation to the Scheme.
EFFECT OF ROUNDING
Figures, amounts, percentages, prices, estimates, 
calculations of value and fractions in this Scheme Booklet 
are subject to the effect of rounding. Accordingly, the 
actual calculation of these figures may differ from the 
figures set out in this Scheme Booklet.
INTERPRETATION
Capitalised terms and certain abbreviations used in this 
Scheme Booklet have the meanings set out in the Glossary 
at the back of this Scheme Booklet. The documents 
reproduced in the annexures to this Scheme Booklet 
may have their own defined terms, which are sometimes 
different from those in the Glossary.
Unless otherwise stated, all data contained in charts, 
graphs and tables is based on information available at the 
date of this Scheme Booklet. All numbers are rounded 
unless otherwise indicated.
Unless otherwise specified, all references to $, A$, AUD 
and cents are references to Australian currency.
All references to times in this Scheme Booklet are 
references to time in Perth, Western Australia, unless 
otherwise stated.
DATE
This Scheme book is dated 17 August 2016.
The primary purpose of collecting this personal 
information is to assist Gryphon in the conduct of 
the Scheme Meeting and to enable the Scheme to be 
implemented by Gryphon in the manner described in 
this Scheme Booklet. The personal information may 
be disclosed to Teranga’s Share Registry, print and mail 
service providers, authorised securities brokers and any 
other service provider to the extent necessary to effect 
the Scheme. Some of these recipients are likely to be 
located in overseas countries, including Canada.
If the information outlined above is not collected, 
Gryphon may be hindered in, or prevented from, 
conducting the Scheme Meeting and implementing  
the Scheme.
Gryphon Shareholders who are individuals and the other 
individuals in respect of whom personal information is 
collected as outlined above have certain rights to access 
the personal information collected in relation to them. 
Such individuals should contact Gryphon’s Share Registry 
on 1300 554 474 (within Australia) or +61 1300 554 474 
(outside Australia) if they wish to exercise these rights.
Gryphon Shareholders who appoint a named person to 
act as their proxy, attorney or corporate representative 
should ensure that they inform that person of the 
matters outlined above.
NOTICE OF MEETING
The Notice of Scheme Meeting is set out in Annexure E.
NOTICE OF SECOND COURT DATE 
At the Second Court Date, the Court will consider 
whether to approve the Scheme following the vote at 
the Shareholder Meeting.
Any Gryphon Shareholder may appear at the Second 
Court Date, expected to be 28 September 2016 at  
1 Victoria Avenue, Perth, WA 6000.
Any Gryphon Shareholder who wishes to oppose 
approval of the Scheme at the Second Court Hearing 
may do so by filing with the Court and serving on 
Gryphon a notice of appearance in the prescribed form, 
together with any affidavit that the Gryphon Shareholder 
proposes to rely on.
GRYPHON AND TERANGA WEBSITES
The content of Gryphon and Teranga’s respective 
websites do not form part of this Scheme Booklet and 
Shareholders should not rely on their content.
Any references in this Scheme Booklet to a website 
is a textual reference for information only and no 
information in any website forms part of this  
Scheme Booklet.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
If you have any questions or require further information 
please contact Gryphon’s Chief Financial Officer on  
+61 (0)8 9287 4333. Gryphon Shareholders should 
consult their legal, financial or other professional adviser 
before making any decision regarding the Scheme.
iv
CONTENTS
i 
01
02
04 
06
1. Matters relevant to your vote on the Scheme  10 
20 
2. Q&A 
25 
3. Details of the Scheme 
4. Information on Gryphon 
32 
41 
5. Information on Teranga 
6. Information about the Combined Group 
65
73
7. Scheme Consideration 
80
8. Risk factors 
9. Australian tax implications of the Scheme 
96
100 
10. Additional information  
11. Glossary  
110 
120
Important Notices 
Important Dates 
Letter from the Chairman of Gryphon 
Letter from the President & CEO of Teranga 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure A –  
Independent Expert’s Report 
Annexure B –  
Comparison of Australian and Canadian  
legal regimes 
Annexure C –  
Scheme of Arrangement 
Annexure D –  
Deed Poll 
Annexure E –  
Notice of Meeting 
Corporate Directory
285
303 
 
315 
 
323
327
1
IMPORTANT DATES
10:00am on  
21 September 2016
10:00am on  
21 September 2016
10:00am on  
23 September 2016
Latest time and date for receipt of proxy forms for Scheme Meeting.
Time and date for determining eligibility to vote at the Scheme Meeting.
Gryphon Shareholders’ meeting to vote on the Scheme.
If the Scheme is approved by Gryphon Shareholders
28 September 2016
Second Court Hearing for approval of the Scheme.
29 September 2016
Court order is lodged with ASIC and Scheme takes effect.  
Last day of trading in Gryphon Shares.
Close of trading on  
29 September 2016
5:00pm on  
6 October 2016
5:00pm on  
6 October 2016
13 October 2016
Suspension of Gryphon Shares from trading on ASX.
Record Date for determining entitlement to receive Scheme Consideration.
Deadline for receipt of Election Forms from Gryphon Shareholders.
Implementation of the Scheme (Implementation Date) 
Issue of the Scheme Consideration.
All dates following the date of the Scheme Meeting are indicative only and, among other things, are subject  
to all necessary approvals from the Court and other Regulatory Authorities.  Any changes to the above 
timetable (which may include an earlier Second Court Hearing) will be announced through ASX and notified  
on http://www.asx.com.au/asx/statistics/announcements.do.  All references to time in this Scheme Booklet  
are references to Perth, Australia time.
1
LETTER FROM THE CHAIRMAN OF GRYPHON
I encourage you to read this Scheme Booklet 
(including the report of the Independent Expert) 
carefully in full and, if required, to seek your own 
legal, financial or other professional advice.
At the scheme meeting, shareholders will be asked 
to approve the scheme. The scheme meeting will 
be held at 38 Station Street, Subiaco WA 6008, on 
23 September 2016 commencing at 10:00am.
Your vote is important. I strongly encourage you 
to vote either by attending the scheme meeting 
in person or by completing and returning the 
accompanying proxy form so that it is received at 
the address shown on the proxy form by 10:00am 
on 21 September 2016.
Shareholders who have any questions relating 
to the scheme should contact Gryphon’s Chief 
Financial Officer on +61 (0)8 9287 4333 between 
9:00am and 5:00pm (Perth, Australia time) Monday 
to Friday.
Yours sincerely
Mel Ashton 
Chairman 
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Dear Shareholder
On 20 June 2016, Gryphon Minerals Limited 
(“Gryphon”) announced a proposal from Teranga 
Gold Corporation (“Teranga”) for Teranga to acquire 
all of the issued shares in Gryphon by way of a 
scheme of arrangement under Part 5.1 of the 
Corporations Act.  Each Gryphon share will be 
acquired by Teranga in exchange for 0.169 Teranga 
CDIs or, if so elected, 0.169 Teranga shares.
The scheme is subject to a number of conditions, 
including court approval and the approval of 
Gryphon shareholders.
Your board considers that the scheme is in the best 
interests of Gryphon shareholders.  The directors 
unanimously recommend that you vote in favour of 
the scheme in the absence of a superior proposal.
The key reasons for your directors’ 
recommendation of the scheme are set out in 
section 1.1 of this Scheme Booklet.  In particular, 
the value of the scheme consideration to be 
received by shareholders if the scheme is approved 
represents a meaningful premium of 53% to the 
last prices at which Gryphon shares were traded 
prior to the board announcing the proposed 
transaction (based on the trading price of Teranga 
CDIs at the same time).  By receiving Teranga CDIs 
or Teranga Shares, you can retain an economic 
exposure to the Banfora Gold Project (and 
Gryphon’s other assets) coupled with Teranga’s 
project development and mining expertise, 
financial standing and the benefits of its producing 
Sabodala gold project in Senegal.
Each director intends to vote for the scheme in 
relation to all Gryphon shares held or controlled 
by them at the time of the scheme meeting in the 
absence of a superior proposal.  The independent 
expert, KPMG Corporate Finance, considers that, 
in the absence of a superior proposal, the scheme 
is fair and reasonable and therefore is in the best 
interests of shareholders.  The full report of the 
independent expert is set out in Annexure A.
2
’4!
V. 1
I:
f
‘ , /. “s '
‘ ‘ ‘\ , '  / ‘
\9 u. I \ ﬁk/ I“ r\\‘. r r 1’,/ 
L!» ‘ 2 f 
, I / ‘(l‘ 
‘ . ‘ V » ’l‘ '95.:
. ‘  -' ,, ;- 3;“er a
f— ; K  » 3 ‘ " N 7.1
h I  ‘ F1," 7 {I E"
x . ﬂ . . Q ' ILA/H ﬂ 
J :V. n _ ' S. ‘ . v' 71;  33‘“,
é-‘J‘.’ HIV 7- in ~ .zy if I E." ‘3‘
K; '- ‘1; 77K? "‘     , ‘   . __
.7 . ,7 > -' , I i‘ l   , ‘ ‘ V n‘
I i ‘ ' ‘I ‘ , ~b" ‘4 \n w , E
l \ a 1:: " 3"   
‘I ‘ .  ,5-L‘” ‘  :jt ” [Ly-“E: ‘
W‘gv: \L‘;    \warijf  )‘Iw‘g' " y» ,7 \V  
y 7'  §  77:53}: J 1.; ‘ .’ ' ‘. W5 '53:" ' :4" >   ‘v
 f  7 a 1 ‘ f 7 ., ‘ »“-' v"


LETTER FROM THE PRESIDENT & CEO OF TERANGA
Dear Gryphon Shareholder
On behalf of Teranga’s board of directors and 
management, I am pleased to write to you 
concerning the opportunity presented by our 
proposed acquisition of Gryphon.
The consideration offered by Teranga provides a 
premium of 53% to the 17 June 2016 closing price 
of Gryphon shares (based on the trading price of 
Teranga CDIs at the same time) and is  
an outstanding opportunity to consolidate two  
high quality gold assets into one multi-jurisdictional 
West African gold producer. Upon closing, the 
combined company will have 3.5 million ounces  
of proven and probable mineral reserves.1 
In addition, we will have the financial capabilities 
to fund the development of the Banfora project 
on an expedited basis and pursue the considerable 
exploration potential of the prospective land 
packages we will have in Burkina Faso, Senegal  
and Côte d’Ivoire.
Teranga has a strong value proposition through 
its Sabodala gold mine in Senegal, where we 
are setting a benchmark for responsible mining.  
Teranga’s properties are located on a prospective 
West African gold belt and Teranga is uniquely 
positioned with the only gold mill in Senegal.  
Since 2009, Sabodala has produced more than  
1.2 million ounces of gold and still has a large,  
long life, reserve base. Our life of mine cash  
flow is strong, driven by low cost production, 
providing us with the free cash flows to grow the 
Company. Our vision is to become a  
mid-tier West African gold producer and our 
acquisition of Gryphon is a significant step  
towards this goal.
The Gryphon and Teranga management teams 
have complementary skills that together create 
a company with proven expertise in exploration
through mine development and operations in  
West Africa.
While Gryphon had originally designed Banfora as  
a traditional carbon in leach (CIL) flowsheet, 
Banfora was redesigned into a heap leach 
operation in 2013 and 2014 to lower the project 
capital cost as the price of gold declined. We share 
Gryphon management’s belief that, in the absence 
of financial constraints, there is greater value today 
in a fully optimised CIL flowsheet, particularly when 
combined with an active exploration program 
aimed at converting high-grade resources to 
reserves for which a CIL flowsheet provides much 
more flexibility in processing new discoveries.   
On a pro forma basis, the Combined Group will 
have US$66.8 million in cash and cash equivalents 
and US$15 million unused on the Teranga Revolving 
Credit Facility. In addition, it is anticipated that 
Sabodala will generate substantial free cash flow 
at current gold prices that will lead to increased 
financing flexibility and access to capital.
Therefore, while Teranga could, potentially, fund 
project construction of the Banfora Gold Project, 
changes in gold price and other macroeconomic 
variables, as well as potential construction 
cost overruns, make it prudent to supplement 
anticipated Sabodala cash flows with third party 
funding for these purposes.
Teranga believes a debt facility in the order of 
US$50 million to US$75 million should bridge  
any potential funding gap to complete the 
construction of the Banfora Gold Project and 
would be achievable in the current economic 
environment.
We are very excited about this transaction and 
its future potential. The combined group will
1 For the pro forma purposes of this Scheme Booklet Teranga has utilised the most recent Gryphon Reserve Estimate for the Banfora Gold  
Project of 826,000 ounces (17.4 Mt at 1.5 g/t) based on a lower capital cost heap leach processing option (see section 4.2(a) for further details).   
However, as noted in Teranga’s press release dated 19 June 2016 and re-confirmed herein, Teranga’s preferred development path for the Banfora 
Gold Project will be based on an optimized CIL flowsheet.   The pro forma Combined Group Proven and Probable Mineral Reserve estimate of  
3.7 million ounces included in Teranga’s 19 June 2016 press release was based on Gryphon’s CIL feasibility study Mineral Reserve estimate of  
1.05 million ounces (16.7 Mt at 1.95 g/t) issued in January 2013.
4
This is a unique opportunity to create a growth 
oriented, mid-tier multi-jurisdictional gold producer 
in West Africa. We encourage you to vote in favour 
of the scheme of arrangement at the meeting and 
look forward to the closing of the transaction and 
to our future with you as a shareholder.
Yours sincerely,
Richard Young 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
Teranga Gold Corporation
have a significant reserve base, our Sabodala 
operations are anticipated to produce, on average, 
approximately 207,000 ounces per year between 
2016 and 2020.2 The opportunity to bring the 
Banfora Gold Project into commercial production 
will only increase the combined group’s  
production profile.
We are also very excited with the suite of 
exploration targets at the Banfora Gold Project, 
where there are a number of shallow oxide  
targets with potential for high grade gold 
mineralisation, and at the Golden Hill project, 
which is located on a prospective gold belt in 
Burkina Faso. On 20 July 2016, Gryphon completed 
a $4.36 million placement pursuant to which 
Teranga subscribed for 5 percent of Gryphon’s 
shares.  The proceeds are being used to fast-
track resource conversion at Banfora, complete 
optimisation studies and prepare the Banfora Gold 
Project for construction.
This transaction is unanimously supported by 
Gryphon’s board of directors, who will vote their 
shares in favour of the transaction at the Gryphon 
shareholders’ meeting on 23 September 2016, 
in the absence of a superior proposal. They see 
this is the way to best maximize the return to all 
stakeholders and create a company with a strong 
future. We encourage you to vote in favour of the 
Scheme Resolution.
2 Details of Teranga’s production targets for Sabodala for the calendar years 2016 to 2020 were initially published in Teranga’s ASX announcements 
titled “Technical Report NI 43-101” and “Press Release - Technical Report” both dated 24 March 2016. Teranga confirms that all material 
assumptions underpinning the production target in these ASX announcements continue to apply and have not materially changed since that date.  
The production guidance is based on existing Proven and Probable Mineral Reserves.
5
SUMMARY
WHAT IS THE SCHEME?
The Scheme is a scheme of arrangement between 
Gryphon and Scheme Participants. If the Scheme 
becomes Effective, Teranga will acquire all Gryphon 
Shares that it does not already own and Gryphon will 
become a wholly owned Subsidiary of Teranga.
A “scheme of arrangement” is a statutory procedure 
that can be used to enable one company to acquire 
another company. It requires a vote in favour of 
the Scheme by the Requisite Majority of Gryphon 
Shareholders (other than Excluded Shareholders)  
at a meeting of Gryphon Shareholders as well as 
Court approval.
If you are a Gryphon Shareholder on the Record Date 
you will receive:
•  0.169 Teranga CDIs per Gryphon Share or, if so
elected,
•  0.169 Teranga Shares per Gryphon Share.
The Scheme Resolution must be passed by Gryphon 
Shareholders (other than Excluded Shareholders) by 
the Requisite Majority, being:
•  a majority in number (more than 50%) of
Gryphon Shareholders who are present and 
voting either in person or by proxy, attorney or, in 
the case of corporate Shareholders, by corporate 
representative; and
•  at least 75% of the total number of votes cast on
the Scheme Resolution.
The Scheme is also subject to the satisfaction or 
waiver of the conditions summarised in section 
3.4 and set out in full in clause 3 of the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement, which include approval 
by the Court.
The terms of the Scheme are set out in full in 
Annexure C.
WHAT SHOULD I DO?
You should read this Scheme Booklet carefully in 
its entirety and then vote by attending the Scheme 
Meeting or by appointing a proxy to vote on your 
behalf. Full details of who is eligible to vote and how 
to vote are set out in section 2.
Answers to various frequently asked questions 
are set out in section 2. If you have any additional 
questions in relation to this Scheme Booklet or the 
Scheme please consult your legal, financial or other 
professional adviser or contact Gryphon’s Chief 
Financial Officer on +61 (0)8 9287 4333 between 
Monday and Friday from 9:00 am to 5:00 pm  
(Perth, Australia time).
WHAT ARE THE CONDITIONS TO  
THE SCHEME?
The implementation of the Scheme is subject to 
a number of conditions as set out in the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement. A full copy of the 
Scheme Implementation Agreement is available on 
ASX’s website at www.asx.com.au and on Gryphon’s 
website at http://www.gryphonminerals.com.au/
index.php/en/investors-4/asx-announcements As at 
the date of this Scheme Booklet, implementation of 
the Scheme remains conditional on:
•  approvals from all relevant regulatory bodies
such as ASIC, and ASX;
•  Gryphon Shareholders’ approval of the Scheme
at the Scheme Meeting by the Requisite 
Majority;
•  no restraining order, injunction or other order or
decision having been issued;
•  Court approval of the Scheme in accordance with
section 411(4)(b) of the Corporations Act;
•  approval for official quotation on the ASX of
the Teranga CDIs to be issued pursuant to the 
Scheme;
•  no “Gryphon Material Adverse Event”
having occurred as stipulated in the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement (including a failure 
to secure renewal or extension of the Key 
Permits. Refer to section 3.4 for further details);
•  no “Gryphon Prescribed Occurrence”
having occurred as stipulated in the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement;
•
the “Gryphon Representations and Warranties” 
being true and correct in all material respects;
6
•  no “Teranga Material Adverse Event”
having occurred as stipulated in the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement;
•  no “Teranga Prescribed Occurrence” having
occurred as stipulated in the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement;
•
the “Teranga Representations and Warranties” 
being true and correct in all material respects; and
•  Burkina Faso Mining Code Consent having
been obtained.
HOW DO I VOTE? 
If you are registered on the Register at 10:00am on 
21 September 2016 as a Gryphon Shareholder, you 
will be entitled to vote on the Scheme Resolution 
at the Scheme Meeting.  Registrable transmission 
applications or transfers registered after this time  
will be disregarded in determining entitlements to 
vote at the Scheme Meeting.
If Gryphon Shares are jointly held, only one of the 
joint Gryphon Shareholders is entitled to vote.  
If more than one joint Gryphon Shareholder votes, 
only the vote of the Gryphon Shareholder whose 
name appears first on the Register will be counted.
HOW TO VOTE IN PERSON
To vote in person at the Scheme Meeting, Gryphon 
Shareholders must attend the Scheme Meeting to  
be held at 38 Station Street, Subiaco WA 6008 on  
23 September 2016 at 10:00am.
A Gryphon Shareholder who wishes to attend 
and vote at the Scheme Meeting in person will be 
admitted to the Scheme Meeting and given a voting 
card upon disclosure of their name and address at 
the point of entry.
Persons who are attending as an attorney should 
bring the original or a certified copy of the power 
of attorney to the Scheme Meeting, unless it has 
already been noted by Gryphon.
Persons who are attending as a corporate 
representative for a corporation must bring evidence 
of their appointment. The appointment must comply 
with section 250D of the Corporations Act.
7
An authorised corporate representative will be  
admitted to the Scheme Meeting and given a  
voting card upon providing written evidence of  
their appointment (including any authority under 
which it is signed), their name and address and the 
identity of their appointer, at the point of entry to  
the Scheme Meeting.
HOW TO VOTE BY PROXY
Your personalised proxy form for the Scheme 
Meeting accompanies this Scheme Booklet. 
Information setting out how you may vote by proxy 
is contained in the notice of meeting. If your proxy 
is signed by an attorney, please also enclose the 
authority under which the proxy is signed (or a 
certified copy of the authority).
Proxy forms may be lodged as follows:
Deliver the completed proxy form to Link Market 
Services Limited located at 1A Homebush Bay Drive, 
Rhodes NSW 2138.
Mail the completed proxy form to Gryphon Minerals 
Limited, C/- Link Market Services Limited, Locked 
Bag A14, Sydney South NSW 1235 Australia using the 
reply paid envelope.
Fax the completed proxy form to Link Market Services 
Limited on +61 2 9287 0309.
Send electronically by visiting https://investorcentre.
linkmarketservices.com.au/Login  logging in to the 
Link website using the holding details as shown on 
the proxy form, selecting ‘Voting’ and following  
the prompts.
Proxy forms, together with any power of attorney or 
authority under which the proxy form is s 
igned, must be received no later than 10:00am on  
21 September 2016 (48 hours prior to 
commencement of the Scheme Meeting).   
Proxy forms received after this time will be invalid.
A proxy will be admitted to the Scheme Meeting and 
given a voting card upon providing written evidence 
of their name and address at the point of entry to the 
Scheme Meeting. The sending of a proxy form will 
not preclude a Gryphon Shareholder from attending 
in person and voting at the Scheme Meeting. 
However, the Corporations Act specifies that the 
presence of a Gryphon Shareholder at a meeting 
suspends his or her proxy’s rights to speak and vote.
WHAT IS THE DIRECTORS’  
RECOMMENDATION?
Your Directors believe that the Scheme is in the best 
interests of Gryphon Shareholders and unanimously 
recommend that, in the absence of a Superior 
Proposal, Gryphon Shareholders vote in favour of the 
Scheme at the Scheme Meeting.
In reaching their recommendation, your Directors 
have assessed the Scheme having regard to the 
reasons to vote for, or against, the Scheme, as set 
out in this Scheme Booklet and Gryphon’s current 
strategic plans.
Your Directors believe the offer represents an 
attractive price and provides an opportunity for 
Gryphon Shareholders to realise value for their 
Gryphon Shares in the near term which may not be 
achieved if the Scheme does not proceed.
Each of your Directors intends to vote the Gryphon 
Shares that they own or control as at the time of the 
Scheme Meeting, and will direct any Gryphon proxies 
placed at their discretion in favour of the Scheme in 
the absence of a Superior Proposal.
If a Superior Proposal emerges after the date of 
this Scheme Booklet, your Directors will carefully 
reconsider the Scheme and advise you of  
their recommendation.
8
;" \
~ 9 ' I“: H‘
.  1
f1- ”5‘“ I‘  
, ‘ y.‘ L . 5: . 
.. '\ {j _,\ 3.‘ . v _-. ;,
.‘ - I ‘W" "' -’ ﬂ.  3
:.,  a: f  ’  F
1<  _ a"; ‘ \ ‘ _, 741*, gov >3 t]-
‘   A;  ' «4%. 43+:
" ‘ '» u” _ \‘ . . ,  ‘,..‘A
2;-  ; t ;  ~ 3. 5. ~;'
A_ 173$? -' .- an; x J I “‘2‘
  m. . 7r
 ' If. "n r 7"" r-W \ u I .\
 4.;  i?" ‘ v 0,»: -  v .
 A  I f” 
— f ' 1‘- ’
m _V> n ‘ é  L' E
‘~2  ,-. ~  ‘ \,  m ﬁl“_ 9' 
 ‘ ' 2; ' ' ~::-;;li=%:f:¢~  ~ ~- - ’
"  m” I 3‘3"; r I
' ~ \I .}
’ix :L-g‘  “‘I Ia: "1 ‘»
 ~ ,3.» ,3 3‘ - a x
:7— . a,“ ’g I“ ‘ I. U  K  ,
  ‘  ‘V ~ ’4 ’ y, "7‘ ‘n‘ I. ' \ I
51  (S f ,  h z
,1 . - ‘wr   f' " J O . ,
I  < k 3 A)- ; «' ‘
’ r ' f /’ V .l' ‘
’r*3‘§ If, V 7/  . IL ‘
' 1’ ' z" I   I 5 x .
.z' ' /’r ' .742 , ‘ If _.
’ .‘ ‘  - . .
u- . l  ﬁré’rr‘5_,-,_  I. ‘ A ,"
\
, V . 63  : I _
'. , _ I a
1 ,‘.' . ‘*‘. - .l
_.  r3 , Vt » 
. l, . -,  \ .
ﬂ' " ' ‘ A ‘


1. MATTERS RELEVANT TO YOUR  
VOTE ON THE SCHEME
REASONS TO VOTE FOR THE SCHEME
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Your Directors unanimously recommend that you vote in favour of the Scheme in the  
absence of a Superior Proposal.
The Independent Expert has concluded that the Scheme is fair and reasonable and therefore  
is in the best interests of Gryphon Shareholders.
The Scheme Consideration represents a significant premium to historical trading prices.
You will gain exposure to Teranga’s gold production, cash flows and significant resources.
You will retain economic exposure to the Banfora Gold Project, with the benefit of Teranga’s 
financial position and its project development and mining expertise and experience.
Asset and geographic diversification will improve the overall risk profile of production and  
cash flows.
Improved trading liquidity and capital markets access associated with the enhanced scale  
of the Combined Group.
No Superior Proposal has emerged as at the date of this Scheme Booklet.
Gryphon’s share price may fall if the Scheme is not approved.
No brokerage or stamp duty will be payable by you on the transfer of your Gryphon Shares.
Gryphon Shareholders who are Australian residents for tax purposes can obtain CGT roll-over relief.
Reasons to vote for the Scheme are discussed in more detail in section 1.1 of this Scheme Booklet.
10
1. MATTERS RELEVANT TO YOUR  
VOTE ON THE SCHEME (CONTINUED)
REASONS NOT TO VOTE FOR THE SCHEME
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
You may disagree with the Independent Expert and your Directors and believe that the  
Scheme is not in your interests.
If the Scheme proceeds you will no longer be a Gryphon Shareholder and your economic 
exposure to the development of the Banfora Gold Project will be diminished.
The tax consequences of transferring your Gryphon Shares pursuant to the Scheme may not  
be optimal for your financial position.
You may consider that there is potential for a Superior Proposal to be made.
The Scheme may be subject to conditions that you consider unacceptable.
The exact value of the Scheme Consideration upon implementation of the Scheme is not 
certain.
As a shareholder in the Combined Group you will be subject to a number of risks to which 
Gryphon is not currently exposed.
You will be exposed to differences between applicable corporations and securities laws.
Reasons why you may not want to vote for the Scheme are discussed in more detail in section 1.2  
of this Scheme Booklet.
11
1.1 REASONS TO VOTE FOR THE SCHEME
(a)   Your Directors unanimously recommend that 
you vote for the Scheme in the absence of a 
Superior Proposal
Your Directors believe that the Scheme is in the 
best interests of Gryphon Shareholders and 
unanimously recommend that, in the absence of 
a Superior Proposal, Gryphon Shareholders vote 
in favour of the Scheme at the Scheme Meeting.
In reaching their recommendation, your Directors 
have assessed the Scheme having regard to the 
reasons to vote for, or against, the Scheme (as 
set out in this Scheme Booklet), and Gryphon’s 
current strategic plans.
Your Directors believe the offer represents 
attractive value for Gryphon Shares.
Each of your Directors intends to vote the 
Gryphon Shares that they own or control at the 
time of the Scheme Meeting, and will direct 
any Gryphon proxies placed at their discretion, 
in favour of the Scheme in the absence of a 
Superior Proposal.
If a Superior Proposal emerges after the date of 
this Scheme Booklet, your Directors will carefully 
reconsider the Scheme and advise you of their 
recommendation.
The interests of your Directors and the number 
and description of Gryphon Shares held by or 
on behalf of your Directors are set out in section 
10.2.
In considering whether to vote for the Scheme, 
your Directors encourage you to:
•
•
•
•
carefully read the whole of this Scheme 
Booklet (including the Independent Expert’s 
Report);
consider the choices available to you as 
outlined in section 3.6;
have regard to your individual risk profile, 
portfolio strategy, tax position and financial 
circumstances; and
consult your legal, financial or other 
professional adviser.
(b)    The Independent Expert has concluded
that the Scheme is fair and reasonable and 
therefore is in the best interests of Gryphon 
Shareholders
The Independent Expert, KPMG Corporate 
Finance, has concluded that the “the Scheme 
is fair and reasonable and therefore is in the 
best interests of Gryphon Shareholders, in the 
absence of a superior proposal”.
The Independent Expert has assessed the value 
of a Gryphon Share, inclusive of a premium for 
control, as between $0.11 to $0.18 per Gryphon 
Share, which compares with the Independent 
Expert’s assessment of the value of the Scheme 
Consideration of between $0.12 and $0.16 
per Gryphon Share (based on a fundamental 
valuation of Teranga and the notional aggregate 
net assets of the Combined Group following the 
implementation of the Scheme).
A copy of the Independent Expert’s Report is 
included in Annexure A.
Your Directors encourage you to read the 
Independent Expert’s Report in its entirety.
(c)    The Scheme Consideration represents a
significant premium to historical trading prices
If the Scheme is implemented, each Gryphon 
Share will be exchanged for 0.169 Teranga CDIs 
or, if so elected, 0.169 Teranga Shares.
The Scheme Consideration (in the form of 
Teranga CDIs) issued to Gryphon Shareholders 
if the Scheme becomes Effective represents a 
substantial premium of approximately:
•
•
•
•
53% over the closing price of Gryphon Shares 
on the ASX on the Pre-Announcement Date;
90% to the VWAP of Gryphon Shares  
in the six months up to and including the  
Pre-Announcement Date;
57% to the VWAP of Gryphon Shares in  
the three months up to and including the  
Pre-Announcement Date; and
54% to the VWAP of Gryphon Shares in  
the one month up to and including the  
Pre-Announcement Date,
12
1. MATTERS RELEVANT TO YOUR  
VOTE ON THE SCHEME (CONTINUED)
The Teranga management, mining and technical 
teams bring a track record of mine development 
and disciplined operating capabilities which could 
enhance the value of the Banfora Gold Project 
and reduce the risks associated with  
its development.
Further, the Combined Group is expected to 
have, on a pro forma basis as at 31 March 2016, 
cash and cash equivalents of approximately 
US$66.8 million4  and unused debt capacity of 
US$15 million which, in addition to continued 
cash flow from operations, will allow the 
Combined Group substantial flexibility for the 
future development of the Banfora Gold Project.
In addition, you will retain an economic  
exposure to the exploration projects of Gryphon 
and gain economic exposure to Teranga’s 
exploration projects.
(f)    Asset and geographic diversification improves 
overall risk profile of production and cash flows
Your Directors believe that the Combined Group 
will benefit from an improved risk profile driven 
by increased portfolio scale, operating and 
geographic diversification and stronger free  
cash flows, resulting in an overall increase in 
investor interest.
in each case by reference to the last traded 
price of Teranga CDIs on ASX on the Pre-
Announcement Date.
(d)   You will gain exposure to Teranga’s gold
production, cash flows and significant resources
Gryphon Shareholders will collectively 
hold approximately 15% of the Combined 
Group immediately following the successful 
implementation of the Scheme.3
Teranga is an existing West African gold producer 
with an operating mine in Senegal.
Gryphon Shareholders will gain immediate 
economic exposure to Teranga’s gold production 
and the associated cash flows this generates.  For 
the year ended 31 December 2016, Teranga is 
forecast to produce 200,000 – 215,000 ounces 
of gold at a cash cost of US$600 – 650 per ounce 
and an all-in sustaining cost of US$900 – 975 
per ounce.  Gryphon Shareholders will become 
shareholders of a multi-jurisdiction, mid-tier gold 
producer.
Gryphon Shareholders will also gain exposure to 
Teranga’s Mineral Reserve and Mineral Resource 
base.  The Combined Group will have Proved 
Mineral Reserves and Probable Mineral Reserves 
of 3.5 million ounces, Measured Mineral 
Resources and Indicated Mineral Resources of 7.4 
million ounces and Inferred Mineral Resources of 
1.6 million ounces (all on an attributable basis).
(e)    You will retain economic exposure to the 
Banfora Gold Project, with the benefit of 
Teranga’s financial position and its project 
development and mining expertise and 
experience
3 Assuming that there are no Ineligible Shareholders, that Teranga does not acquire any additional Gryphon Shares outside of the Scheme 
and the exercise by Tablo Corporation (controlled by Mr David Mimran) of its pre-emptive rights to maintain its pro-rata interest in Teranga at 
approximately 13.4% post-implementation of the Scheme (refer to section 6.4 for more detail).
4 On the basis of cash and cash equivalents of Teranga ($53.5 million) and Gryphon ($8.1 million) less change of control costs ($4.5 million in 
aggregate) plus proceeds from Tablo Corporation’s equity placement ($10.1 million) (refer to section 6.5 for more detail).
13
(g)    Improved trading liquidity and capital markets
(i)    Gryphon’s share price may fall if the Scheme is
access associated with the enhanced scale of 
the Combined Group
Gryphon Shareholders will benefit from Teranga’s 
enhanced share market liquidity and capital 
markets access, and a market capitalisation 
scale which is expected to lead to increased 
interest from institutional investors and a greater 
following by the analyst community.
(h)    No Superior Proposal has emerged as at the
date of this Scheme Booklet
The Gryphon Board’s unanimous 
recommendation that Gryphon Shareholders 
vote in favour of the Scheme is given subject to 
no Superior Proposal emerging. As at the date 
of this Scheme Booklet, no other proposal has 
emerged. However, there remains the possibility 
that a third party may make a Superior Proposal 
prior to the Scheme Meeting.
The Scheme Implementation Agreement  
includes terms which prevent Gryphon from 
seeking an alternative proposal from a third party 
in certain circumstances (see section 10.13 for 
more details).
The Scheme Implementation Agreement does 
not prevent a third party from making an 
alternative proposal and does not prevent the 
Directors from responding to an unsolicited 
written proposal if necessary to discharge 
their duties. However, under the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement, Gryphon is required 
to make a payment of $805,000 to Teranga if 
certain events occur, for example, a third party 
acquires an interest of at least 50% of Gryphon 
or the Gryphon Board publicly recommends that 
a Superior Proposal is in the best interests of 
Shareholders (see section 10.13 for more details).
Your Directors will notify Gryphon Shareholders 
if a Superior Proposal is received before the 
Scheme Meeting.
not approved
The trading price of a Gryphon Share rose by  
22% following the announcement of the Scheme  
on the Announcement Date (based on the  
closing price of Gryphon Shares on ASX on 
the Pre-Announcement Date and on the 
Announcement Date).
Your Directors believe that if the Scheme is not 
approved and no Superior Proposal emerges 
it is likely that the trading price of Gryphon 
Shares will fall to below the level at which it has 
been trading since the Scheme was announced 
(although this is difficult to predict with any 
degree of certainty).
(j)    No brokerage or stamp duty will be payable on
the transfer of your Gryphon Shares
You will not incur any brokerage or stamp duty on 
the transfer of your Gryphon Shares to Teranga 
under the terms of the Scheme.
(k)    Gryphon Shareholders who are Australian 
residents for tax purposes can obtain CGT  
roll-over relief
Gryphon Shareholders who are Australian 
residents for tax purposes and who would 
otherwise realise a capital gain on the disposal 
of their Gryphon Shares in return for the Scheme 
Consideration should generally be able to obtain 
capital gains tax (CGT) “scrip-for-scrip” roll-over 
relief.
You should refer to section 9 for further details 
in relation to the Australian tax consequences of 
the Scheme.
14
1. MATTERS RELEVANT TO YOUR  
VOTE ON THE SCHEME (CONTINUED)
1.2 POSSIBLE REASONS NOT TO VOTE  
FOR THE SCHEME
(a)    You may disagree with the Independent Expert
and your Directors and believe that the Scheme is 
not in the best interests of Shareholders
You may hold a different view to your Directors 
and the Independent Expert and believe that the 
Scheme Consideration is inadequate.
(b)   If the Scheme proceeds you will no longer be
a Gryphon Shareholder and your economic 
exposure to the development of the Banfora Gold 
Project will be diminished
Under the Scheme you will receive 0.169 Teranga 
CDIs or, if so elected, 0.169 Teranga Shares per 
Gryphon Share. If the Scheme is implemented, you 
will no longer participate to the same extent in the 
future performance of Gryphon. While you will 
retain economic exposure to the potential upside 
that may result from the development of the 
Banfora Gold Project as a result of being a holder 
of Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs, you will not 
participate in the potential “upside” (if any) to the 
same extent that may result from being a Gryphon 
Shareholder.
(c)    The tax consequences of transferring your
Gryphon Shares pursuant to the Scheme may not 
be optimal for your financial position
Implementation of the Scheme may have tax 
consequences for you. A general guide to the 
Australian taxation implications of the Scheme 
is set out in section 9. This guide is expressed in 
general terms and you should seek professional 
advice regarding the tax consequences applicable 
to your circumstances.
(d)   You may consider that there is potential for a
Superior Proposal to be made
You may believe that there is a possibility that a 
Superior Proposal could emerge in the foreseeable 
future. However, for the reasons noted below, your 
Directors consider that the possibility of a Superior 
Proposal emerging is low:
•  Since the announcement of the Scheme on the 
Announcement Date and up to the date of this 
Scheme Booklet, the Directors have not received 
or become aware of any Superior Proposal.
15
•  The Scheme is a result of a 9 month engagement
process with Teranga involving the provision 
of publicly available presentation materials, as 
well as a non-exclusive due diligence period. 
During the course of this process no alternative 
proposals that could be considered superior 
were received by Gryphon.
•  The Scheme Implementation Agreement
prohibits Gryphon from soliciting any Competing 
Proposal, although Gryphon may respond to a 
Competing Proposal if the Directors determine 
that failing to do so would be likely to constitute 
a breach of their fiduciary or statutory duties, as 
discussed in section 10.13.
(e)    The Scheme may be subject to conditions that
you consider unacceptable
The implementation of the Scheme is subject to 
a number of conditions, summarised in section 
3.4 and set out in the Scheme Implementation 
Agreement.  A full copy of the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement is available on ASX’s 
website at www.asx.com.au and on Gryphon’s 
website at http://www.gryphonminerals.com.au/
index.php/en/investors-4/asx-announcements 
The status of the conditions is discussed in  
section 3.4.
(f)    The exact value of the Scheme Consideration
upon implementation of the Scheme is not 
certain
The exact value of the Scheme Consideration that 
would be realised by Gryphon Shareholders upon 
implementation of the Scheme is not certain, as it 
is dependent on the price at which Teranga Shares 
will trade on the TSX (and potentially also foreign 
currency exchange rates from time to time), and  
on the price at which Teranga CDIs will trade  
on ASX.
Following the implementation of the Scheme, 
the price at which Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs 
trade may rise or fall based on a number of factors, 
including broad market conditions, general investor 
sentiment and the financial and operational 
performance of the Combined Group. If the price 
of Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs falls, the value of 
those Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs received by 
Gryphon Shareholders as Scheme Consideration 
will decline in value.
In addition, the Sale Agent will be issued 
with Teranga Shares attributable to Ineligible 
Shareholders and will be seeking to sell those 
Teranga Shares on the TSX as soon as reasonably 
practicable following the Implementation 
Date. It is possible that any such sales may 
exert downward pressure on the Combined 
Group’s share price in the period following the 
Implementation Date.
(g)    As a shareholder in the Combined Group you 
will be subject to a number of risks to which 
Gryphon is not currently exposed
If the Scheme becomes effective, Scheme 
Participants (other than Ineligible Shareholders) 
will be issued the Scheme Consideration in the 
form of either Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares 
and may therefore be subject to certain risks 
which Gryphon is not currently exposed to, 
including:
•
•
•
Mining operations – Teranga’s mining  
operations are subject to risks and hazards 
normally encountered in such activities, 
which could result in property damage, 
personal injury or death, environmental 
pollution and potential legal liability;
Borrowings – although it is not highly geared, 
as of 30 June 2016, Teranga has drawn 
debt of US$15 million from a US$30 million 
Teranga Revolving Credit Facility with Societé 
Générale. Gryphon has no borrowings and 
therefore there is a risk associated with 
repayment obligations that Gryphon is not 
currently exposed to;
Streaming arrangement – Teranga 
completed a streaming deal with Franco 
Nevada Corporation on 16 January 2014. 
Teranga is required to provide 22,500 ounces 
of gold over the first 6 years and then 6% 
of future gold production. This increases 
Gryphon Shareholders’ exposure to further 
borrowings. To date, Teranga has successfully 
met all annual repayment obligations under 
this streaming arrangement;
•
Foreign countries and mining risks – 
Teranga’s exploration, development and 
production activities are currently conducted 
in Senegal. Consequently, Teranga’s
•
•
•
operations are exposed to various levels 
of political, economic and other risks and 
uncertainties;
Labour and employment matters – 
production at Teranga’s mining operations 
is dependent upon the efforts of Teranga’s 
employees and Teranga’s relations with its 
unionised and non-unionised employees;
Property interests – Teranga has certain 
obligations in order to acquire and maintain 
title to some of its current properties and to 
meet certain requirements. No guarantee 
can be given that Teranga will be in a positon 
to comply with all such conditions and 
obligations, or to require third parties to 
comply with their obligations with respect to 
such properties; and
Hedging – Teranga has entered into gold  
hedging arrangements of up to 5,000 
ounces per month for not more than 12 
months and there is no assurance that such 
arrangements will be successful.
Further details of some of the risks associated 
with an investment in the Combined Group are 
set out in section 8.3. Gryphon Shareholders are 
encouraged to read this section carefully and in 
its entirety.
(h)  You will be exposed to differences between 
applicable corporations and securities laws
Gryphon is incorporated in Australia and listed 
on ASX, while Teranga is incorporated in Canada 
with a primary listing on the TSX and a secondary 
listing on ASX. If the Scheme becomes Effective, 
Gryphon Shareholders (other than Ineligible 
Shareholders) whose rights are currently 
governed by the laws of Australia, the ASX Listing 
Rules and Gryphon’s constitution will become 
holders of Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares. 
The rights of holders of Teranga Shares will be 
governed by the Canada Business Corporations 
Act, securities laws of certain provinces of 
Canada, the TSX Company Manual and Teranga’s 
constituent documents.
Although some of the material differences 
between Australian company law and ASX Listing 
Rules and applicable Canadian corporate and
16
1. MATTERS RELEVANT TO YOUR  
VOTE ON THE SCHEME (CONTINUED)
securities laws and the TSX Company Manual 
rules as they relate to Gryphon and Teranga, 
respectively, could be viewed as advantageous to 
Gryphon Shareholders, others could be viewed as 
disadvantageous to Gryphon Shareholders.
Further details on rights attaching to Teranga 
Shares and the differences between applicable 
corporate and securities laws, listing rules, and 
other relevant laws, can be found in Annexure B.
1.3 OTHER RELEVANT CONSIDERATIONS
(a)    The Scheme may be implemented even if you
vote against it.
You should be aware that even if you do not 
vote, or vote against the Scheme, the Scheme 
may still be implemented if it is approved by 
the Requisite Majority of Gryphon Shareholders 
and by the Court. If this occurs, your Gryphon 
Shares will be transferred to Teranga and you 
will receive 0.169 Teranga CDIs or, if so elected, 
0.169 Teranga Shares per Gryphon Share even 
though you did not vote on, or voted against, 
the Scheme.
(b)  Costs
Gryphon has incurred significant costs in 
responding to the proposed Scheme and 
revisions of that proposal to the point that 
it is capable of being submitted to Gryphon 
Shareholders as a scheme of arrangement 
for their consideration. These costs include 
negotiations with Teranga, retention of 
advisers, provision of information to Teranga, 
facilitating Teranga’s access to due diligence, 
engagement of the Independent Expert and 
preparation of this Scheme Booklet.
If the Scheme is implemented, these costs 
will effectively be met by Teranga as the 
ultimate controller of Gryphon following 
Implementation of the Scheme. If the  
Scheme is not implemented and if no Superior 
Proposal emerges and is completed, Gryphon 
expects to incur total costs of approximately 
$800,000 which will be paid in the 2016/2017 
financial year.
17
“'3‘“ 1 “$-
4 k , " A’. I _ h >
. v  h ' I .9  “It,
I)!“ ’ , _ ;,_ . K r ~
“V —-: ~ ‘7 ~ ' ' . n t»
“w .“:“.\ A -~ u... ,- ; L43. m _ .‘
'sz ‘ ' -..«-,,-. by“ .‘  x
g ._ \ 7 ‘ 1 . h“, ‘2'. . ' 1 -
- 2 f,- ’ . _
‘ - h V - > 
_) 7‘ ' X
 I   ?<\.
 '» “N “\\\7\_:‘  
’ \ M  . - xx x.‘ 
3L1  - 'ﬁ/ “  _ 7,, ,
 V  ' E” ‘ ‘\ xxx “x ‘ '
    - . xﬁ< 
.‘. ‘HV I A ‘ r W1:
-\. ‘  ‘x  “5??
‘ ' 9.  1 I I. V,
i  ’f- . .// \


, « '~:  .V 4 . \ '\ \ "W 3/
«m . ’, 3‘, / Va...“ K ,\ '3‘» ‘|‘. A
w» my  . -\ ' ~ A a. 
u if ﬁ‘ﬁ .‘ I" ' \  “(f ,w
 is.  .. 
’  V ‘  [Jypb‘ , a - ~,-;7 a; . ,
 1‘ i"  2  . . 43-"  7
3-13... _ 1' gr 7 .
‘- «A  21"” I; V: ‘ A  C “  .
If '2‘.“ f.  >‘ ‘,‘:>  fr. ‘—  :-
. - ‘ _ ‘1 c?" I“ v'. ,: Irv}. "I. 11:9?!“
 I ' "\ ’5' 2‘" ' b ,  ' 1‘?“va 
 _ r I (.‘H . '1‘ , \ g. 4.I;r If" . h
. "   givﬁi‘l‘f-(ﬂfi .75  "1   "
,' ; .5 r . \ ‘, : fu’ v‘
@E ‘1 " ' I ‘ -i..~.s'~ 
., 9—- 7'3:- _‘  '~ “ :7 7 , _T. T]
~-2‘.:: ' =- a.;=~- j: 
U) - ‘7 ~ I “f, I l ." 9: ' -
—‘ ‘-’-'-r -‘  j; ‘ «M7 _
1:-  L-ug ~H / ' ‘1 i ‘ __.‘ "‘ " __ V ’:‘ U :3  
_ . . .3 ‘ ;:/,’:;V ' VV “  . 1...? 
,/ ,(wi:  \ \>*I-'l—,:‘,  7 ' _’\.‘
I.  'f/':’ﬁ/‘ \k. :7’ 5“  "*«g ‘ 
V  5' / Mr ' “ ' .0- VI" 

4‘ . / " “I V V r l 77’:— Vﬁ‘r‘
,ﬂr;4’y  \\ K ’9. '/  
/  V,  , a , '“* '

 \ var. _/  . 4.?" x r 
.3 h ‘ a 5 ‘39; (7 3f >>/ I   é, 
p \ \ . h  3‘ I -' /< \J“ z - I 
v ’\ » W  u’  ' / V ‘ .r ‘f- “
‘w  + ‘ \ x -   
“7"; m" ’ \  i ;  
WW ~/ — w * ~\  
44.3 ‘  \_ 1- Ti?)
, £56 ,  2» ,. . \\ \-  -- I ~ 
. 34/7, 1' I" 7 V V} V“ >    .1 ,
3644 I w. a ' - .  "r\\v ' ' .
gum," ‘ c” ‘ I 3". I 7 , . I  -;
but”? 1.: “55*” 4:121 '  »   ’ '~
{6%    I r
W 99—4 +,,§;=s #11:,  . v ' . ‘
amt :4 a! A  12%:53‘1   ' -


2.
Q&A
20
This Scheme Booklet contains detailed information 
regarding the Scheme.  The following section 
provides summary answers to some questions you 
may have and will assist you to locate further 
detailed information in this Scheme Booklet.
THE SCHEME AT A GLANCE
What is the Scheme?
The Scheme is a scheme of arrangement between 
Gryphon and Scheme Participants.  If the Scheme 
becomes Effective Teranga will acquire all Gryphon 
Shares that it does not already own and Gryphon 
will become a wholly owned Subsidiary of Teranga.
A “scheme of arrangement” is a statutory procedure 
that can be used to enable one company to acquire 
another company.  It requires a vote in favour of the 
Scheme by a Requisite Majority of Gryphon 
Shareholders (other than Excluded Shareholders) at 
a meeting of Gryphon Shareholders and Court 
approval.
The terms of the Scheme are set out in full in 
Annexure C.
What do your Directors recommend?
Your Directors unanimously consider that the 
Scheme is in the best interests of Gryphon 
Shareholders and recommend that you vote in 
favour of the Scheme in the absence of a Superior 
Proposal.  The basis for this recommendation is set 
out in section 1.1.
Section 1.2 includes a summary of the possible 
reasons not to vote for the Scheme.
of the Scheme).The Independent Expert’s Report is 
set out in full in Annexure A.
What are the prospects of receiving a 
Superior Proposal?
Since the Scheme was announced, no Superior 
Proposal has emerged.  Given the time that has 
elapsed since the Scheme was announced on 20 
June 2016, your Directors’ view is that a Superior 
Proposal is unlikely to emerge prior to the Scheme 
Meeting.
What should I do?
You should read this Scheme Booklet carefully in its 
entirety and then vote by attending the Scheme 
Meeting or by appointing a proxy to vote on your 
behalf.  Full details of who is eligible to vote and 
how to vote are set out in sections 3.7 and 3.8.
WHAT YOU WILL RECEIVE UNDER THE 
SCHEME
What will I receive if the Scheme becomes 
Effective?
If the Scheme is approved and implemented, 
Gryphon Shareholders (other than Ineligible 
Shareholders) will receive 0.169 Teranga CDIs or, if 
so elected by completing the Election Form, 0.169 
Teranga Shares for each Gryphon Share you hold 
on the Record Date.
Ineligible Shareholders will receive cash instead of 
the Scheme Consideration.  The entitlements of 
Ineligible Shareholders under the Scheme are 
described in more detail in section 7.4.
How do your Directors intend to vote?
What is a Teranga CDI?
Each Gryphon Director who owns or controls 
Gryphon Shares at the time of the Scheme Meeting 
intends to vote in favour of the Scheme in the 
absence of a Superior Proposal.
What is the Independent Expert’s 
conclusion?
The Independent Expert has concluded that, in the 
absence of a superior proposal, the Scheme is fair 
and reasonable and therefore is in the best interests 
of Gryphon Shareholders.
The Independent Expert has assessed the value of 
a Gryphon Share, inclusive of a premium for control, 
as between $0.11 to $0.18 per Gryphon Share, 
which compares with the Independent Expert’s 
assessment of the value of the Scheme 
Consideration of between $0.12 and $0.16 per 
Gryphon Share (based on a fundamental valuation 
of Teranga and the notional aggregate net assets of 
the Combined Group following the implementation
A Teranga CDI or Chess Depository Interest is a 
security quoted on ASX that represents a beneficial 
entitlement to one Teranga Share.  Teranga CDIs 
are not listed and will not be tradeable on the TSX.
Teranga Shares represented by Teranga CDIs will 
be held by CDN, a wholly owned Subsidiary of ASX, 
on behalf of the holders of Teranga CDIs.
As a holder of a Teranga CDI, you will have the 
same right to receive any distributions or dividends 
paid by Teranga to Teranga Shareholders from time 
to time.
Holders of Teranga CDIs will be able to direct CDN 
to cast votes in a particular manner on their behalf 
at a general meeting of Teranga Shareholders or 
they will be able to require CDN to appoint the 
holder as proxy to exercise the votes attaching to 
the Teranga Shares represented by the holder’s 
Teranga CDIs.
21
Holders of Teranga CDIs may convert their Teranga 
CDIs into the underlying Teranga Shares listed on 
the TSX.
Agent in Canadian dollars no more than 20 
Business Days after the Implementation Date.
Section 7.3(b) provides further information in 
relation to Teranga CDIs.
How do I make an election?
Gryphon Shareholders (other than Ineligible 
Shareholders) can elect to receive the Scheme 
Consideration in the form of either Teranga CDIs or 
Teranga Shares.
If you do not make an election, you will be deemed 
to have elected to receive the Scheme 
Consideration in the form of Teranga CDIs.
If you wish to make an election, you should 
complete the Election Form accompanying this 
Scheme Booklet and return the Election Form in 
accordance with the instructions on that form.
The deadline for receipt of the Election Form is 
5:00pm on 6 October 2016.
Can I choose to receive cash instead of 
Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares?
No.  There is no option for Gryphon Shareholders to 
elect to receive cash instead of the Scheme 
Consideration.  However, once you have received 
the Scheme Consideration, you may sell some or all 
of your Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares on ASX or 
the TSX respectively.
Alternatively, you may elect to sell your existing 
Gryphon Shares on ASX for cash before the 
Effective Date.
What will I receive if the Scheme is not 
approved by the Requisite Majority at the 
Scheme Meeting?
If the Scheme is not approved by the Requisite 
Majority, you will not receive any consideration and 
you will retain your Gryphon Shares.
When will I receive the Scheme 
Consideration?
If you are a Gryphon Shareholder (other than an 
Excluded Shareholder or an Ineligible Shareholder) 
on the Record Date, you will be issued your 
Scheme Consideration on the Implementation Date.
How will fractional entitlements be treated 
under the Scheme?
When the calculation of the number of Teranga 
CDIs (or Teranga Shares, if so elected) to be issued 
to a Gryphon Shareholder would result in the issue 
of a fraction of a Teranga CDI (or Teranga Share), 
the fractional entitlement will be rounded down to 
the nearest whole number of Teranga CDIs (or 
Teranga Shares).
Do I need to do or sign anything to transfer 
my Gryphon Shares?
No.  If the Scheme becomes effective, Gryphon will 
automatically have authority to sign a transfer 
instrument on behalf of Scheme Participants.
When can I start trading my Teranga CDIs 
or Teranga Shares?
Once you have received the Scheme Consideration, 
you can trade your Teranga CDIs on ASX.
If you elect to receive Teranga Shares as Scheme 
Consideration and wish to trade the Teranga 
Shares, you will need to instruct a stockbroker who 
is able to execute trades on the TSX.
What are the Australian tax consequences 
of the Scheme?
Section 9 provides a general outline of the 
Australian income tax, capital gains tax, GST and 
stamp duty consequences for Scheme Participants 
who dispose of their Gryphon Shares in accordance 
with the Scheme.
Based on the summary of Australian taxation 
implications contained in section 9, any capital gain 
made by a Gryphon Shareholder who is an 
Australian resident may be eligible for scrip-for-scrip 
rollover relief.
You should consult with your own tax adviser 
regarding the tax consequences of disposing of your 
Gryphon Shares in accordance with the Scheme in 
light of current tax laws and your particular 
circumstances.
Will I have to pay brokerage fees or stamp 
duty?
On the Implementation Date, you will be sent a 
holding statement in relation to the Teranga CDIs 
or, if elected, a share certificate in respect of the 
Teranga Shares, that are issued to you as Scheme 
Consideration.
No brokerage fees or stamp duty will be payable by 
Gryphon Shareholders on the transfer of their 
Gryphon Shares under the Scheme, or the receipt 
by Gryphon Shareholders of the Scheme 
Consideration.
If you are an Ineligible Shareholder, you will be paid 
the cash you are entitled to receive from the Sale
If you dispose of your Gryphon Shares before the 
Record Date, or dispose of your Teranga CDIs or
22
Teranga Shares after the Implementation Date, 
brokerage fees may be payable.
Should I vote?
In respect of the Teranga Shares sold by the Sale 
Agent on behalf of Ineligible Shareholders, 
brokerage fees will be deducted from the proceeds 
of the sale before the cash proceeds are remitted to 
Ineligible Shareholders.
VOTING TO APPROVE THE SCHEME
When and where will the Scheme Meeting 
be held?
The Scheme Meeting will be held at 10:00am on 23 
September 2016 at 38 Station Street, Subiaco WA 
6008.
Am I entitled to vote at the Scheme 
Meeting?
If you are registered as a Gryphon Shareholder on 
the Share Register at 10:00am on 21 September 
2016 and you are not an Excluded Shareholder, you 
will be entitled to vote at the Scheme Meeting.
What vote is required to approve the 
Scheme?
For the Scheme to proceed, votes “in favour of” the 
Scheme Resolution at the Scheme Meeting must be 
received from a Requisite Majority of Gryphon 
Shareholders that are entitled to vote.  A Requisite 
Majority is:
•
•
a majority in number (more than 50%) of 
Gryphon Shareholders, who are present 
and voting either in person or by proxy, 
attorney or, in case of corporate Gryphon 
Shareholders, by corporate 
representative); and
at least 75% of the total number of votes 
cast on the Scheme Resolution.
It is also necessary for the Court to approve the 
Scheme before it can become Effective.
What choices do I have as a Gryphon 
Shareholder?
As a Gryphon Shareholder you have the following 
choices:
You can vote in person or by proxy at the 
Scheme Meeting;
You can elect not to vote at the Scheme 
Meeting; or
You can sell your Gryphon Shares on 
ASX.  If you sell your Gryphon Shares on 
ASX you may incur brokerage costs.
•
•
•
23
Voting is not compulsory.  However, your Directors 
believe that the Scheme is important to Gryphon 
Shareholders and your Directors unanimously 
recommend that you vote in favour of the Scheme in 
the absence of a Superior Proposal.
How do I vote?
You may vote in person by attending the Scheme 
Meeting to be held at 10:00am on 23 September 
2016.  Alternatively, you may vote by completing 
and lodging the proxy form that is enclosed with this 
Scheme Booklet.  The proxy form can be lodged in 
person, by mail, by fax or sent electronically by 
visiting 
https://investorcentre.linkmarketservices.com.au/Lo
gin , selecting ‘Voting’ and following the prompts to 
lodge your vote.
You can also vote by appointing a corporate 
representative (if you are a corporate shareholder) 
or an attorney.
Full details of how to vote and how to lodge a proxy 
form, corporate representative appointment or 
power of attorney are set out on page 7.
What happens if I do not vote, or I vote 
against the Scheme?
The Scheme may not be approved at the Scheme 
Meeting.  If this occurs the Scheme will not proceed, 
you will not receive the Scheme Consideration and 
you will remain a Gryphon Shareholder.
However, if the Scheme is approved and 
implemented your Gryphon Shares will be 
transferred to Teranga and you will receive the 
Scheme Consideration for your Gryphon Shares 
even if you did not vote or you voted against the 
Scheme.
What happens if the Scheme is not 
approved at the Scheme Meeting or is not 
approved by the Court?
If the Scheme is not approved by a Requisite 
Majority of Gryphon Shareholders at the Scheme 
Meeting or the Scheme is not approved by the 
Court:
•
•
•
•
Gryphon will remain listed on ASX;
you will retain your Gryphon Shares;
you will not receive the Scheme 
Consideration; and
you will remain exposed to the risks of 
Gryphon, including the risks discussed in 
section 8.2.
Your Directors believe that if the Scheme is not 
implemented then the trading price of Gryphon 
Shares is likely to fall.
Before the Scheme Meeting, Gryphon estimates 
that it will have incurred or committed transaction 
costs of approximately $800,000 in relation to the 
Scheme.  Those costs will be payable by Gryphon 
regardless of whether or not the Scheme is 
approved and becomes Effective.
If the Scheme does not proceed you will retain your 
Gryphon Shares.  Your Directors intend to continue 
to operate Gryphon as a listed public company 
carrying on the business of exploring and 
developing West African gold projects under the 
leadership of the current senior management.  The 
Gryphon Board has not formed any plans to make 
any significant changes to the business of Gryphon, 
redeploy any of its operating assets or change or 
affect the future employment of the present 
employees of Gryphon.
When will the result of the Scheme Meeting 
be known?
The results of the Scheme Meeting will be available 
shortly after the conclusion of the Scheme Meeting 
and will be announced to ASX once available.  The 
results will also be published on 
www.gryphonminerals.com.au soon after the 
Scheme Meeting.
OTHER
Can I keep my Gryphon Shares?
If the Scheme is implemented, your Gryphon 
Shares will be transferred to Teranga.  This will 
happen even if you did not vote or you voted against 
the Scheme.
What happens if a Superior Proposal 
emerges?
If a Superior Proposal is received this will be 
announced to ASX and your Directors will carefully 
consider the proposal and advise you of their 
recommendation.
Are any other approvals required?
The Scheme must be approved by the Court in 
addition to being approved by a Requisite Majority 
of Gryphon Shareholders.  If the Scheme is 
approved by a Requisite Majority of Shareholders at 
the Scheme Meeting, Gryphon will apply to the 
Court for approval of the Scheme. The Court 
hearing is expected to be held on 28 September 
2016 (although this may change).  Further details of 
the approval process are set out in section 3.
Is the Scheme subject to any conditions?
Implementation of the Scheme is subject to a 
number of conditions summarised in section 3.4 and 
set out in full in the Scheme Implementation 
Agreement. A full copy of the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement is available on ASX’s 
website at www.asx.com.au and on Gryphon’s 
website at 
http://www.gryphonminerals.com.au/index.php/en/.
Do I need to do or sign anything to transfer 
my Gryphon Shares?
No. If the Scheme becomes Effective, Gryphon will 
automatically have authority to sign a transfer 
document on behalf of Scheme Participants.
You should be aware that, if you are a Scheme 
Participant, you will be deemed to have warranted 
to Gryphon, and authorised Gryphon to warrant to 
Teranga on your behalf, that
•
•
all of your Gryphon Shares are fully paid 
and free from all encumbrances (for 
example, mortgages or other security 
interests); and
you have full power and capacity to 
transfer your Gryphon Shares to Teranga.
What if I have further questions about the 
Scheme?
If you have any further questions about the Scheme 
please contact Gryphon’s Chief Financial Officer on 
+61 8 9287 4333 between 9:00 am to 5:00 pm 
(Perth, Australia time) Monday to Friday, or visit the 
website www.gryphonminerals.com.au.
24
3.
Details of the Scheme
25
3.1
Overview
On 20 June 2016, Gryphon announced that it had entered into a Scheme Implementation Agreement 
with Teranga under which, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of a number of conditions, Gryphon 
agreed to propose the Scheme to Gryphon Shareholders.  A copy of the Scheme Implementation 
Agreement is set out in Gryphon’s announcement to the ASX on 20 June 2016 
(http://www.gryphonminerals.com.au/index.php/en/investors-4/asx-announcements) and a summary of 
the key terms of the Scheme Implementation Agreement is included in section 10.13.
3.2
Effect of the Scheme
If the Scheme is implemented:
(a)
(b)
Teranga will acquire all of the Gryphon Shares that it does not already own;
Gryphon Shareholders (other than Excluded Shareholders and Ineligible Shareholders) will 
receive the Scheme Consideration in respect of each Gryphon Share they hold on the Record 
Date; and
(c)
Gryphon will become a Subsidiary of Teranga and subsequently be de-listed from ASX.
3.3
Scheme Consideration
If the Scheme is implemented, Gryphon Shareholders (other than Excluded Shareholders and Ineligible 
Shareholders) will receive the Scheme Consideration of 0.169 Teranga CDIs or, if so elected, 0.169 
Teranga Shares per Gryphon Share.  On the Implementation Date, you will be issued the Scheme 
Consideration in respect of each Share held by you as at the Record Date.
From the date of issue, the Teranga CDIs (or, if elected, Teranga Shares) received as Scheme 
Consideration will rank equally in all respects with the existing Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares (as the 
case may be) and will be fully paid and free from any encumbrance.
Holding statements detailing your holding of Teranga CDIs (or share certificates in the case of Teranga 
Shares) are expected to be sent to you on or soon after the Implementation Date.
Ineligible Shareholders should refer to section 7.4 for details about the timing for payment of the 
consideration they will receive.
Gryphon Shareholders (including Ineligible Shareholders) should refer to section 7 for further details 
about the Scheme Consideration.
3.4
Conditions of the Scheme
The implementation of the Scheme is subject to the following Conditions Precedent:
(a)
Before 5:00pm on the Business Day before the Second Court Date:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
ASIC issues or provides such consents, approvals, modifications or exemptions, or 
does such other acts which the parties agree are reasonably necessary or desirable 
to implement the Scheme;
ASX issues or provides such consents, approvals, waivers or does such other acts 
which the parties agree are reasonably necessary to implement the Scheme;
TSX conditionally approves the listing of the Teranga Shares to be issued pursuant to 
the Scheme, subject only to the satisfaction by Teranga of customary listing 
conditions of the TSX (which shall not include a requirement to obtain approval by 
Teranga Shareholders); and
all other regulatory approvals required to implement the Scheme being granted or 
obtained and those regulatory approvals not being withdrawn, cancelled, revoked or 
varied in a manner that is materially adverse to the parties;
26
27
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
Gryphon Shareholders approve the Scheme at the Scheme Meeting by the Requisite Majority;
As at 8:00am on the Second Court Date, no temporary restraining order, preliminary or 
permanent injunction or other order or decision has been issued or made by any court of 
competent jurisdiction or any Regulatory Authority, and there is no other legal restraint or 
prohibition, preventing the consummation of any aspect of the Transaction on the 
Implementation Date;
The Court approves the Scheme in accordance with section 411(4)(b) of the Corporations Act;
The Independent Expert provides a report to Gryphon that concludes that the Scheme is in the 
best interests of Gryphon Shareholders and the Independent Expert not withdrawing or 
adversely modifying that conclusion before 8:00am on the Second Court Date;
The Teranga CDIs to be issued pursuant to the Scheme have, before 8:00am on the Second 
Court Date, been approved for official quotation on the ASX;
No Gryphon Material Adverse Event occurs between the date of this agreement and 8:00am on 
the Second Court Date (including a failure to secure renewal or extension of the Key Permits – 
refer below for further details);
No Gryphon Prescribed Occurrence occurs between the date of this agreement and 8:00am on 
the Second Court Date;
The Gryphon Representations and Warranties given by Gryphon pursuant to the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement are true and correct in all material respects as at the date of this 
agreement and as at 8:00am on the Second Court Date;
No Teranga Material Adverse Event occurs between the date of this agreement and 8:00am on 
the Second Court Date;
No Teranga Prescribed Occurrence occurs between the date of this agreement and 8:00am on 
the Second Court Date;
The Teranga Representations and Warranties given by Teranga pursuant to the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement are true and correct in all material respects as at the date of this 
agreement and as at 8:00am on the Second Court Date; and
(m)
Teranga receiving written evidence (in a form satisfactory to it, acting reasonably) that Burkina 
Faso Mining Code Consent has been obtained, on terms acceptable to Teranga acting 
reasonably.
As at the date of this Scheme Booklet, neither Gryphon nor Teranga is aware of any reason why the 
Conditions Precedent will not be satisfied.
Teranga has notified Gryphon that it has obtained the necessary approval from the TSX in relation to the 
conditional listing of the Teranga Shares to be issued pursuant to the Scheme, and so the Condition 
Precedent in paragraph (a)(iii) above is satisfied.
In relation to the Condition Precedent in paragraph (g) above that no Gryphon Material Adverse Event 
occurs before 8:00am on the Second Court Date, it should be noted that a failure to secure the renewal 
or extension of the Key Permits by 8:00am on the Second Court Date would constitute a Gryphon 
Material Adverse Event.  The Key Permits are the Wahgnion Exploitation Licence, the Nogbele 
Exploration Permit and the Nianka Exploration Permit.
The Wahgnion Exploitation Licence expires in August 2016.  Under Article 53 of the Burkina Faso 
Mining Code 2015, a two year extension for the period to begin development and production activities 
can be obtained via a joint decree of the Burkina Faso Ministers of Mines and of Finance.  Gryphon will 
shortly submit an application to extend the Wahgnion Exploitation Licence.
The Nogbele Exploration Permit and the Nianka Exploration Permit each expired on 8 July 2016.  The 
renewal process involves removing the areas which are currently subject to the Wahgnion Exploitation 
Licence from the exploration permit areas.  Gryphon has submitted a formal application under Article 42 
of the Burkina Faso Mining Code 2015 for the renewal of all exploration permits at Banfora with new 
lease boundaries.
On the basis of Gryphon’s extensive discussions with the relevant authorities in Burkina Faso, Gryphon 
has no reason to believe that the extension to the Wahgnion Exploitation Licence and the renewal of the 
Nogbele Exploration Permit and the Nianka Exploration Permit will not be received.  In particular, senior 
representatives from both Gryphon and Teranga have met with the Minister of Mines of Burkina Faso 
and received verbal assurance that the extension to the Wahgnion Exploitation Licence and the renewal 
of the Nogbele Exploration Permit and the Nianka Exploration Permit would be received.  However, 
there can be no guarantee that the renewal and extensions will be received by Gryphon from the 
relevant authorities in Burkina Faso or that they will be received before the Second Court Date.
In relation to the Condition Precedent in paragraph (m) above, there remains significant doubt as to 
whether consent is required under the Burkina Faso Mining Code.  Formal in-country advice on the 
matter is currently being obtained by Teranga.  Teranga is required, under clause 3.2.2 of the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement, to waive the condition if it determines or becomes satisfied, acting 
reasonably and in good faith, that such consent is not required.
3.5
Key steps to implement the Scheme
The key steps to implement the Scheme are as follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Gryphon Shareholders will vote on whether to approve the Scheme at the Scheme Meeting.  
Each Gryphon Shareholder (other than Excluded Shareholders) who is registered on the 
Register at 10:00am on 21 September 2016 is entitled to vote at the Scheme Meeting.
If the Scheme is approved by the Requisite Majority at the Scheme Meeting, Gryphon will apply 
to the Court to approve the Scheme on the Second Court Date (expected to be 28 September 
2016).  Section 3.17 contains details on this procedure.  The Corporations Act and the relevant 
Court rules provide a procedure for Gryphon Shareholders to oppose the approval by the Court 
of the Scheme.
If the Court approves the Scheme, and all conditions to the Scheme have been satisfied or 
waived, Gryphon will lodge with ASIC an office copy of the Court order approving the Scheme.  
Gryphon expects to lodge this with ASIC on or before 29 September 2016.
With effect from the start of the Business Day following the day on which the office copy of the 
Court order is lodged with ASIC, Gryphon Shares will be suspended from trading on ASX.
(e)
On the Implementation Date:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
all of the Gryphon Shares held by Scheme Participants at 7:00 pm on the Scheme 
Record Date will be transferred to Teranga and, in exchange, each Scheme 
Participant (other than Ineligible Shareholders) will be issued the Scheme 
Consideration.  The Scheme Record Date is currently expected to be 6 October  
2016;
Gryphon will register all transfers of Gryphon Shares to Teranga; and
shortly thereafter, documents of title to Teranga CDIs and Teranga Shares will be 
sent to Gryphon Shareholders (except Ineligible Shareholders) in respect of the 
Scheme Consideration to which the holder of Gryphon Shares is entitled.
After the Scheme has been implemented, Gryphon will apply for termination of the official quotation of 
Gryphon Shares on ASX and to have itself removed from the official list of the ASX.
3.6
Your choices as a Gryphon Shareholder
As a Gryphon Shareholder you have the following choices:
you can vote at the Scheme Meeting in person, by attorney, by proxy or, in the case of 
corporate shareholders, by corporate representative;
you can elect not to vote at the Scheme Meeting; or
you can sell your Gryphon Shares on ASX.  If you sell your Gryphon Shares on ASX you may 
incur brokerage costs.  If the Scheme becomes Effective, Gryphon Shares will cease trading on
(a)
(b)
(c)
28
ASX at close of trading on the Effective Date.  Accordingly, you can sell your Gryphon Shares 
on market at any time before the close of trading on the day that the Scheme becomes 
Effective (although normal brokerage and other expenses on sale may be incurred).
3.7
How to vote
Gryphon Shareholders can vote in either of two ways:
(a)
by attending the Scheme Meeting and voting in person or by attorney or, in the case of 
corporate shareholders, by corporate representative; or
(b)
by appointing a proxy to attend and vote on their behalf.
See page 7 for full details on how to vote.
3.8
Eligibility to vote
The time for determining eligibility to vote at the Scheme Meeting is 10:00am on 21 September 2016.  
Only those Gryphon Shareholders (other than Excluded Shareholders) entered on the Gryphon Register 
at that time will be entitled to attend and vote at the Scheme Meeting.
3.9
Ineligible Shareholders
If you are a Gryphon Shareholder whose address show in the Gryphon Register is in an Ineligible 
Jurisdiction, Teranga will not issue Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs to you.  In other words, if your 
address shown in the Gryphon Register at 5:00pm on the Record Date is in a jurisdiction (other than 
Australia, New Zealand and Canada) that Teranga determines, acting reasonably, does not permit the 
issue of the Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs to you either unconditionally or after compliance with 
terms that Teranga reasonably regards as acceptable and practical, you will not be eligible to receive the 
Scheme Consideration.
The number of Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs that would otherwise have been issued to you under 
the Scheme will be issued to the Sale Agent as Teranga Shares.  Teranga will procure that, as soon as 
reasonably practicable and in any event not more than 20 Business Days after the Implementation Date, 
the Sale Agent sells those Teranga Shares in such manner, or such financial market, at such price and 
on such other terms as the Sale Agent determines in good faith, and remits the proceeds of such sale to 
you in Canadian dollars, net of costs.
3.10
Determination of persons entitled to the Scheme Consideration
To establish the identity of the Scheme Participants, dealings in Gryphon Shares will only be recognised 
by Gryphon if:
(a)
(b)
in the case of dealings of the type to be effected using CHESS, the transferee is registered in 
the Register as the holder of the relevant Gryphon Shares as at 5:00pm on the Record Date; 
and
in all other cases, registrable transmission applications or transfers in registrable form in 
respect of those dealings are received on or before 5:00pm on the Record Date at the place 
where the Register is kept.
3.11
Scheme Record Date
Those Gryphon Shareholders (other than Excluded Shareholders) on the Register on the Record Date, 
being 5:00pm on the fifth Business Day following the Effective Date, will be entitled to receive the 
Scheme Consideration in respect of the Gryphon Shares they hold as at the Record Date.
3.12
Register
Gryphon must register any registrable transmission applications or transfers of the Gryphon Shares 
received on or before 5:00pm on the Record Date.
29
3.13
No disposals after Effective Date
If the Scheme becomes Effective, you may not dispose of any Gryphon Shares after the Effective Date.  
Any dealings in Gryphon Shares after this time will not be recognised.
3.14  Maintenance of the Register
For the purpose of determining entitlements to the Scheme Consideration, Gryphon will maintain the 
Register until the Scheme Consideration has been issued to the Scheme Participants and Teranga has 
been entered in the Register as the holder of all the Gryphon Shares.  The Register in this form will 
solely determine entitlements to the Scheme Consideration.
3.15
Deemed warranty on transfer of Gryphon Shares to Teranga
Under the terms of the Scheme each Scheme Participant is deemed to have warranted to Teranga that 
all of their Gryphon Shares will, at the date of the transfer, be fully paid and free from all encumbrances 
(such as mortgages and other security interests) and that they have full power and capacity to transfer 
their Gryphon Shares (including any rights and entitlements attaching to those Gryphon Shares) to 
Teranga.  See clause 2.12 of the Scheme in Annexure C.  Gryphon undertakes that it will provide the 
warranty to Teranga as agent and attorney of each Gryphon Shareholder.  You should ensure that your 
Gryphon Shares are free of any such mortgages or security interests.
Gryphon Shareholders should be aware that, to the extent that this warranty is untrue in respect of their 
Gryphon Shares, and their Gryphon Shares are not transferred under the Scheme free from all 
encumbrances, they may be liable to compensate Teranga for any damage caused to those parties 
resulting from such encumbrance.
3.16
Deed Poll
On 15 August 2016, Teranga executed the Deed Poll under which Teranga agreed, subject to the 
Scheme becoming Effective, to issue and provide to Scheme Participants the Scheme Consideration on 
the Implementation Date.  A summary of the key terms of the Deed Poll is set out in section 10.15.  A 
copy of the Deed Poll is also included in Annexure D.
3.17
Court approval
On 16 August 2016, the Court made the requisite orders that the Scheme Meeting be convened and that 
this Scheme Booklet be despatched to Gryphon Shareholders.  The orders made by the Court 
convening the Scheme do not constitute an endorsement of, or any other expression of opinion on, the 
Scheme or this Scheme Booklet.
Gryphon will apply to the Court for an order approving the Scheme if the Scheme is approved by the 
Requisite Majority at the Scheme Meeting.  The Court has discretion as to whether to grant the orders 
approving the Scheme, even if the Scheme is approved by the Requisite Majority.
Each Gryphon Shareholder and, with the Court’s permission, any other interested person has the right to 
appear at the Second Court Hearing.
The Corporations Act and the Federal Court (Corporations) Rules 2000 provide a procedure for Gryphon 
Shareholders to oppose the approval by the Court of the Scheme.  If you wish to oppose the approval of 
the Scheme at the Second Court Hearing you may do so by filing with the Court and serving on Gryphon 
a notice of appearance in the prescribed form together with any affidavit on which you wish to rely at the 
hearing.  With leave of the Court, you may also oppose the approval of the Scheme by appearing at the 
Second Court Hearing and applying to raise any objections you may have at the hearing.  Gryphon 
should be notified in advance of an intention to object.  The date for the Second Court Hearing is 
currently scheduled to be 28 September 2016, though an earlier date may be sought.  Any change to 
this date will be announced through ASX and notified on Gryphon’s website 
(http://www.gryphonminerals.com.au/index.php/en/).
3.18
Taxation implications
A general guide to the Australian taxation implications of the Scheme for Gryphon Shareholders is set 
out in section 9.  This guide is expressed in general terms and is not intended to provide taxation advice 
in respect of the particular circumstances of any Gryphon Shareholder.
30
3.19
Suspension of trading
Gryphon will apply to ASX for suspension of trading in Gryphon Shares on ASX after close of trading on 
the day the Scheme becomes Effective.  Following final implementation of the Scheme Gryphon will 
request ASX to remove it from the official list of ASX.
31
Information on Gryphon
4.
32
4.1
Introduction
Gryphon is an ASX listed company focused on advancing its 100%-owned Banfora Gold Project in 
Burkina Faso, as well as a pipeline of new and exciting projects in West Africa.
Gryphon is an Australian public company, limited by shares, that was admitted to the official list of ASX 
on 22 April 2004.
Gryphon is a ‘disclosing entity’ for the purposes of the Corporations Act and is therefore subject to 
regular reporting obligations under the Corporations Act and the ASX Listing Rules.  See section 4.8 for 
further information.
In addition to the information about Gryphon contained in this section, the Independent Expert’s Report 
in Annexure A contains further detailed information on Gryphon.
4.2
Overview of projects
Figure 1: Location of Gryphon’s projects
(a)
Banfora Gold Project, Burkina Faso (100%)
The Banfora Gold Project is located in the south-west of Burkina Faso, West Africa. Burkina Faso is one 
of the largest gold producers in Africa and is located on some of the world’s most prolific greenstone 
belts (accounting for 22% of West Africa’s greenstone belt exposure). The country is already host to a 
number of producing mines and this is anticipated to increase given the prospectivity and strong 
Government support for the mining industry.
33
The Banfora Gold Project is 100% owned and includes exploration licenses covering over 1,000 square 
kilometres and a mining licence that covers 89 square kilometres. These licences are located in a major 
gold district where world class gold deposits such as Tongon (4.2 Million oz Au), Syama (5 Million oz Au 
mined & 6.5 Million oz Au in resources) and Morila (6.5 Million oz Au) are also found. The Banfora Gold 
Project has an enviable location being easily accessible by road in close proximity to the regional town 
of Banfora and the major city of Bobo-Dioulasso.  In addition, an existing hydro-power supply source and 
substation is located less than 100 kilometres to the south of the project site in Côte d’Ivoire, which can 
potentially be used to power future mining expansion and development.
Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves
The Banfora Gold Project is a significant undeveloped gold resource in West Africa and is one of only a 
few new large scale greenfields discoveries in the world.
The Mineral Resources released in Gryphon’s ASX announcement dated 4 February 2014 are shallow 
with 90% above 150 metres vertical depth and they remain open at depth and along strike. The Ore 
Reserves for the heap leach operation (announced to ASX by Gryphon on 4 August 2014) are also 
shallow with an average vertical pit depth of 50 metres across the deposits, with maximum depths at the 
Nogbele North pit and Samavogo south of close to 100 metres.
The current Mineral Resource Estimate for the Banfora Gold Project reported at the 0.3g/t, 0.5g/t, 1.0g/t 
& 1.5g/t lower cut offs are as stated in the following table:
Banfora Gold Project Mineral Resource Estimate at 30 June 2015:
Lower cut
off
g/t
0.3
0.5
1.0
1.5
Measured
Indicated
Tonne
s 
Mt 
9.5
6.7
3.1
2.0
Grad
e g/t 
Au 
1.1
1.4
2.3
2.9
Gol
d
Moz 
0.35
0.31
0.23
0.18
Tonne
s 
Mt 
76.2
60.5
28.8
16.1
Grad
e g/t 
Au 
1.2
1.4
2.1
2.8
Gol
d
Moz 
2.9
2.7
1.9
1.4
Total Measured +
Indicated
Tonnes
Mt
Grade 
g/t Au
Gold 
Moz
85.8
67.2
31.9
18.0
1.2
1.4
2.1
2.8
3.2
3.0
2.2
1.6
Inferred 
Grad
e g/t 
Au 
1.1
1.3
1.9
2.6
Tonne
s 
Mt 
19.2
15.9
7.8
3.8
Gol
d
Moz 
0.70
0.66
0.47
0.32
Note: Refer to ASX release on 4 February 2014.  Gryphon confirms that it is not aware of any new 
information or data that materially affects the information in the said announcement and all material 
assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the Mineral Resource Estimate continue to apply.
Ore Reserve Estimate for Banfora 2Mtpa Heap Leach Operation at 30 June 2015:
Area
Oxidation
Nogbele
Oxide 
Transition 
Fresh 
Fourkoura  Oxide
Transition 
Fresh 
Samavogo  Oxide
Stinger
Total
Transition 
Fresh 
Oxide 
Transition 
Fresh 
Oxide 
Transition 
Fresh
Cut-off 
Au g/t
0.3-0.4 
0.5-0.6 
0.5-0.7 
0.4 
0.6 
0.9 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.4 
0.7 
1.1
Grand total
Proved
Probable
Grade 
Au g/t 
1.1 
1.4 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1.1 
1.4 
2.0 
1.4
Au 
koz 
88 
38 
51 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
88 
38 
51 
176
Tonnes
Mt
4.8 
1.2 
1.1 
0.8 
0.5 
0.5 
1.1 
0.5 
1.3 
1.4 
0.3 
0.1 
8.0 
2.5 
2.9 
13.4
Grade 
Au g/t 
1.1 
1.4 
2.1 
1.1 
1.6 
2.0 
1.7 
1.9 
2.3 
1.5 
1.9 
2.7 
1.2 
1.6 
2.2 
1.5
Au 
koz 
166 
55 
72 
28 
25 
33 
59 
33 
92 
67 
16 
5 
320 
128 
202 
650
Tonnes
Mt
2.4 
0.8 
0.8 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2.4 
0.8 
0.8 
4.0
Total
Grade 
Au g/t 
1.1 
1.4 
2.1 
1.1 
1.6 
2.0 
1.7 
1.9 
2.3 
1.5 
1.9 
2.7 
1.2 
1.5 
2.1 
1.5
Tonnes
Mt
7.2 
2.1 
1.9 
0.8 
0.5 
0.5 
1.1 
0.5 
1.3 
1.4 
0.3 
0.1 
10.4 
3.3 
3.7 
17.4
Au 
koz 
253 
93 
123 
28 
25 
33 
59 
33 
92 
67 
16 
5 
407 
166 
252 
826
34
Note: Refer to ASX release on 4 August 2014.  Gryphon confirms that it is not aware of any new 
information or data that materially affects the information in the said announcement and all material 
assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the Reserve Estimate continue to apply.
The cut-off grades used in the estimation of the Banfora Ore Reserves shown above are the non-mining, 
break-even gold grades taking into account mining recovery and dilution, metallurgical recovery, site 
operating costs, royalties and revenues. For reporting of Ore Reserves the calculated cut-off grades 
were rounded to the first decimal gram per tonne of gold. The cut-off grades vary depending on the 
material type and the pit location.
The grades and metal stated in the Ore Reserves Estimate released in Gryphon’s ASX announcement 
dated 4 August 2014 include estimates for mining recovery and dilution. The Ore Reserve Estimate is 
reported within the open pit designs prepared as part of the feasibility study. Contained within the pit 
designs on which the Ore Reserves are based is a total of 59.4 Mt of waste material, resulting in an 
average waste:ore strip ratio of 3.4:1.
Outside the currently defined and evaluated deposits, the Banfora Gold Project area remains highly 
prospective for further discoveries.
(b)
Golden Hill Project, Burkina Faso (51%, earning 80%)
The Golden Hill Project is considered particularly prospective as it is located within the highly 
mineralised Houndé Greenstone Belt in Burkina Faso. This belt hosts the majority of the high grade 
discovered gold ounces in Burkina Faso, including Semafo’s recently discovered Siou Deposit plus the 
high grade Yaramoko deposit being developed by Roxgold .  The belt also hosts Semafo’s Mana Mine 
and Endeavour Mining’s Houndé deposit.  The Golden Hill Project straddles the same structure and 
stratigraphy that host these high grade deposits.
The other parties to the Golden Hill Project Joint Venture are Boss Resources Limited (ACN 116 834 
336) (Boss) and two subsidiaries of Boss, Askia Gold Pty Ltd (ACN 138 993 656) (Askia) and Boss 
Minerals Pty Ltd (ACN 158 713 949) (Boss Minerals).  Gryphon owns 51% of the operating entity, Boss 
Minerals SARL, which in turn owns the tenements the subject of the Golden Hill Project.
Further, under the terms of a Shareholders and Earn-in Agreement between the parties, Gryphon is 
entitled to acquire up to 80% of the shares in Boss Minerals and Askia in exchange for funding 
development of the Golden Hill Project and Gourma Gold Project.
(c)
Gourma Gold Project, Burkina Faso (51%, earning 80%)
The Gourma Project includes approximately 60 km of a gold-bearing crustal shear which has received 
very little modern exploration.  The Gourma Project is located within the Fada N’Gourma Greenstone 
Belt, 250 km east of Ouagadougou and only 80 km south-southwest of Niger’s largest gold deposit, the 
50,000 ounce per annum Samira Hill gold mine. The Gourma Project consists of six contiguous permits 
(Diabatou, Tyara, Foutouri Boutouanou, Tyabo and Kankandi)5 that cover a total area of approximately 
1,300 km². It is accessible from the south off the Fada N’Gourma-Kantchari highway via a well 
maintained gravel road and from the west via a gravel road from the town of Gayeri.
The other parties to the Gourma Gold Project Joint Venture are Boss, Askia and Boss Minerals. 
Gryphon owns 51% of the operating entity, Boss Minerals SARL, which in turn owns the tenements the 
subject of the Gourma Gold Project.
Further, under the terms of a Shareholders and Earn-in Agreement between the parties, Gryphon is 
entitled to acquire up to 80% of the shares in Boss Minerals and Askia in exchange for funding 
development of the Golden Hill Project and Gourma Gold Project.
4.3
Directors and senior management
The current directors of Gryphon are:
•
Mel Ashton – Non-Executive Chairman
5 The Tyabo and Kankandi permits are subject to transfer from Cluff Mining Burkina Sarl.  The Foutouri and Tyara permits are 
the subject of exceptional renewal applications.
35
•
•
•
Stephen Parsons – Managing Director
Didier Murcia AM – Non-Executive Director
Bruce McFadzean – Non-Executive Director
The current senior managers of Gryphon are:
•
•
•
Steven Zaninovich – Chief Operating Officer
Michael Naylor – Chief Financial Officer
Carl Travaglini – Company Secretary/Financial Controller
If the Scheme does not proceed, the current senior management of Gryphon will remain.  If the Scheme 
is approved, the intentions of Teranga in relation to employees generally is set out in section 6.2.
4.4
Gryphon securities
As at 15 August 2016, being the latest practicable date prior to finalisation of this Scheme Booklet, there 
were 422,796,447 Gryphon Shares, 16,390,000 Performance Rights and 4,737,341 Share Appreciation 
Rights on issue.
4.5
Financial information
(a)
Basis of preparation
The following section summarises certain historical financial information about Gryphon for the year 
ended 30 June 2015, as well as the half year period ended 31 December 2015 and the period of nine 
months ended 31 March 2016.  The financial information set out in this section is a summary only and is 
prepared for the purposes of this Scheme Booklet.  The 2015 financial report was audited by BDO Audit 
(WA) Pty Ltd and an unmodified audit report was issued.  The 2015 half year financial report was 
reviewed by BDO Audit (WA) Pty Ltd and an unmodified review report was issued.  The financial 
information for the nine months ended 31 March 2016 has not been reviewed or audited by Gryphon’s 
auditor.
Full financial statements for Gryphon for the financial year ended 30 June 2015 and the half year ended 
31 December 2015 were released to ASX and are available free of charge on http://www.asx.com.au/ or 
by requesting a copy from Gryphon’s Chief Financial Officer on +61 (08) 9287 4333.
(b)
Consolidated income statement
Below is a summary of Gryphon’s audited consolidated income statement for the full year ended 30 
June 2015, Gryphon’s audit reviewed consolidated income statement for the half year ended 31 
December 2015, and Gryphon’s unaudited consolidated income statement for the nine months ending 
31 March 2016.
Revenue 
Revenue from continuing operations 
Other income 
 
Expenses 
Administration expense 
Consultancy expense 
Employee benefits expense 
Share based payment expense 
Occupancy expense 
Compliance and regulatory expense 
Insurance expense 
Depreciation expense
30 Jun 2015
A$’000 
Audited
31 Dec 2015
A$’000
Reviewed
31 March 2016
A$’000
Unaudited
824 
1,398 
2,222
(1,018) 
(389) 
(1,962) 
(285) 
(243) 
(197) 
(178) 
(753)
208 
192 
400
(472) 
(176) 
(864)
79
(120) 
(60) 
(50) 
(417)
290 
1,260 
1,550
(712) 
(266) 
(1,207)
(17) 
(179) 
(63) 
(76) 
(523)
36
Interest expense 
Exploration and evaluation expense 
Fixed assets written off 
Foreign exchange gain 
 
 
Loss before income tax 
Income tax expense 
Loss after income tax 
 
Other comprehensive income 
Exchange difference on translation of foreign 
operations 
Changes in the fair value of financial assets 
Other comprehensive loss 
 
Total comprehensive loss 
 
Loss for the period is attributable to: 
Non-controlling interest 
Members of Gryphon Minerals Ltd 
 
Total comprehensive loss for the period is 
attributable to: 
Non-controlling interest 
Members of Gryphon Minerals Ltd 
 
 
Basic loss per share (cents)
(c)
Consolidated balance sheet
30 Jun 2015
A$’000 
Audited
-
(12,727)
(437) 
1,446
(16,743)
(14,521)
-
(14,521)
135
(2,566) 
(2,431)
(16,952)
(24)
(14,497) 
(14,521)
(24)
(16,928) 
(16,952)
(3.6)
31 Dec 2015
A$’000
Reviewed
31 March 2016
A$’000
Unaudited
(1)
(3,063)
(52) 
(168) 
(5,364)
(4,964)
-
(4,964)
105
(312) 
(207)
(5,171)
(38)
(4,926) 
(4,964)
(38)
(5,133) 
(5,171)
(1.2)
(2)
(5,016)
(52) 
(304) 
(8,417)
(6,867)
-
(6,867)
125
(248) 
(123)
(6,990)
(65)
(6,802) 
(6,867)
(65)
(6,925) 
(6,990)
(1.7)
Below is a summary of Gryphon’s audited consolidated balance sheet as at 30 June 2015, Gryphon’s 
audit reviewed consolidated balance sheet as at 31 December 2015, and Gryphon’s unaudited 
consolidated balance sheet as at 31 March 2016.
ASSETS 
Current assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Inventory 
Total current assets 
 
Non-current assets 
Trade and other receivables 
Financial assets 
Property, plant and equipment 
Exploration and evaluation expenditure 
Total non-current assets 
 
Total Assets 
 
LIABILITIES 
Current liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Total current liabilities 
 
Non-current liabilities
30 Jun 2015
A$’000 
Audited
18,453
928 
23
19,404
267 
540 
2,878 
5,139 
8,824
28,228
2,917 
2,917
37
31 Dec 2015
A$’000
Reviewed
31 March 2016
A$’000
Unaudited
12,883
315 
23
13,221
283 
418 
2,564 
6,066 
9.331
22,552
2,526 
2,526
10,636
420 
16
11,072
257 
1,550 
2,417 
5,377 
9,601
20,673
2,784 
2,784
Provisions 
Total non-current liabilities 
 
Total liabilities 
 
Net Assets 
 
EQUITY 
Contributed equity 
Reserves 
Accumulated losses 
Equity attributable to the members of Gryphon 
Minerals Ltd 
Non-controlling interest 
Total equity
(d)
Consolidated cash flow statement
30 Jun 2015
A$’000 
Audited
420 
420
3,337
24,891
229,014 
7,531
(210,859)
25,686
(795) 
24,891
31 Dec 2015
A$’000
Reviewed
31 March 2016
A$’000
Unaudited
385 
385
2,911
19,641
229,014 
7,245
(215,785)
20,474
(833) 
19,641
337 
337
3,121
17,552
229,021 
7,426
(218,035)
18,412
(860) 
17,552
Below is a summary of Gryphon’s audited consolidated cash flow statement for the full year ended 30 
June 2015, Gryphon’s audited reviewed consolidated cash flow statement for the half year ended 31 
December 2015, and Gryphon’s unaudited consolidated cash flow statement for the nine months ending 
31 March 2016:
Cash flows from operating activities 
Payments for exploration and evaluation 
Refunded exploration and evaluation expense 
Payments to administration suppliers and 
employees 
Interest received 
Interest paid 
Proceeds from R&D grant 
Net cash used in operating activities 
 
Cash flows from investing activities 
Payments for exploration farm-ins 
Purchase of property, plant and equipment 
Refund on deposit paid on equipment 
Payments for tenement acquisitions 
Refund of tenement fees 
Net cash used in investing activities 
 
Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 
Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of 
the year 
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the 
year
30 Jun 2015
A$’000 
Audited
31 Dec 2015
A$’000
Reviewed
31 March 2016
A$’000
Unaudited
(13,504)
541
(3,658)
857
-
1,005
(14,759)
(1,326) 
(263) 
500 
(12)
7
(1,094)
(15,853) 
34,306
18,453
(3,416)
-
(1,802)
237 
(1) 
-
(5,672)
-
(2,555)
324 
(2) 
-
(4,982)
(7,905)
(926) 
(49) 
385
- 
2
(588)
(5,570) 
18,453
12,883
(238) 
(62) 
385
- 
2 
83
(7,822) 
18,453
10,636
4.6
Material changes in Gryphon’s financial position
To the knowledge of your Directors, and except as disclosed elsewhere in this Scheme Booklet, the 
financial position of Gryphon has not materially changed since 31 December 2015 other than:
•  As at 30 June 2016, Gryphon’s cash position had decreased to $9,280,154;6 and
6 Since 30 June 2016, Gryphon has raised $4.4 million through a placement of 21.2 million Gryphon Shares to Teranga.  On 9 
August 2016, Gryphon sold its shares in Algold Resources Limited for US$2.6 million which has increased its cash position by 
this amount.
38
•  As at 30 June 2016, Gryphon’s investments in listed shares had a market value of $3,846,603. 7
4.7
Recent share price history
The latest recorded price of Gryphon Shares on ASX on the Pre-Announcement Date was $0.135.  The 
latest recorded price of Gryphon Shares on ASX was A$0.210 on 15 August 2016, being the last 
practicable date prior to finalisation of this Scheme Booklet.
The following chart shows the closing price of Gryphon Minerals Shares on ASX over the past 12 
months, to the Announcement Date.
As at the Announcement Date:
•
•
•
the 10 day VWAP of Gryphon Shares was $0.134;
the highest recorded trading price of Gryphon Shares in the previous 3 months was $0.17; and
the lowest recorded trading price of Gryphon Shares in the previous 3 months was $0.067.
The current price of Gryphon Shares on ASX can be obtained from the ASX website (www.asx.com.au) 
or http://www.gryphonminerals.com.au/index.php/en/.
4.8
Publicly available information
As an ASX listed company and a “disclosing entity” for the purposes of section 111AC(1) of the 
Corporations Act, Gryphon is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations.  Broadly these 
require it to announce price sensitive information to ASX as soon as it becomes aware of the 
information, subject to exceptions for certain confidential information. Gryphon’s most recent 
announcements are available from its website 
http://www.gryphonminerals.com.au/index.php/en/investors-4/asx-announcements.  Further 
announcements concerning Gryphon will continue to be made available on this website after the date of 
this Scheme Booklet.
ASX maintains files containing publicly available information about entities listed on their exchange.  
Gryphon’s files are available for inspection at ASX during normal business hours and are available on 
the ASX website (www.asx.com.au).
Additionally, copies of documents lodged with ASIC in relation to Gryphon may be obtained from or 
inspected at an ASIC service centre.  Please note ASIC may charge a fee in respect of such services.
7 This figure includes Gyphon’s shares in Algold Resources Limited which as at 30 June 2016 were valued at A$3,481,968.  
These shares were sold on 9 August 2016 for US$2.6 million.
39
The following documents are available for inspection free of charge prior to the Scheme Meeting during 
normal business hours at the registered office of Gryphon:
•
•
•
•
Gryphon’s constitution;
Gryphon’s annual report for the financial year ended 30 June 2015;
Gryphon’s public announcements; and
Gryphon’s interim report for the period ended 31 December 2015.
The annual and interim reports and public announcements are also available at 
http://www.gryphonminerals.com.au/index.php/en/investors-4/asx-announcements.
4.9
Further information
For the risks associated with the Scheme, refer to section 8.  In particular, section 8.2 outlines the risks 
to Gryphon if the Scheme does not proceed.
40
Information on Teranga
5.
41
5.1
Responsibility for information
The information in this section 5 of the Scheme Booklet has been prepared by Teranga.  The information 
concerning Teranga and the intentions, views and opinions contained in this section 5 are the 
responsibility of Teranga.   Information presented below is based on prior public disclosure of Teranga 
included within its March 2016 AIF, the Sabodala Technical Report prepared in accordance with NI 43-
101, and Teranga’s 2015 Annual Report, all of which are available on Teranga’s profile on the SEDAR 
website at www.sedar.com  on Teranga’s page on the ASX company announcements platform at 
www.asx.com.au and on Teranga’s website at www.terangagold.com.
Gryphon and Gryphon’s Directors and officers do not assume any responsibility for the accuracy or 
completeness of this information.
All dollar figures presented below are in US dollars unless otherwise indicated.
5.2
Overview of Teranga
Teranga is a Canada based gold mining company, which is dual-listed on the TSX and ASX.  Teranga 
was incorporated in the fall of 2010 to acquire the Sabodala Gold Project from a publicly listed company.  
Teranga took over operational control of the Sabodala Gold Project on 23 November 2010, and its initial 
public offering was completed on 7 December 2010.
Teranga’s producing gold mine is located within the Sabodala ML, which covers an area of 291 km2 and 
is located approximately 650 km east of the capital of Senegal, Dakar, within the West African Birimian 
geological belt in Senegal, and about 90 km from major gold mines in Mali.  The Sabodala mill was the 
first, and remains the only, large-scale gold processing facility to come into operation in Senegal.  Since 
Teranga’s acquisition of the Sabodala Gold Project, it has produced over 1 million ounces of gold. In 
2016, Teranga expects to produce between 200,000 and 215,000 ounces of gold8.
In addition to the Sabodala ML, Teranga holds one of the largest gold exploration land positions in 
Senegal with a direct or majority controlling joint venture interest in the Regional Land Package which 
surrounds its Sabodala gold mine.  The Regional Land Package comprises an area of approximately 
1,000 km2 and is located on the same geographical gold belt that runs through Mali and Senegal where 
more than 50 million ounces of gold resources have been discovered, including three discoveries of 
greater than 5 million ounces.
As of 31 December 2015, the expanded Sabodala ML had 4.4 million ounces of Measured and Indicated 
Resources including 2.6 million ounces in proven and probable reserves and a further 0.9 million ounces 
of Inferred Resources.  Full details of Teranga’s reserves and resources are set out in the Mineral 
Reserves and Resources statement in section 5.3.  In total, Teranga has increased its reserve base by 
80% since its IPO after netting out production.  A significant multiyear reserve development program is 
underway to add high-grade mill feed and low grade heap leach feed to the reserve base, which should 
allow Teranga to further increase future annual production at attractive cash margins.
Teranga’s significant investment in corporate social responsibility has helped in establishing a mutually 
beneficial partnership with the regional and local levels of government. The strengthening of this 
relationship is expected to continue and to generate positive outcomes for the local and regional 
population in terms of agriculture and food security, youth education and training, health care and long 
term employment.
5.3
Teranga’s business
(a)
Corporate Structure
Teranga was incorporated on 1 October 2010 under the Canada Business Corporations Act.  Teranga 
has five material subsidiaries, including two key Senegalese operating companies: SGO, which holds 
the Sabodala ML and operates the Sabodala gold mine and mill, and SMC which holds, directly or via 
joint venture, the Regional Land Package.
8 Details of Teranga's production targets for Sabodala for the calendar year 2016 were published in Teranga's ASX 
announcements titled "Technical Report NI 43-101" and "Press Release - Technical Report" both dated 24 March 2016. 
Teranga confirms that all material assumptions underpinning the production targets in these ASX announcements continue to 
apply and have not materially changed since that date.  The production guidance is based on existing Proven and Probable 
Mineral Reserves.
42
Set out below is a chart reflecting the organisational structure of Teranga and each of its material subsidiaries, as 
well as the percentage of ownership and jurisdiction of incorporation of each such subsidiary.
(1)
The  Government  of  Senegal  holds  the  remaining  10%  of  SGO,  and  of  the  90%  held  by  SGML,  0.5%  is  held  by  certain  nominee  directors  thereof  in 
accordance with the requirements of applicable Senegalese laws.
(b)
Recent Developments
In May 2013, Teranga executed a series of agreements (referred to as the Global Investment 
Agreement) with the Government of Senegal which, among other matters, allowed its Senegalese 
operating company SGO, to incorporate non-contiguous satellite deposits into its Sabodala ML.  The 
agreement was reflected in an amendment to the Sabodala Mining Convention.
On 4 October 2013, Teranga completed the acquisition of Oromin Explorations Ltd. (Oromin), a 
Canadian gold mining company listed on the TSX. Oromin held a 43.5% participating interest in a joint 
venture, OJVG. OJVG held a 90% interest in a Senegalese operating company (the Government of 
Senegal owned the remaining 10%) which held the Golouma Mining License, which is contiguous with 
the Sabodala ML.
In December 2013, the Gora deposit, located within an existing exploration permit held by SMC, became 
the first satellite deposit incorporated in the Sabodala ML, with a perimeter of 45km2.  At that time, the 
Gora deposit had reported measured and indicated resources of 370,000 oz (2.32 Mt at 5.00 g/t Au), 
inclusive of 290,000 oz of proven and probable reserves (1.89 Mt at 4.74 g/t Au).
On 15 January 2014, Teranga completed a $135 million stream transaction with Franco Nevada 
Corporation (Franco Nevada) to fund its acquisition of the balance of OJVG that Teranga did not 
already own, and retire half of Teranga’s then US$60 million loan facility with Macquarie Bank Limited.  
Pursuant to the Gold Stream Transaction, Franco Nevada pre-purchased a fixed annual amount of gold 
from SGO: (i) 22,500 oz for the first six years of the agreement; and (ii) thereafter, 6% of future gold 
production.  In addition to the initial deposit amount of $135 million, Franco Nevada pays 20% of spot 
price of gold for each oz delivered (for an effective 4.8% royalty).  Concurrent with the Gold Stream 
Transaction, Teranga acquired the balance of the interests in the OJVG (56.5%) for $112.5 million, 
thereby consolidating Teranga’s interests in the Sabodala region and increasing the size of its areas 
under mine license from 33m2 to 246km2 and more than doubling Teranga’s reserve base.
On 7 April 2015, Teranga negotiated amendments to the Sabodala Mining Convention to combine the 
Sabodala ML, the Golouma Mining License (formerly held by OJVG) and the Gora Project into an 
expanded and consolidated mine license area of 291.2km2, which also incorporated the material 
commitments set out in the Global Investment Agreement.
In July 2015, Teranga entered into the US$30.0 million Teranga Revolving Credit Facility.  The Teranga 
Revolving Credit Facility bears an annual interest rate of LIBOR plus 4.65% which matures on 30 June
43
2019 and is currently drawn down by US$15.0 million.  The unused portions of Teranga Revolving Credit 
Facility are subject to an annual commitment fee of 1.6%.
On 29 January 2016, SGO received a Presidential Decree formally extending the term of the expanded 
Sabodala ML to 26 January 2025.
On 13 July 2016, Teranga entered into the Côte d'Ivoire JVA pursuant to which Teranga will acquire a 
100% interest in four exploration permits in the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire held by Miminvest, an entity 
controlled by a Teranga Director, Mr David Mimran.  The four permits cover an area of 1,461.7km2.  
Under the terms of the Côte d'Ivoire JVA, a wholly-owned Ivorian subsidiary of Teranga will be 
established into which Miminvest will transfer title to the permits.  In exchange for its 100% interest in the 
four permits Teranga shall fund all exploration costs, while Miminvest shall retain a 3% net smelter 
royalty over each of the permits.  There is no minimum annual work commitment under the terms of the 
Côte d'Ivoire JVA and Teranga anticipates limited spending during 2016.
(c)
Mission, Vision & Strategy
Teranga has established the following mission, vision and strategy to guide its business objective of 
creating shareholder value.
Vision
Teranga’s vision is to become a pre-eminent mid-tier gold producer in West Africa.
Mission
Teranga’s mission is to create value for all of its stakeholders through responsible mining.
Strategy
To increase long-term sustainable cash flows, Teranga has a three-pronged strategy focused on 
achieving: (i) reserve growth; (ii) production growth; and (iii) margin expansion.
•
•
•
(i) Reserve growth: the first component of the Teranga's growth strategy focuses on 
increasing reserves through converting Mineral Resources to Mineral Reserves, making large-
scale discoveries and acquiring existing deposits. Teranga continues to seek ways to leverage 
its unique advantage as the only gold producer with a full-scale operating mill and related 
infrastructure in Senegal and for other opportunities, such as the acquisition of Gryphon and 
the Côte d'Ivoire JVA, to add other high quality West African gold assets to Teranga's portfolio..
(ii) Production growth: the second component of Teranga's growth strategy is focused on 
maximising throughput to Teranga's process facilities by increasing process capacity through 
high return initiatives that leverage Teranga's existing asset base.  Major growth opportunities 
and capital projects are evaluated using a minimum after-tax internal rate of return target to 
govern Teranga's capital allocation and investment decisions.
(iii) Margin expansion: the third component of Teranga's growth strategy is to improve cash 
margins through productivity improvements and cost savings.
Overall, Teranga's focus is on increasing profitable production to maximise free cash flow.
(d)
Sabodala Gold Project
The Sabodala ML has an initial term extending to January 2025.  Thereafter, it is renewable for 
successive five year terms, based on anticipated mine life and ongoing regulatory compliance.
Pursuant to the Sabodala Mining Convention, SGO is required to pay a 5% gross production royalty to 
the Government of Senegal; invest $1,200,000 per annum in social development programs within the 
region; contribute $350,000 per annum for training of officers of the Directorate of Mines and Geology 
and Ministry of Mines; and contribute $30,000 per annum for logistical support of the territorial 
administration of the region.  In addition: (i) $250,000 is payable annually pursuant to a forestry protocol 
with the Ministry of Environment for a period of five years ending in 2019; (ii) $925,000 for additional 
reserves payable in 2016; (iii) institutional support amounts for exploration licenses (approximately 
$100,000 estimated for 2016); and (iv) with the commencement of mining at the Gora pit in July 2015,
44
$200,000 is payable annually for each production year up to a maximum of $1,000,000 for community 
projects located around the Gora deposit.
Following the completion of the acquisition of OJVG, Teranga is also required to make initial payments 
totalling $10.0 million related to the waiver of the right for the Government of Senegal to acquire an 
additional equity interest in the Senegalese subsidiary of OVJG.  As at 30 June 2016 US$7.1 million has 
already been contributed to the Government of Senegal under this commitment.
Accessibility
The Sabodala Gold Project (including the Golouma and Gora projects) is accessible from Dakar by 
sealed road, to the regional centre of Tambacounda and then via a good all-weather sealed road, 230km 
southeast to Kédougou, then 96km of sealed and laterite-surfaced roads which access the villages of 
Faloumbo and Sabodala. A 1,250m sealed, public airstrip, capable of handling light to medium sized 
aircraft, lies at the north end of the Sabodala ML.
Local Resources, Personnel and Infrastructure
The main mining camp is located approximately 3km from the mine and 2km from the plant and is 
designed to house up to 960 employees.  A separate camp has been constructed at Bransan for 
exploration personnel and is designed to accommodate 50 persons.  A significant proportion of the 
personnel involved in the mining operations have been sourced from the local villages, surrounding 
regions and Dakar.
Teranga provides for the majority of its own infrastructure needs. Power is generated at the site using 
low speed, heavy fuel oil generators. A 30MW 5-unit engine heavy fuel oil power plant was originally 
constructed, and subsequently expanded to 36MW with the mill expansion by SGO in 2012.  Water 
supply to service the processing plant and mine comprises three surface water storage dams from local 
catchment areas. These dams are designed to store adequate water from seasonal rainfall events to 
provide for all production needs on a year-round basis.  There are sufficient waste disposal areas and 
tailings storage areas. Existing port facilities at Dakar are utilized for unloading of all equipment, spares 
and consumables for the mine.
Geology and Mineralisation
The Sabodala ML and the surrounding Regional Land Package are located in the 2,213 Ma to 2,198 Ma 
age Kedougou-Kenieba Inlier which lies within the Paleoproterozoic age Birimian Terrane of the West 
African Craton. The permits straddle two major divisions of the Inlier – the volcanic-dominated Mako 
Supergroup to the west, and the sediment-dominated Diale-Dalema Supergroup to the east. The 
Sabodala, Masato and Gora deposits and western portions of Teranga’s Faleme and Near Mine projects 
are hosted in the Mako belt volcanics. The Mako Supergroup consists mainly of tholeiitic basalts and 
andesitic lavas (massive and pillowed flows) with minor komatitic units interbedded with volcanoclastic 
sediments (pyroclastic banded tuffs and agglomerates), quartzite and chert as well as ultramafics, 
dolerites and gabbros. The Diale and Dalema Supergroup are characterized by folded sandstones and 
siltstones interbedded with calc-alkaline ash and lapilli tuffs that are more pelitic and siliceous in the 
Diale Supergroup and more calcareous in the Dalema Supergroup.
The Mako and Diale-Dalema supracrustal sequences are intruded by a series of variably deformed 
granitoid intrusions that range in age from 2,160 Ma to 2,000 Ma. These include the Karkadian Batholith 
which bounds the Mako Belt to the west, and several major large stocks in the central Mako Belt in the 
project areas. Northeast trending intermediate to felsic and later, post-tectonic mafic dykes are present 
throughout the region, the latter forming prominent linear magnetic features. Felsic and intermediate 
composition dykes are often spatially associated with shear zones hosting gold mineralization, and 
locally are host to significant gold mineralization themselves.
Principal structures on the Sabodala property form a steeply west-northwest dipping, north-northeast 
trending shear zone network which has previously been referred to as the “Sabodala Shear Zone”. This 
includes the Niakafiri, and Masato shear zones, which are high strain zones developed in altered 
ultramafic units. There are also shear zones that are linked to them by north to northwest trending 
splays. These include the “Ayoub’s Thrust”, which is focused along the ultramafic sill that lies on the 
west side (hanging wall) of the Sabodala deposit.
Mineralisation is generally associated with highly strained steeply dipping north-northeast or east-west 
trending shear zones, quartz-carbonate-sericite-tourmaline-pyrite shear veins, highly altered quartz-
carbonate-albite-pyrite zones, and often spatially associated with felsic and mafic dykes.
45
Exploretlen Statue
Terenga has adopted a three-phase exploration epproech lorthe Sebodela Gold Project. Phase 1
includes target generation and consists oi airborne geophysics, surlece geochemistry, geological
mapping, and rotary air blast drilling and trenching. This work has been largely completed and
Terenga's lulure exploration programs will be locused on Phase 2 and Phase 3.
Phase 2 and Phase 3 have the objective oi increasing Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves within
the Sabodala Gold Project. Phase 2. prioritizing erd ranking. incudes identilylng target: and ordering
them dependan on their potential of hosting economic minerallzeticn and Phase 3. target testing.
includes trenching and reverse circulation and diamond drilling within the areas at significant
mineralleetiont
(e) lllnlng Operetlone
lllnerel Resources
Mineral Resources were estimated for the Sabodala Gold Proied end are shown below. Mineral
Resources are reported inclusive oi Mineral Reserves The etleot‘we date oi the estimate is El
Deoember 2015.
There have been no revisions to the resource models lcr 2015. except lor ed'pstrnents die to mining
depletion. minor revisions lrorn inlill drilling el Niekeﬁri Southwest and Meki Medina. remodeling oi
mineralization at Nieluatiri Main, and conversion lrorn a sectional model to a block model e1 Diadiakot For
es1imeting 2015 Mineral Resources. Terange has implemented a new reporting procedure. which
includes the use el open pit shells to constrain open pit resources and reporting underground resources
separately
Pit n Min r I R rnrn t 1 r 1
i t i i ‘ ‘ r
., Pl “I; Ill :01 am 150 33: 2°73 m m 2.525 m 100
,  . We rut 305 m Int :05 m m m 53
. . i m; m 491 am 201 524 2“: 145 L021 2.35 too 153
u a we use as 1.09: an 213 LS» 564 m 53 us a
r -r 315 5“ 52 JI5 5 ll 52 50 1‘53 9
I ‘ ‘ Add ‘55 6! 1M 5“ 285 I” 550 :13 Ill I“ I5
-- Pl 4.909 m 2m 1142 on 223 um It» or
.W m 251 is
A r r I” 133 2W 7.222 0” m 2.356 I I? 102
-- Pl 2.5! 129 107
.W an m I
. r i 2,350 134 us
.. p. 550 I u 26
t r r 560 I 46 26
-- Pl In 127 r
ﬂQ---
. r i M! 754 39
. “J: m rr: 3”: m 1.5. tau us 335
‘ '  - - m: at n: ma w w rm m 141
t "'7: us um ’5": us mo in Li! .2
-- M sea a 79 150 m; m w 2“: lot 994
~ - tum use 275 ‘03 HQ 275 I03 1.”! 255 in
. . i an: on 150 ’3": m w 2”: H5 roar m as in
n, P: am 239 as: can no as: on 245 r
.. . rpm 2114 m 2m mu m m as: us 100
. . i 'r 325 m w :25 m m 355 10]
Scheme Booklet | Gryphon Minerals 46


Deposit
Domain
Kerekounda
Maki Medina
Niakafiri SW
Niakafiri SE
Kinemba
Kobokoto
Koulouqwinde
Kourouloulou
Kouroundi
Koutouniokollo
Mamasato
Sekoto
Subtotal  
Somigol ML
Total Sabodala 
+ Somigol
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined 
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined
Open Pit 
Underground 
Combined
Measured
Indicated
Tonn
es 
(‘000s
)
5,894 
  
5,894 
25,01
1 
  
25,01
1
Grad
e 
(g/t 
Au) 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
0.79
0.79
1.15
1.15
Au 
(‘000
s)
Tonn
es 
(‘000
s)
1,255 
499 
 
  1,755 
   2,112 
109 
 
  2,221 
  
770 
  
 
770 
 
   4,439 
73 
 
  4,512 
24 
  
  
 
24 
 
842 
  
  
 
842 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
96 
  
59 
 
156 
 
67 
  
  
 
67 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
560 
  
  
 
560 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
150  39,58
4 
  4,038 
150  43,62
2 
926  54,37
7 
  5,985 
926  60,36
2
Grad
e 
(g/t 
Au) 
4.28 
4.88 
4.45 
1.22 
2.71 
1.30 
0.81 
 
0.81 
0.98 
2.60 
1.01 
1.06 
  
1.06 
1.02 
 
1.02 
  
 
 
11.51 
9.15 
10.61 
0.93 
 
0.93 
  
 
 
1.45 
  
1.45 
  
 
 
1.58 
3.81 
1.78
1.59 
3.84 
1.81
Au 
(‘000
s) 
173 
78 
251 
83 
10 
93 
20 
 
20 
140 
6 
146 
1 
  
1 
28 
 
28 
  
 
 
36 
18 
53 
2 
 
2 
  
 
 
26 
  
26 
  
 
 
2,005 
495 
2,500
2,777 
738 
3,516
Measured and
Indicated
Tonne
s 
(‘000s
Inferred
Grad
e 
(g/t 
Au) 
  
5.70 
5.70 
0.81 
2.54 
1.55 
0.67 
 
0.67 
0.96 
2.64 
1.11 
0.95 
2.52 
1.55 
0.86 
 
0.86 
1.42 
2.67 
1.68 
6.71 
13.58 
12.18 
0.74 
 
0.74 
1.58 
2.54 
1.78 
1.25 
2.32 
1.38 
0.89 
2.11 
0.95 
1.16 
3.48 
2.63
1.23 
3.38 
1.92
Au 
(‘000
s)
43 
43 
3 
7 
10 
1 
  
1 
5 
1 
6 
3 
5 
7 
9 
  
9 
11 
5 
16 
5 
38 
42 
1 
  
1 
4 
2 
6 
12 
3 
15 
14 
2 
16 
74 
387 
462
409 
534 
944
Tonn
es 
(‘000
s)
Au 
(‘000
s) 
173 
78 
251 
83 
10 
93 
20 
 
20 
140 
6 
146 
1 
 
1 
28 
 
28 
  
 
 
36 
18 
53 
2 
 
2 
  
 
 
26 
 
26
235 
235 
114 
85 
199 
30 
  
30 
162 
16 
177 
91 
56 
147 
335 
  
335 
230 
60 
290 
22 
86 
108 
42 
  
42 
85 
22 
108 
305 
42 
347 
485 
25 
510 
2,155  1,989 
495  3,465 
2,650  5,454 
3,703  10,33
3 
738  4,921 
4,441  15,25
4
Grad
e 
(g/t 
Au) 
4.28 
4.88 
4.45 
1.22 
2.71 
1.30 
0.81 
 
0.81 
0.98 
2.60 
1.01 
1.06 
  
1.06 
1.02 
 
1.02 
  
 
 
11.51 
9.15 
10.61 
0.93 
 
0.93 
  
 
 
1.45 
  
1.45 
  
 
 
1.47 
3.81 
1.66
1.45 
3.84 
1.62
) 
1,255 
499 
1,755 
2,112 
109 
2,221 
770 
  
770 
4,439 
73 
4,512 
24 
  
24 
842 
  
842 
  
  
  
96 
59 
156 
67 
  
67 
  
  
  
560 
  
560 
  
  
  
45,47
8 
4,038 
49,51
6 
79,38
8 
5,985 
85,37
3
Notes for Mineral Resources Summary:
1. 
2.
3.
CIM definitions were followed for Mineral Resources. 
Open pit oxide Mineral Resources are estimated at a cut-off grade of 0.35 g/t Au, except for Gora at 0.48 
g/t Au. 
Open pit transition and fresh rock Mineral Resources are estimated at a cut-off grade of 0.40 g/t Au, except 
for Gora at 0.55 g/t Au. 
Underground Mineral Resources are estimated at a cut-off grade of 2.00 g/t Au. 
Measured Resources at Sabodala include stockpiles which total 9.2 Mt at 0.77 g/t Au for 229,000 oz. 
Measured Resources at Gora include stockpiles which total 0.1 Mt at 1.30 g/t Au for 6,000 oz. 
Measured Resources at Masato include stockpiles which total 5.9 Mt at 0.79 g/t Au for 150,000 oz. 
High grade assays were capped at grades ranging from 1.5 g/t Au to 110 g/t Au. 
The figures above are “Total” Mineral Resources and include Mineral Reserves. 
Open pit shells were used to constrain open pit resources. 
Mineral Resources are estimated using a gold price of US$1,450 per ounce. 
Sum of individual amounts may not equal due to rounding.
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
 
Refer  to  Teranga’s  ASX  releases  on  24  March  2016,  titled  “Technical  Report  NI  43-101”  and  “Press  Release  – 
Technical  Report”.  Teranga  confirms  that  it  is  not  aware  of  any  new  information  or  data  that  materially  affects  the 
information in the announcements and all material assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the Mineral 
Resources Summary continue to apply.
47
Mineral Reserves
The Mineral Reserve estimate as of 31 December 2015 and the location of the reserves are shown 
below.  Open pit Mineral Reserve estimates were prepared for the Sabodala, Gora, Niakafiri Main, 
Masato, Golouma West, Golouma South, Kerekounda, Maki Medina, Niakafiri SE, and Niakafiri SW 
deposits.  Underground Mineral Reserves were prepared for the Golouma West 1, Golouma West 2, 
Golouma South, and Kerekounda deposits.
The Proven and Probable Mineral Reserves for the deposits are based on only that part of the Measured 
and Indicated Resources that falls within the designed final pit limits.  As there were no Measured 
Resources in the Masato, Golouma, Kerekounda, Maki Medina, Niakafiri SE, and Niakafiri SW models, 
only Indicated Mineral Resources were included in the Mineral Reserve estimate.
Open Pit and Underground Mineral Reserves Summary
Deposits
Subtotal ML
Sabodala 
Gora 
Niakafiri Main
Masato 
Golouma West 
Golouma South 
Kerekounda 
Maki Medina 
Niakafiri SE 
Niakafiri SW
Subtotal SOMIGOL 
Subtotal Open Pit
Golouma West 1 
Golouma West 2 
Golouma South 
Kerekounda
Subtotal Underground 
Total
Stockpiles
Proven and Probable
Tonnes 
(Mt) 
3.90 
1.46 
7.47 
12.83 
21.41 
3.23 
1.27 
0.79 
0.90 
1.12 
0.37 
29.08 
41.92 
0.62 
0.45 
0.47 
0.61 
2.15 
44.07
15.27 
59.34
Grade 
(g/t) 
1.44 
4.78 
1.10 
1.62 
1.06 
1.96 
3.09 
3.44 
1.17 
1.09 
0.92 
1.32 
1.41 
6.07 
4.39 
4.28 
4.95 
5.01 
1.59
Au 
(Moz) 
0.18 
0.22 
0.26 
0.67 
0.73 
0.20 
0.13 
0.09 
0.03 
0.04 
0.01 
1.23 
1.90 
0.12 
0.06 
0.06 
0.10 
0.35 
2.25
0.79 
1.38
0.39 
2.63
Tonnes 
(Mt) 
1.57 
0.31 
4.06 
5.95 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
5.95 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.00 
5.95
15.27 
21.23
Proven 
Grade 
(g/t) 
1.57 
4.94 
1.23 
1.52 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1.52 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.00 
1.52
0.79 
0.99
Au 
(Moz) 
0.08 
0.05 
0.16 
0.29 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.29 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.29
0.39 
0.68
Tonnes 
(Mt) 
2.33 
1.15 
3.41 
6.88 
21.41 
3.23 
1.27 
0.79 
0.90 
1.12 
0.37 
29.08 
35.96 
0.62 
0.45 
0.47 
0.61 
2.15 
38.11
0.00 
38.11
Probable 
Grade 
(g/t) 
1.36 
4.74 
0.94 
1.71 
1.06 
1.96 
3.09 
3.44 
1.17 
1.09 
0.92 
1.32 
1.39 
6.07 
4.39 
4.28 
4.95 
5.01 
1.60
0.00 
1.60
Au 
(Moz) 
0.10 
0.17 
0.10 
0.38 
0.73 
0.20 
0.13 
0.09 
0.03 
0.04 
0.01 
1.23 
1.61 
0.12 
0.06 
0.06 
0.10 
0.35 
1.96
0.00 
1.96
Total Including Stockpile 
 
Notes for Mineral Reserves Summary: 
1.  CIM definitions were followed for Mineral Reserves. 
2.  Mineral Reserve cut off grades for range from are 0.35 g/t to 0.63 g/t Au for oxide and 0.42 g/t to 0.73 g/t Au
for fresh based on a $1,100/oz gold price
3.  Mineral Reserve cut off grades for Sabodala 0.45 g/t for oxide and 0.55 g/t for fresh based on a $1,100/oz gold
price
4.  Underground reserves cut-off grades ranged from 2.3-2.6 g/t based on $1,200/oz gold price 
5.  Sum of individual amounts may not equal due to rounding. 
6.  The  Niakafiri  Main  deposit  is  adjacent  to  the  Sabodala  village  and  relocation  of  at  least  some  portion  of  the 
village  will  be  required  which  will  necessitate  a  negotiated  resettlement  program  with  the  affected  community 
members.
Refer  to  Teranga’s  ASX  releases  on  24  March  2016,  titled  “Technical  Report  NI  43-101”  and  “Press  Release  – 
Technical  Report”.  Teranga  confirms  that  it  is  not  aware  of  any  new  information  or  data  that  materially  affects  the 
information in the announcements and all material assumptions and technical parameters underpinning the Mineral 
Resources Summary continue to apply.
48
Location of the Open Pit and Underground Reserves
Figure 2: Location of Teranga's open pit and underground Reserves
Mining Method
The Sabodala open pit commenced production in March 2009 and has since been in operation.  
Subsequently, Masato, Gora and Golouma open pits were added to the producing open pits.  A 
summary of the open pit production history is shown below.
Open Pit Production History
Unit
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
Ore mined
Waste mined
Total mined
Grade mined
Ounces mined
Tonnes milled
Head grade
Recovery
Recovered gold
Kt
Kt
Kt
g/t
oz
Kt
g/t
%
oz
2,637
9,144
11,781
2.19
2,915
13,199
16,114
1.80
3,973
21,818
25,791
1.39
5,916
22,961
28,877
1.98
4,540
30,238
34,778
1.62
6,174
23,148
29,321
1.54
7,748
23,883
31,631
1.22
186,077
168,979
177,362
376,184
236,718
305,192
303,023
1,806
2,285
2,444
2,439
3,152
3,622
3,421
3.12
92
2.12
91
1.87
89
3.08
89
2.24
91
2.03
90
1.79
92
166,769
141,119
131,461
214,310
207,204
211,823
182,282
The mining method utilized is conventional truck and shovel open pit mining. The Sabodala open pit is 
currently under care and maintenance and is planned to be mined again in 2017. The selective mining 
practice and stockpiling strategy at the Sabodala gold mine since start-up has released ore at a faster 
rate than milling capacity.  This has resulted in a large build-up of low grade stockpiled ore on the run of
49
mine pad, planned to be fed to the Sabodala processing plant throughout the LOM and at the end of 
mine life.
The mining at Niakafiri occurs in two phases, with the first phase starting in year 2019.  This phase 
includes Niakafiri SE and Niakafiri SW.  These two deposits are located outside the village relocation 
zone and, as a result, mining can occur prior to the relocation of Sabodala village.  The second phase of 
mining at Niakafiri starts in year 2023 and is made up entirely of Niakafiri Main deposit.  The relocation 
of Sabodala village is planned to commence in year 2021, in order to prepare for the mining operation.
The open pit mining ends in year 2024 and the remaining LOM comprises mining from the underground.
Underground mining will be by cut and fill mining method.  Cut and fill mining is simple, repetitive, and 
highly flexible for deposits with uncertain continuity and regularity.
The underground mine construction begins in year 2020, with ore production in 2021.  Two deposits will 
be mined concurrently in order to meet the current mine life schedule. Kerekounda and Golouma South 
will be mined first starting in 2021.  Once they are exhausted, the Golouma West deposits will be mined.  
The objective of scheduling the deposits to be mined in this sequence is to have continuous production 
from the underground with some lag in the schedule to allow infrastructure to be moved from the first set 
of deposits to the second set.
The LOM is approximately 13.5 years, ending mid-year 2029.  The average gold production for the first 
five years is 207,000 oz.  Additional mill upgrades are planned to be commissioned prior to 2017 with 
completion of the mill optimization in 2016.  The full benefits are expected to be achieved in 2017. The 
LOM plan can be seen below.
Life of Mine Plan (2016 to 2029)
LOM 
3.9 
1.44 
0.18 
31.0 
21.4 
1.06 
0.73 
110.2
1.5 
4.78 
0.22 
32.2 
0.8 
3.44 
0.09 
18.2 
4.5 
2.28 
0.33 
49.6 
9.0 
1.09 
0.31 
26.6 
0.9 
1.17 
0.03 
2.9 
2.1 
5.01 
0.35 
44.1 
1.59 
2.25 
270.7
314.7
2016-2020
AVG
2016
3.1 
1.94 
0.20 
36.3 
39.5
0.5 
1.10 
0.02 
0.2 
0.7 
4.00 
0.08 
17.9 
0.0 
0.99 
0.00 
3.6 
1.2 
3.08 
0.12 
14.8 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2.3 
2.91 
0.22 
36.4 
38.7 
13.7
2017 
0.3 
1.11 
0.01 
11.1
0.7 
5.15 
0.12 
14.1 
0.5 
3.39 
0.06 
13.0
1.6 
3.74 
0.19 
38.2 
39.8 
11.1
2018 
1.5 
1.33 
0.07 
15.0 
0.7 
0.74 
0.02 
16.2 
0.1 
7.90 
0.02 
0.2 
0.3 
3.74 
0.03 
1.6 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.9 
1.17 
0.03 
2.9 
  
  
  
3.4 
1.51 
0.17 
35.9 
39.3 
10.1
2019 
2.0 
1.58 
0.10 
5.0 
0.4 
0.70 
0.01 
5.8 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.9 
1.98 
0.06 
18.4 
1.5 
1.05 
0.05 
6.2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4.7 
1.42 
0.22 
35.4 
40.1 
10.4
2020 
  
  
  
  
1.1 
0.86 
0.03 
19.4 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2.4 
1.99 
0.15 
16.4 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3.5 
1.63 
0.19 
35.8 
39.4 
9.4
2021 
  
  
  
  
2.8 
0.93 
0.09 
27.2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.1 
2.24 
0.00 
0.0 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.1 
5.00 
0.02 
3.0 
1.09 
0.10 
27.2 
30.2 
7.9
2022 
  
  
  
  
5.0 
1.00 
0.16 
21.5 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.3 
4.95 
0.05 
5.3 
1.22 
0.21 
21.5 
26.8 
8.7
2023 
  
  
  
  
4.3 
1.02 
0.14 
11.6 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4.0 
1.10 
0.14 
12.5 
  
  
  
  
0.3 
4.63 
0.05 
8.6 
1.20 
0.33 
24.2 
32.8 
12.9
2024 
  
  
  
  
6.7 
1.27 
0.27 
8.2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3.5 
1.10 
0.12 
7.9 
  
  
  
  
0.3 
4.33 
0.04 
10.4 
1.29 
0.43 
16.1 
26.5 
18.9
2025 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.1 
4.39 
0.01 
0.1 
4.39 
0.01 
 
0.1 
14.5
2026 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.2 
5.55 
0.03 
0.2 
5.55 
0.03 
 
0.2 
10.2
2027 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.4 
5.36 
0.06 
0.4 
5.36 
0.06 
 
0.4 
6.2
2028 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.4 
5.52 
0.07 
0.4 
5.52 
0.07 
 
0.4 
2.1
2029 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.2 
4.76 
0.02 
0.2 
4.76 
0.02 
 
0.2
0.82
0.84
0.76
0.73
0.70
0.68
0.67
0.66
0.68
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.66
Unit 
Ore Mined 
Mt 
Ore Grade 
g/t 
Contained Oz  Moz 
Waste 
Mt 
Ore Mined 
Mt 
Ore Grade 
g/t 
Contained Oz  Moz 
Waste 
Mt 
Ore Mined 
Mt 
Ore Grade 
g/t 
Contained Oz  Moz 
Waste 
Mt 
Ore Mined 
Mt 
Ore Grade 
g/t 
Contained Oz  Moz 
Waste 
Mt 
Ore Mined 
Mt 
Ore Grade 
g/t 
Contained Oz  Moz 
Waste 
Mt 
Ore Mined 
Mt 
Ore Grade 
g/t 
Contained Oz  Moz 
Waste 
Mt 
Ore Mined 
Mt 
Ore Grade 
g/t 
Contained Oz  Moz 
Waste 
Mt 
Ore Mined 
Mt 
Ore Grade 
g/t 
Contained Oz  Moz 
Ore Mined 
Mt 
Ore Grade 
g/t 
Contained Oz  Moz 
Waste 
Mt 
Movement 
Mt 
Stockpile  
Mt 
Ore Balance 
Stockpile Grade g/t
Sabodala
Masato
Gora
Kerekounda
Golouma
Niakafiri1
Maki Medina
Underground
Summary
50
LOM
Unit 
Contained Oz  Moz 
 
  
  
Ore Milled 
59.3 
Head Grade 
1.38 
Oxide 
21% 
Produced Oz  Moz  2.376
Mt 
g/t 
%
2016-2020
AVG
4.3 
1.66 
27% 
0.207
2016 
0.36 
  
3.9 
1.93 
37% 
0.215
2017 
0.30 
  
4.2 
1.85 
25% 
0.229
2018 
0.25 
  
4.5 
1.56 
26% 
0.202
2019 
0.24 
  
4.5 
1.54 
31% 
0.200
2020 
0.21 
  
4.5 
1.46 
19% 
0.190
2021 
0.17 
  
4.5 
0.99 
28% 
0.128
2022 
0.19 
  
4.4 
1.35 
16% 
0.173
2023 
0.27 
  
4.5 
1.73 
29% 
0.225
2024 
0.41 
  
4.4 
2.06 
0% 
0.263
2025 
0.31 
  
4.4 
0.82 
17% 
0.104
2026 
0.22 
  
4.4 
0.85 
19% 
0.109
2027 
0.13 
  
4.4 
1.06 
18% 
0.135
2028 
0.04 
  
4.4 
1.09 
18% 
0.139
2029
2.3 
0.94 
18% 
0.063
(a)
(b) 
(c)
(d) 
(e)
The schedule summarized Niakafiri from “Niakafiri Main” and “Niakafiri SE”. The portion of Niakafiri SE to be mined lies outside of the 
Sabodala Village area and assumes relocation is not required.  
Sum of individual amounts may not equal due to rounding.   
The estimated ore reserves underpinning the production targets (as defined in the ASX Listing Rules) set out above, have been prepared by 
Mr. Paul Chawrun, who is a Competent Person, in accordance with the requirements of the 2012 JORC Code. 
Stockpile balances at 1 January 2016 included 15.3 Mt at 0.79 g/t for 0.39 million contained ounces 
Details of Teranga's production targets included in the Life of Mine Plan for the calendar years 2016 to 2029 were initially published in 
Teranga's ASX announcements titled "Technical Report NI 43-101" and "Press Release - Technical Report" both dated 24 March 2016. 
Teranga confirms that all material assumptions underpinning the production target in these ASX announcements continue to apply and have 
not materially changed since that date.  The production targets are based on existing Proven and Probable Reserves.
Mineral Processing
The Sabodala processing plant was expanded in late 2012 to a design capacity of approximately 3.5 
Mtpa (fresh ore) and 4.0 Mtpa with a mix of fresh and oxidized ore.
The plant comprises facilities for crushing, grinding, CIL cyanidation, and tailings disposal. Gold recovery 
facilities include acid washing, carbon stripping and electro winning, followed by bullion smelting and 
carbon regeneration.
A mill optimization project was launched in mid-2015; it consists of adding a second primary jaw crusher 
and screen to operate in parallel with the existing crusher. This will (i) increase availability to the live 
storage for the mill circuit, and (ii) provide the flexibility to reduce the top size primary crusher product.
Basic engineering for the mill optimization was completed in the first quarter of 2015 to finalize the 
design, layout, material quantities, procurement packages and an execution plan for construction. During 
this process, additional capital was allocated for upgrades to the SAG mill and to the ball mills. Upgrades 
to the SAG mill include a trommel screen installation, redesign of the liner configuration and installation 
of a vortex discharge head.
Upon completion and ramp-up in the fourth quarter 2016, the mill optimization is expected to increase 
throughput by more than 10% on an annualized basis based on existing ore hardness.
Project Infrastructure
The Sabodala ML infrastructure includes several open pits, a processing plant, a run of mine pad, and a 
tailings storage facility as shown in the figure below.
The storage volume of TSF1 is 12.4 Mm3 for variable beach slope model and 18.0 Mm3 for fixed beach 
slope model based on the crest level of the existing embankments, raising of the existing southern 
embankment and constructing new south-western embankment. Teranga will implement the fixed beach 
slope model for TSF1.
At an average in-situ dry density for the deposited tailings of 1.49 t/m3, this additional storage equates to 
approximately 26.8 Mt or 6.7 years of operation (4 Mtpa) with fixed beaches.
Assuming that TSF1 can continue to be operated to achieve an average in-situ dry density for the 
deposited tailings of 1.49 t/m3, TSF1 could continue to operate through to the end of Q1 2022. 
Construction of TSF2 could therefore be deferred until the end of the wet season 2021, effectively Q4 of 
2021, and TSF2 could be commissioned in Q2 2022.
An additional raise to TSF2 is available beyond the current design to 149RL (an elevation point above 
sea level), providing for significantly more storage space than is required for the current 14 year LOM.  It 
is envisaged that this could be completed at a relatively low capital cost since the existing western 
embankment for TSF1 forms part of the containment for the future TSF2 design.
Notes:
51
A network of haul roads connect the various pits to the process plant.  The Gora haul road is 
approximately 26km long and the Golouma haul road is approximately 7.5km long.  Power is supplied 
from the power plant located near the Sabodala pit and processing plant, and diesel generators at the 
Golouma and Gora projects.  Existing port facilities at Dakar are used for delivery of all project 
construction materials and long term operational freight.  Teranga has set up its own corporate offices in 
Dakar in which logistics, government liaison, personnel transport, and other management functions for 
SGO and SMC are based.
Figure 3: Sabadola Infrastructure Map
Further information on Teranga’s exploration activities, Mineral Reserve, Mineral Resources, activities, 
results, programs and infrastructure, can be found in the Sabodala Technical Report, available on 
Teranga’s profile on the SEDAR website at www.sedar.com and Teranga’s page on the ASX company 
announcements platform at www.asx.com.au.
5.4
Teranga Directors
As at the date of this Scheme Booklet, the Teranga Directors are:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Alan Hill – Chairman
Richard Young – President, Chief Executive Officer and Non-Independent Director
William Biggar – Director
Jendayi Frazer – Director
Edward Goldenberg – Director
Christopher Lattanzi – Director
David Mimran – Director
Alan Thomas – Director
Frank Wheatley – Director
Profiles of each of the Teranga Directors are set out below.
Alan Hill – Chairman
Mr Hill joined Teranga as its Executive Chairman and CEO on 3 December 2010.  On 30 April 2014, Mr 
Hill transitioned to Non-Executive Chairman of Teranga.  Mr Hill has been a director of Gold Fields 
Limited since 2009. He previously served as President and CEO of Gabriel Resources Ltd., from May
52
53
2005 to March 2009. Prior to leading Gabriel, Mr Hill served as Non-Executive Chairman of Alamos Gold 
Inc. from 2005 through 2007.  Prior to that, Mr Hill spent 20 years at Barrick Gold Corporation where, as 
Executive Vice President, Development, he oversaw project evaluations, acquisitions and development 
of many of Barrick’s major mines in North America, South America, Africa and Australia. Mr Hill holds 
undergraduate and graduate degrees in mining engineering and a post graduate degree in rock 
mechanics from Leeds University in the U.K.
Richard Young – President, Chief Executive Officer and Non-Independent Director
Mr Young joined Teranga as its President and CFO on 3 December 2010 and was appointed as CEO on 
6 September 2012. Mr Young most recently served as Vice President and CFO of Gabriel Resources Ltd 
from May 2005 to March 2010. Prior to Gabriel, Mr Young served in a series of positions of increasing 
responsibility at Barrick Gold Corporation over a 13-year period rising from positions in the finance 
group, mine operations and development — primarily the Goldstrike and the Pierina projects — before 
becoming Vice President, Investor Relations. A Chartered Professional Accountant/CA, Mr Young is a 
graduate of the University of Western Ontario and has a graduate diploma in public accountancy from 
McGill University.
William Biggar – Director
Mr Biggar is a Corporate Director who has held senior executive positions in the mining, real estate, and 
investment industries. From 2008 to 2012, Mr Biggar was President and Chief Executive Officer of North 
American Palladium Ltd, one of only two primary palladium producers in the world. Prior to that, he was 
Managing Director at private equity firm Richardson Capital Ltd. from 2004 to 2007, and President and 
Chief Executive Officer of TSX/NYSE listed Granite REIT from 2003 to 2004. Mr Biggar has also worked 
in senior executive positions with Magna International Inc. and Barrick Gold Corporation, and Managing 
Director positions with a focus on mergers and acquisitions at Merrill Lynch Canada and UBS Securities. 
Mr Biggar has served on the board of a number of public and private companies and is currently on the 
board of TSX-listed Milestone Apartments REIT and True North Commercial REIT. Mr Biggar is a CPA, 
CA and holds a Bachelor of Commerce degree and a Master of Business Administration from the 
University of Toronto.
Jendayi Frazer – Director
Dr Jendayi Frazer is the President and CEO of 50 Ventures, LLC, a strategic consulting and investment 
firm focused on Africa, and Managing Partner of Africa Exchange Holdings, Ltd., a private sector 
initiative to build Africa’s equity and commodity markets. Dr Frazer is on the Board of Directors at the 
East Africa Exchange Ltd. and MasterCard Foundation, an independent organization promoting financial 
inclusion and youth learning in Africa. She is also an Adjunct Senior Fellow for Africa Studies at the 
Council on Foreign Relations and a Distinguished Public Service Professor at Carnegie Mellon 
University since 2009. The first woman U.S. Ambassador to South Africa in 2004, Ambassador Frazer 
was the leading architect of U.S. – Africa policy for nearly a decade, most recently serving as U.S. 
Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs from 2005-2009, and Special Assistant to the President 
and Senior Director for African Affairs on the National Security Council from 2001-2009. Dr Frazer holds 
a B.A. in Political Science and African and Afro-American Studies, M.A. degrees in International Policy 
Studies and International Development Education, and a Ph.D. in Political Science, all from Stanford 
University.
Edward S Goldenberg – Director
Mr Goldenberg is a senior partner at the law firm of Bennett Jones LLP where he has a corporate 
practice, advising clients on governance issues, public policy and government relations. Mr Goldenberg 
has a distinguished background working with the Government of Canada, having been the Senior Policy 
Advisor to the Prime Minister of Canada (1993-2003) and the Prime Minister’s Chief of Staff (2003). Prior 
to these roles, Mr Goldenberg acted in various capacities in the federal government, including in all the 
major economic departments and as General Constitutional Advisor to the Minister of Justice (1980-
1982). In 2013, Mr Goldenberg was named as a Member of the Order of Canada “for his contributions to 
public policy in Canada”. He is one of the authors of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Mr Goldenberg 
was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Laws from McGill University in 2004. Mr Goldenberg holds a BA, 
MA and BCL from McGill University and also studied at the Institut d’Études Politiques de Paris (France).
Christopher Lattanzi – Director
Mr Lattanzi is currently a director of Argonaut Gold Inc. and Spanish Mountain Gold Ltd. Mr Lattanzi is 
an associate consultant for Micon International Limited, having been the founding member of Micon in 
1988 and serving as its president from formation until 2005. Prior to 1988, Mr Lattanzi was a consultant
with David Robertson and Associates, Micon International Limited’s predecessor firm. Mr Lattanzi has 
invaluable experience in property valuation, scoping, feasibility studies and project monitoring on a 
global basis. Mr Lattanzi was appointed a director of Meridian Gold Inc. in 1999 and was chairman of the 
board from mid-2004 until December 2006. He holds a B.Eng (Mining) from Melbourne University.  Mr 
Lattanzi has worked in the mineral industry for more than 50 years.
David Mimran – Director
Mr Mimran is currently CEO of Grands Moulins d’Abidjan and Grands Moulins de Dakar, one of the 
largest producers of flour and agri-food in West Africa. Mr Mimran is head of Tablo Corporation, 
Miminvest SA, and Mimran Natural Resources, all established as investment vehicles into West Africa’s 
natural resource sector by Mr Mimran and the Mimran Group, a family conglomerate with a history of 
successful business operations in Africa and Europe. Previous roles included Vice Chairman and 
founding partner of Breeden Partners, L.P. from 2006 to 2012. He has served as a director and principal 
to the Bank of West Africa (CBAO), one of the largest banking groups in the region, as well as Archer 
Daniels Midland Company. He is currently a director of the Mimran Group, Avenira Limited and on Board 
of Trustees for Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City. Mr Mimran currently acts as Special Advisor to 
the government of the Republic of Cote D’Ivoire where he has led negotiations with the International 
Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the European Union, and the Government of the Republic of France.
Alan Thomas – Director
Mr Thomas has been a director/trustee and Chief Financial Officer of Labrador Iron Ore Royalty 
Corporation (formerly Labrador Iron Ore Trust) since 2004. Mr Thomas served on the board of directors 
of Gabriel Resources Ltd. from May 2006 until June 2010. From 2000 to 2006, Mr Thomas held the 
position of Vice-President and Chief Financial Officer of ShawCor Ltd., an energy services firm 
headquartered in Toronto with manufacturing and service operations around the world. Previously, he 
was the CFO of Noranda Inc. from 1987 to 1998. Mr Thomas is a Chartered Professional Accountant 
and graduate of the University of Toronto.
Frank Wheatley – Director
Mr. Wheatley is the CEO of Yellowhead Mining Inc., a position he has held since 1 July 2013.  Prior to 
that, Mr Wheatley was Executive Director, Corporate Affairs and Strategy of Talison Lithium Limited from 
January 2010 until 31 March 2013 when it was acquired by Chengdu Tianqi Industry (Group) Co.. Mr 
Wheatley has 30 years’ experience as a director and senior officer of, and legal counsel to, a number of 
Canadian public mining companies and has extensive legal and business experience in the mineral 
industry, particularly in the areas of public financing, project debt financing, permitting of large-scale 
mining projects, and strategic mergers and acquisitions in the international minerals industry. Mr 
Wheatley received his Bachelor of Commerce and LL.B. degrees from the University of British Columbia.
5.5
Teranga Senior Management
As at the date of this Scheme Booklet, the key members of Teranga’s senior management team include:
•
•
•
•
•
•
Richard Young – President, Chief Executive Officer and Non-Independent Director
Navin Dyal – Chief Financial Officer
Paul Chawrun – Chief Operating Officer
David Savarie – General Counsel & Corporate Secretary
David Mallo – Vice President, Exploration
Sepanta Dorri – Vice President, Corporate & Stakeholder Development
Profiles of these key members of Teranga’s senior management team are set out below.
Richard Young – President, Chief Executive Officer and Non-Independent Director
Refer to section 5.4.
Navin Dyal – Chief Financial Officer
Mr Dyal joined the company from Barrick Gold Corporation after 7 years where he was most recently 
head of finance for the Copper Business Unit. His progressive, expansive experience includes roles that
54
were close to the operations and spans all areas of finance such as planning, budgeting, implementing 
key projects, internal controls, external reporting, working on highly complex accounting transactions and 
training staff globally. Mr Dyal began his career in one of the largest accounting firms. He holds a 
Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Toronto and is a Chartered Professional 
Accountant.
Paul Chawrun – Chief Operating Officer
Mr Chawrun has been part of the Teranga team since September 2012 where he previously served as 
Teranga’s Vice President, Technical Services, playing a fundamental role in steering the successful 
acquisition and integration of OJVG property, the development of the high-grade Gora satellite deposit, 
and driving several high-return organic growth initiatives. Prior to Teranga, he served in a number of 
senior management positions for organizations focused on project development, including Director of 
Technical Services for Detour Gold from 2009-2011. Initially a geologist with Corona Corporation starting 
in 1988, he worked in mine operations from 1993 to 2006 where he continually advanced his 
responsibility in technical and operating roles for Fording Coal (now part of Teck Resources) and Suncor 
Energy. A professional engineer, Mr Chawrun is a graduate from Queen’s University in mining 
engineering, also holding degrees in geology from McMaster University and a Master’s of Business 
Administration from Athabasca University.
David Savarie – General Counsel & Corporate Secretary
Mr Savarie most recently served as Deputy General Counsel and Corporate Secretary of Gabriel 
Resources Ltd., from January 2007 to November 2010. Before joining Gabriel in 2007, Mr Savarie 
served as Corporate Counsel to a contract manufacturer in the pharmaceutical industry, prior to which 
he was in private practice with the law firm of Miller Thomson LLP in Toronto. Mr Savarie received his 
Bachelor of History from the University of Western Ontario and his Bachelor of Laws from Queen’s 
University.
David Mallo – Vice President Exploration
Mr Mallo holds a Bachelor of Science (Specialist) degree from Brandon University and has over 35 years 
of mineral exploration experience predominantly in project evaluation and management of exploration 
programs. As Manager-Advanced Projects with Prime Explorations Ltd., Mr Mallo was an integral part of 
the acquisition, discovery, and exploration management team at the world-class Eskay Creek gold 
deposit in northern British Columbia. As Executive Vice President of Exploration for Adrian Resources 
Ltd., Mr Mallo managed all aspects of the extensive exploration programs through feasibility at the world-
class Petaquilla copper-gold property in Panama.
More recently, Mr Mallo was the Vice President of Exploration for Oromin Explorations Ltd. at the OJVG 
Gold Project in Senegal, West Africa. In this capacity, he was responsible for designing, implementing 
and managing all aspects of the advanced exploration campaigns from the 2004 inception of the OJVG 
Gold Project through feasibility and merger with Teranga in 2013. While managing the exploration 
programs for Oromin Explorations Ltd., the OJVG Gold Project progressed from a grassroots property to 
a viable multi-million-ounce gold property hosting numerous gold deposit discoveries, including 
Teranga’s currently operating Masato and Golouma deposits.
Sepanta Dorri – Vice President, Corporate & Stakeholder Development
Ms Dorri most recently served as General Manager, Business Development at Xstrata Nickel from 2008 
to 2013, with responsibility for mergers and acquisitions, commercial evaluations and strategic planning, 
working closely with the projects and operations teams. Prior to Xstrata Nickel, Ms Dorri served as Vice 
President, Investment Banking at Merrill Lynch Canada, where she completed numerous corporate 
finance transactions in the metals and mining sector. Ms Dorri is a Chartered Professional Accountant, 
and holds a Master of Accountancy from the University of Waterloo and a Master of Business 
Administration from London Business School. In 2012, she was the winner of the WXN Top 100 
Canada’s Most Powerful Women award in the Trailblazers and Trendsetters Category.
5.6
Historical financial information
(a)
Basis of preparation
The selected historical financial information in this section has been extracted from Teranga’s audited 
consolidated financial statements for the years ended 31 December 2015 and 31 December 2014 and
55
the unaudited interim condensed consolidated financial statements for the three month period ended 31 
March 2016.
The information in this section is a summary only and has been prepared solely for inclusion in this 
Scheme Booklet. The full financial accounts for the financial years 31 December 2015 and 31 December 
2014 (inclusive of all notes) of Teranga have been published in Teranga’s audited consolidated financial 
statements for the years ended 31 December 2015 and 31 December 2014 which were audited by Ernst 
& Young LLP.  Ernst & Young LLP issued unqualified audit reports in relation to Teranga’s audited 
consolidated financial statements for the years ended 31 December 2015 and 31 December 2014.  
Teranga's audited consolidated financial statements for the years ended 31 December 2015 and 31 
December 2014, and the unaudited interim consolidated financial statements of Teranga for the three 
month period ended 31 March 2016 are available under Teranga’s profile on SEDAR at www.sedar.com 
and on the ASX website at www.asx.com.au.
(b)
Statement of financial position
Set out below are Teranga’s audited consolidated statements of financial position as at 31 December 
2015 and 31 December 2014 and the unaudited consolidated statements of financial position as at 31 
March 2016.
Current assets 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Inventories 
Other current assets 
Total current assets
Non-current assets 
Inventories 
Property, plant and equipment 
Mine development expenditures 
Deferred income tax assets 
Other non-current assets 
Goodwill 
Total non-current assets 
 
Total Assets 
 
Current liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Borrowings 
Current income tax liabilities 
Deferred revenue  
Provisions 
Total current liabilities 
 
Non-current liabilities 
Borrowings 
Deferred revenue 
Provisions 
Other non-current liabilities 
Total non-current liabilities 
 
Total liabilities 
 
EQUITY 
Issued capital 
Foreign currency transaction reserve 
Other components of equity 
Retained earnings 
Equity attributable to shareholders 
Non-controlling interest 
Total equity 
Total equity and liabilities
31 Dec 2014
US$’000
31 Dec 2015
US$’000
31 March 2016
US$’000
35,810 
1,562 
66,639 
8,995 
113,006
91,057 
198,433 
260,719 
11,879 
7,917 
41,776 
611,781
724,787
53,909 
3,946
-
21,814 
1,936 
81,605
-
92,184 
16,704 
18,399 
127,287
208,892
367,837
(998) 
16,255 
118,337 
501,431 
14,464 
515,895 
724,787
44,436 
15,701 
57,529 
9,381 
127,047
106,898 
193,426 
237,046 
23,098 
8,701
-
569,169
696,216
62,545
-
8,685 
19,155 
2,588 
92,973
13,450 
72,190 
28,236 
11,098 
124,974
217,947
385,174
(998) 
16,905 
67,794 
468,875 
9,394 
478,269 
696,216
53,498 
14,799 
51,802 
11,338 
131,437
109,115 
194,153 
238,937 
23,279 
8,060
-
573,544
704,981
62,349
-
12,367 
22,374 
3,245 
100,335
13,706 
63,616 
28,615 
10,987 
116,924
217,259
385,200
(998) 
16,989 
75,606 
476,797 
10,925 
487,722 
704,981
56
(c)
Statement of comprehensive income
Set out below are Teranga’s audited consolidated statements of comprehensive income for the years 
ended 31 December 2015 and 31 December 2014 and the unaudited consolidated statements of 
comprehensive income for the three month period ended 31 March 2016.
Revenue 
Cost of sales¹ 
Gross profit 
 
Exploration and evaluation expenses 
Administration expenses¹ 
Corporate social responsibility expenses¹ 
Share-based compensation 
Finance costs 
Impairment charge 
Net foreign exchange gains/(losses) 
Other income/(expenses) 
 
 
Profit/(loss) before income tax 
Income tax recovery/(expense) 
Net profit/(loss) 
 
Net profit/(loss)attributable to: 
Shareholders 
Non-controlling interests 
Net profit/(loss) for the period 
 
Other comprehensive income/(loss): 
Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit 
for the period 
Change in fair value of available for sale financial 
assert, net of tax 
Other comprehensive loss for the period 
Total comprehensive income/(loss) for the period 
 
Total comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to: 
Shareholders 
Non-controlling interests 
Total comprehensive income/(loss) for the period 
 
Earnings/(loss) per share from operations 
attributable to the shareholders of the Company 
during the period 
 
- basic earnings/(loss) per share 
- diluted earnings/(loss) per share
Year ended 
31 Dec 2014
US$’000
260,588 
(210,128)
50,460
(2,772) 
(10,934) 
(2,543) 
(911) 
(9,484)
-
2,013 
(1,982) 
(26,613)
23,847 
(1,536) 
22,311
17,776 
4,535 
22,311
(1)
(1)
Year
ended 31 
Dec 2015 
US$’000
224,620 
(174,884)
49,736
(2,525) 
(10,835) 
(2,853) 
(1,761) 
(3,159) 
(90,000)
1,901 
1,381
(107,851)
(58,115)
2,502
(55,613)
(50,543) 
(5,707) 
(55,613)
-
-
3 months 
ended 31
March 
2016
US$’000
79,198 
(52,531) 
26,667
(1,413) 
(1,573) 
(967) 
(948) 
(1,071)
-
(1,483) 
(4,960) 
(12,415)
14,252 
(4,909) 
9,343
7,812 
1,531 
9,343
-
-
22,310
(55,613)
9,343
17,775 
4,535 
22,310
0.05 
0.05
(50,543) 
(5,070) 
(55,613)
(0.14) 
(0.14)
7,812 
1,531 
9,343
0.02 
0.02
1 In 2016, in order to better align costs with industry peers, Teranga (i) reclassified regional administration costs 
directly relating to cost of sales activities, from administration expenses to cost of sales, and (ii) allocated those 
regional administration costs relating to corporate social responsibility to a separate line on the consolidated 
statements of comprehensive income.  The prior year figures have been adjusted to conform to the current quarter’s 
presentation.
57
(d)
Statement of cash flows
Set out below are Teranga’s audited consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended 31 
December 2015 and 31 December 2014 and the unaudited consolidated statements of cash flows for 
the three month period ended 31 March 2016.
Year ended 31
Year ended 31
Dec 2014 
US$’000
Dec 2015 
US$’000
3 months 
ended 31
March 2016
US$’000
Cash flows from operating activities 
Net profit/(loss) for the period 
Impairment charge 
Depreciation of property, plant and equipment 
Depreciation of capitalised mine development costs 
Inventory movements – non-cash 
Losses on derivative instruments 
Capitalised deferred stripping – non-cash 
Amortisation of advanced royalties 
Gain on sale of exploration rights 
Amortisation of intangibles 
Amortisation of deferred financing costs 
Unwinding of discounts  
Share-based compensation  
Deferred gold revenue recognised  
Deferred income tax expense (recovery) 
Property, plant and equipment written off  
Decrease (increase) in inventories  
Changes in non-cash working capital other than 
inventories 
Net cash provided by operating activities  
 
Cash flows related to investing activities   
Decrease in restricted cash  
Acquisition of OJVG 
Expenditures of property, plant and equipment  
Expenditures for mine development  
Acquisition of intangibles  
Net cash used in investing activities  
 
Cash flows related to financing activities  
Net proceeds from equity offering  
Proceeds from Franco-Nevada gold stream  
Proceeds from stock options exercised  
Repayment of borrowings  
Draw down from revolving credit facility  
Financing costs paid  
Interest paid on borrowings  
Net cash provided by financing activities  
 
Effect of exchange rates on cash holdings in foreign 
currencies 
 
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents  
Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of 
period  
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of period
22,311
-
25,806 
44,062 
(8,089)
-
(658) 
440
-
714 
3,275 
1,132 
911
(21,002)
1,536
1
(19,693) 
(1,737)
(55,613) 
90,000 
22,703 
19,526 
7,458
-
(1,374) 
1,892 
(400) 
247 
793 
951 
1,761
(22,653) 
(11,219)
84
(14,164) 
(9,558)
49,009
30,434
20,000
(112,500) 
(3,567) 
(15,346)
-
(111,413)
25,367 
135,000
-
(72,775)
-
(1,000) 
(3,340) 
83,252
1
20,849 
14,961
35,810
- 
-
(23,962) 
(23,545)
(175)
(47,682)
17,337
- 
-
(4,192) 
15,000 
(2,025) 
(247) 
25,873
1
8,626 
35,810
44,436
9,343
-
5,762 
5,235 
2,917 
924 
(274) 
965
- 
22 
256 
225 
948
(5,355) 
(180)
-
1,599 
1,756
24,143
- 
-
(7,015) 
(7,331)
(36)
(14,382)
- 
- 
18 
- 
- 
-
(444) 
(426)
(273)
9,062 
44,436
53,498
58
5.7
Capital structure and ownership
(a)
Issued and outstanding securities
As at 10 August 2016, being the latest practicable date prior to finalisation of this Scheme Booklet, 
Teranga has 392,110,760 common shares (of which 37,381,554 represent Teranga CDIs quoted on 
ASX) and 19,102,164 options on issue.
(b)
Substantial holders
As at 10 August 2016, being the latest practicable date prior to finalisation of this Scheme Booklet, 
Teranga has the following substantial shareholders:
Name
Number of shares held
Tablo Corporation
Van Eck Associates Corporation
52,480,135
34,612,034
% of 
shares
13.38
8.83
(c)
Incentive plans
Stock Option Plan
The Stock Option Plan allows Teranga to grant stock options to purchase Teranga Shares.  The 
Teranga Board does not award Stock Options according to a prescribed formula or target, but rather 
takes into account the individual’s position, scope of responsibility, ability to affect profits, the individual’s 
historic and recent performance, and the value of the awards in relation to other elements of the 
executive’s total compensation.  All Stock Options granted will be at an exercise price at least equal to 
the 5-day volume weighted average price of Teranga Shares at the time of grant.
As at 10 August 2016, being the latest practicable date prior to finalisation of this Scheme Booklet, the 
following Stock Options were on issue under the Stock Option Plan:
Number of Stock 
Options
Grant Date
Expiry Date
Exercise Price (C$)
5,320,000
1,200,000
675,000
25,000
317,500
360,000
1,075,000
540,000
225,000
50,000
600,000
600,000
26-Nov-10
03-Dec-10
09-Feb-11
27-Apr-11
14-Jun-11
13-Aug-11
20-Dec-11
24-Feb-12
24-Feb-12
05-Jun-12
27-Sep-12
26-Nov-20
03-Dec-20
09-Feb-21
27-Apr-21
14-Jun-21
13-Aug-21
20-Dec-21
24-Feb-22
24-Feb-22
05-Jun-22
27-Sep-22
09 October 2012
06 October 2022
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
59
Number of Stock 
Options
Grant Date
Expiry Date
Exercise Price (C$)
80,000
140,000
200,000
50,000
40,000
120,000
50,000
2,250,000
1,392,506
3,792,158
31 October 2012
31 October 2022
31 October 2012
31 October 2022
03 December 2012
03 December 2022
23 February 2013
23 February 2023
14 May 2013
03 Jun- 2013
01 May 2014
14 May 23
03 Jun 2023
01 May 2024
31 March 2015
31 March 2020
31 March 2015
31 March 2020
31 March 2016
31 March 2021
Total: 19,102,164
Fixed Bonus Unit Plan
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
0.64
0.64
0.67
Teranga’s Fixed Bonus Unit Plan (FBU Plan) was introduced in 2012 as an additional long-term 
incentive compensation scheme for Teranga employees.  Unlike the Stock Option Plan, fixed bonus 
units (Units) issued under the FBU Plan settle in cash and not equity.  The Teranga Board determines 
the conditions attached to each award of Units, and upon achievement of the specific vesting conditions 
the cash payment available to the Unit holder is the product of: (i) the number of Units held; multiplied by 
(ii) the difference between the exercise price of the Unit, which cannot be lower than the market price of 
Teranga Shares on date of issuance, and the actual market price of Teranga Shares on the date prior to 
the date of exercise.  The Units typically vest on a time basis over a three-year term and can include 
performance measures at the discretion of the Teranga Board.
Units do not entitle a holder thereof to any voting or other shareholder rights.
As of 10 August 2016, being the last practicable date prior to the finalisation of this Scheme Booklet, 
there were 1,797,500 Units outstanding, of which 1,360,00 have an exercise price of C$3.00, 300,000 
have an exercise price of C$0.64 and 137,500 have an exercise price of C$0.67.
Restricted Share Units Plan
In order to allow executive officers to participate in the long term success of Teranga and to promote a 
greater alignment of interests between executives and shareholders, Teranga has adopted the RSU 
Plan.  Pursuant to the RSU Plan, the Teranga Board may, from time to time, award RSUs to Designated 
Executives. The RSUs represent a right to receive an amount of cash (subject to withholdings), on 
vesting, equal to the product of (i) the number of vested RSUs held by such Designated Executive, and 
(ii) the market price of Teranga Shares at such time.  RSUs will generally vest, subject to determination 
of the Teranga Board, as to 50% of the RSUs in thirds over a three-year period, and as to the other 50% 
of the RSUs in thirds over a three-year period upon satisfaction of at least two operational performance 
measures. The two operational performance measures currently used are annual gold production and 
all-in sustaining cost per ounce, as these measures represent the most critical aspects of Teranga’s 
business.  Teranga's compensation committee retains the discretion to amend these performance 
measures at the time of grant of RSUs in order to ensure they properly reflect the business strategy of 
Teranga at that time.
RSUs do not entitle a Designated Executive to any voting or other shareholder rights.
Additional RSUs will be automatically credited to a Designated Executive’s RSU account if and when 
Teranga pays a dividend or similar payments are made to Teranga Shareholders. The additional RSUs
60
to be credited will be calculated by multiplying the number of RSUs in the Designated Executive’s 
account at the time such distribution is paid by the amount of the distribution, and then dividing that 
amount by the market price of Teranga Shares when the distribution is paid.
There have been three tranches of RSU grants since the adoption of the RSU Plan by Teranga in 2014.   
Each tranche to date has been granted with amounts equally split between time and performance 
measures over a three- year term. As at 10 August 2016, being the latest practicable date prior to 
finalisation of this Scheme Booklet, there were 8,209,859 RSUs outstanding.  The table below sets out 
the vesting conditions and the vesting dates of these outstanding RSUs.
2014 Grants
RSUs Issued
Vesting Condition
Amount to be Vested
542,259
Time (5 May 2017)
Performance (2016 Production Guidance)
Performance (2016 Cost Guidance)
271,123
135,568
135,568
2015 Grants
RSUs Issued
Vesting Condition
Amount to be Vested
1,836,667
Time (31 March 2017)
Time (31 March 2018)
Performance (2016 Production Guidance)
Performance (2016 Cost Guidance)
Performance (2017 Production Guidance)
Performance (2017 Cost Guidance)
459,167
459,167
229,583
229,583
229,583
229,583
2016 Grants
RSUs Issued
Vesting Condition
Amount to be Vested
5,830,933
Time (31 March 2017)
Time (31 March 2018)
Time (31 March 2019)
Performance (2016 Production Guidance)
Performance (2016 Cost Guidance)
Performance (2017 Production Guidance)
Performance (2017 Cost Guidance)
Performance (2018 Production Guidance)
Performance (2018 Cost Guidance)
971,822
971,822
971,822
485,911
485,911
485,911
485,911
485,911
485,911
61
Deferred Share Units Plan
The DSU Plan was adopted on 24 March 2014 to provide Designated Directors with the opportunity to 
acquire DSUs in order to allow them to participate in the long term success of Teranga and to promote a 
greater alignment of interests between Designated Directors and Teranga Shareholders. DSUs 
represent a right to receive an amount of cash (subject to applicable withholdings), on ceasing to be a 
Designated Director, equal to the product of (i) the number of DSUs held by such Designated Director, 
and (ii) the volume weighted average trading price of a Teranga Share on the TSX for the five trading 
days prior to such date.
Pursuant to the DSU Plan, Designated Directors may elect to receive all or part of their annual retainer, 
meeting fees and additional compensation, which compensation is paid quarterly, in DSUs.  Elections 
are irrevocable for the period in respect of which they are made. In addition, the Board may, from time to 
time, make discretionary awards of DSUs to Designated Directors.
DSUs do not entitle a Designated Director to any voting or other rights as a Shareholder.
There have been three tranches of DSU grants since the adoption of the DSU Plan by Teranga in 2014.  
As at 10 August 2016, being the latest practicable date prior to the finalisation of this Scheme Booklet, 
there were 1,920,000 DSUs outstanding.  The table below sets out the vesting dates of these 
outstanding DSUs.
Series of DSUs
Number of DSUs
Vesting Date
2014 Grant
2015 Grant
2016 Grant
545,000
700,000
675,000
Total DSUs
1,920,000
5 May 2016
31 March 2016
31 March 2017
5.8
Recent Teranga Share price performance
The  latest  recorded  prices  of  Teranga  Shares  on  the  TSX  and  of  Teranga  CDIs  on  ASX  before  the 
public  announcement  on  the  Announcement  Date  was  C$1.19  and  A$1.22  respectively.    The  latest 
recorded prices of Teranga Shares on the TSX and Teranga CDIs on ASX on 10 August 2016, being the 
last practicable date prior to finalisation of this Scheme Booklet, was C$1.21 and A$1.18 respectively.
62
The following chart shows the closing price of Teranga Shares on the TSX and Teranga CDIs on ASX 
over the past 12 months, to 10 August 2016.
TGZ Share Price Performance
(August 10, 2015 - August 10, 2016)
TGZ:TSX
TGZ: ASX
$1.40
$1.20
$1.00
)
$
A
$1.40
$1.20
)
$
C
$1.00
(
e
c
i
r
P
e
r
a
h
S
$0.80
$0.60
$0.40
$0.20
$0.00
$0.80
$0.60
$0.40
$0.20
$0.00
(
e
c
i
r
P
e
r
a
h
S
As at 10 August, being the last practicable date prior to finalisation of this Scheme Booklet:
•
•
•
•
the last recorded trading price of Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs was C$1.21 and A$1.18 
respectively;
the 10 day VWAP of Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs was C$1.12 and A$1.12 respectively;
the highest recorded trading price of Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs in the previous 3 
months was C$1.25 and A$1.29 respectively; and
the lowest recorded trading price of Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs in the previous 3 
months was C$0.87 and A$0.93 respectively.
The current price of Teranga Shares on TSX and Teranga CDIs on ASX can be obtained from the TMX 
Group website (www.tmxmoney.com) and the ASX website (www.asx.com.au), respectively.
5.9
Teranga’s interests in Gryphon Shares
As  at  the  date  of  this  Scheme  Booklet,  Teranga  holds  an  interest  in  21,200,000  Gryphon  Shares and 
has voting power of 5.01% in respect of Gryphon Shares.
Teranga has a relevant interest in 21,200,000 Gryphon Shares.
5.10
Dealing in Gryphon Shares in previous four months
Except  for  the  acquisition  of  21,200,000  Gryphon  Shares  at  a  price  of  $0.206  per  Gryphon  Share  for 
total cash consideration of $4,367,200 pursuant to the Placement and the consideration to be provided 
under  the  Scheme,  during  the  period  of  4 months  before  the  date  of  this  Scheme  Booklet,  neither 
Teranga  nor  any  of  its  associates  have  provided  or  agreed  to  provide  consideration  for  any  Gryphon 
Shares under a purchase or agreement.
63
5.11
Benefits to holders of Shares
Other than as set out above, neither Teranga nor any of its associates has given or offered to give or 
agreed to give a benefit to another person that was likely to induce the other person, or an associate of 
that person to:
•
•
vote in favour of the Scheme; or
dispose of Gryphon Shares,
during the period of 4 months ending on the date of this Scheme Booklet and which was not offered to 
all other Gryphon Shareholders.
5.12
Teranga reporting and disclosure
Teranga is subject to the continuous disclosure requirements of the TSX and the various Canadian 
Securities Commissions and is a reporting issuer on the TSX. In addition, as an ASX listed company and 
a “disclosing entity” for the purposes of section 111AC(1) of the Corporations Act, Teranga is subject to 
regular reporting and disclosure obligations.
Teranga’s most recent announcements are available from its website 
http://www.terangagold.com/English/investors/news/default.aspx. Further announcements concerning 
Teranga will continue to be made available on this website after the date of this Scheme Booklet.
ASX maintains files containing publicly available information about entities listed on its exchange. 
Teranga’s files are available for inspection at ASX during normal business hours and are available on 
the ASX website (www.asx.com.au). As a reporting issuer on the TSX, Teranga’s disclosure filings are 
also available on the SEDAR website at www.sedar.com.
5.13
No other material information
Except as disclosed elsewhere in this Scheme Booklet, there is no other information that is material to 
the making of a decision in relation to the Scheme, being information that is within the knowledge of any 
director  of  Teranga,  at  the  date  of  this  Scheme  Booklet,  which  has  not  previously  been  disclosed  to 
Gryphon Shareholders.
64
6.
Information about the Combined 
Group
65
6.1
Rationale for Teranga’s proposed acquisition of Gryphon
The Scheme proposal represents an opportunity to combine two high quality gold assets to create a 
multi-jurisdictional gold producer with the potential for diversified production and cash flows in West 
Africa.  Like Senegal, where Teranga’s Sebodala Gold Project is located, Burkina Faso has proven to be 
a mining-friendly jurisdiction in West Africa, with the two countries sharing many similarities including 
language and currency as members of the West African Economic and Monetary Union.
The proposed Transaction adds one million ounces to Teranga’s reserve base immediately, with 
considerable exploration potential to further increase reserves, which is expected to enhance the 
Combined Group’s production, cost and cash flow profiles commencing as early as 2019.
Teranga’s vision is for the Combined Group to become a pre-eminent mid-tier gold producer in West 
Africa, while its mission is to share the benefits of responsible mining with all of its stakeholders.  The 
combination of Teranga and Gryphon moves Teranga closer to that vision.
Teranga has operated the Sabodala Gold Project in Senegal since 2010, producing over 1 million 
ounces of gold at this multi-pit and central mill operation.  Teranga believes that its experience in 
operating and expanding Sabodala make it uniquely qualified to develop and operate Banfora, a multi-pit 
and central mill operation similar to Sabodala.  Further, Teranga believes the completion of the 
Transaction will deliver significant long-term value for all shareholders of Teranga and Gryphon through 
the expedited development of an optimized CIL operation at Banfora, along with accelerated exploration 
programs not only at Banfora but also at Golden Hill and Gourma exploration properties.
The implementation of the Scheme and the creation of the Combined Group is expected to deliver the 
following opportunities:
(a)
Up-and-coming, multi-jurisdictional producer
If Teranga brings the Banfora Gold Project into production, the Combined Group will benefit 
from increased production and cash flow diversification.  In the meantime, it will enjoy a 
diversity in the geographical locations of its projects across more than one West African 
country.
(b)
Enhanced reserves, production growth, and cash flows
The pro forma gold reserves of the Combined Group are 3.5 million ounces, giving the 
Combined Group the potential to grow production.  Higher production at all-in sustaining costs 
that the Combined Group will endeavour to minimise is expected to increase cash flows of the 
Combined Group.
(c)
Optimise Banfora Gold Project's potential
The Combined Group will seek to fully optimise development of the Banfora Gold Project using 
a CIL flowsheet in order to maximise project value in the absence of financial constraints.  
While Gryphon had originally considered a CIL flowsheet, Banfora was redesigned into a heap 
leach operation in 2013/2014 to lower the projected capital cost as the price of gold declined.  
In the absence of financial constraints there is greater value today in a fully optimised CIL 
flowsheet, particularly, when combined with an active exploration program aimed at converting 
high grade resources to reserves.
Teranga’s solid balance sheet, strong cash flows and the Combined Group’s improved access 
to the capital markets provide the financial strength to develop Banfora to maximize project 
value.
(d)
Unlock significant exploration potential
There is considerable valuation upside as the Combined Group intends to accelerate 
exploration of the Banfora mining area, the Golden Hill Project and the Gourma Project.  
Through additional funding, ownership in the Golden Hill Project and the Gourma Project 
exploration joint ventures is expected to increase from 51% to 80%.
66
(e)
Improved liquidity and enhanced capital markets profile
Shareholders in the Combined Group will benefit from Teranga’s enhanced share market 
liquidity and capital markets access, and a market capitalisation scale which is expected to lead 
to increased interest from institutional investors and a greater following by the analyst 
community.
(f)
Strong platform for West African growth
The strength and complementary nature of Gryphon's and Teranga’s assets, management 
teams, regional operating experience, exploration expertise and social license positions the 
Combined Group as an “up and coming” multi-jurisdictional mid-tier gold producer in the West 
Africa gold hub, creating new opportunities for growth and a broader scope for West African 
growth initiatives.
6.2
Teranga’s intentions if the Scheme is implemented
This section sets out Teranga’s present intentions in relation to the continuation of the business 
of Gryphon, any major changes to be made to the business of Gryphon, including any 
redeployment of the fixed assets of Gryphon and the future employment of the present 
employees of Gryphon, if the Scheme is implemented.
The statements set out in this section are statements of present intention only and have been 
formed on the basis of facts and information concerning Gryphon (including certain non-public 
information made available by Gryphon to Teranga prior to the entry into the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement) and the general business environment which is known to Teranga 
at the time of preparing this Scheme Booklet.  Final decisions on these matters will only be 
made by Teranga in light of all material facts and circumstances at the relevant time.  
Accordingly, statements set out in this section may change as new information becomes 
available or as circumstances change, and the statements in this section should be read in that 
context.
If the Scheme is implemented:
•
•
•
•
•
Teranga will become the holder of all Gryphon Shares and Gryphon will become a 
wholly owned Subsidiary of Teranga;
Teranga intends to appoint its nominees to the Gryphon Board on the Implementation 
Date;
Teranga will apply for Gryphon to be removed from the official list of the ASX;
Teranga intends to advance the Banfora Gold Project into construction and operation, 
using funding from existing cash and cash equivalents of the Combined Group, 
anticipated future cash flows from the Sabodala Gold Project and third party funding, 
if necessary, depending on the gold price and other variables at the time of 
construction.  Over the next six months, Teranga will focus on an infill drill program to 
convert Mineral Resources to Mineral Reserves; drilling brownfield targets to define 
Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves with a view to increasing the size of the 
Mineral Reserve base. Beyond drilling, Teranga will optimize the mine plan and the 2 
million tonne per annum mill first put forward by Gryphon in 2013, reviewing related 
capital and operating parameters; and
Teranga intends to encourage continued employment of Gryphon employees for at 
least six to twelve months, with the opportunity for permanent roles in the Combined 
Group, if desired.
Except for the changes and intentions set out in this section, following implementation of the 
Scheme, Teranga intends, based on information presently know to it:
•
•
to continue the business of Gryphon;
not to make any changes to the business of Gryphon or the deployment of Gryphon's 
assets; and
67
•
to continue the employment of Gryphon's employees.
6.3
Board composition
The Teranga Board currently consists of 9 directors and it is not anticipated that this will change.  Each 
of the existing Teranga directors will continue as Teranga directors following implementation of the 
Scheme.  Details of the current Teranga directors are set out on in section 5.4.
6.4
Capital structure
As at 10 August 2016, being the last practicable date prior to finalisation of this Scheme Booklet, 
Teranga had 392,110,760 common shares listed and posted for trading on the TSX (of which 
37,381,554 represent Teranga CDIs quoted on ASX).
Should the Scheme be approved by Gryphon Shareholders, Teranga will issue approximately 
70,639,710 Teranga Shares to acquire a 100% interest in Gryphon pursuant to the Scheme.
At the Implementation Date, the overall shareholding interest of Gryphon Shareholders in Teranga will 
be approximately 15% (assuming that there are no Ineligible Shareholders and that Teranga does not 
acquire any Gryphon Shares outside of the Scheme).
As described in section 0, Teranga currently has two substantial shareholders, the largest of which, 
Tablo Corporation has an interest of approximately 13.4%. Pursuant to a Voting and Investor Support 
Agreement dated 14 October 2015, between Teranga, David Mimran, Tablo Corporation and others, 
upon any issue of Teranga Shares (not related to an exercise of Stock Options), Tablo Corporation has 
the right to retain its proportionate interest in Teranga by subscribing for Teranga Shares at an issue 
price equal to that at which the proposed issue of Teranga Shares is being undertaken. Tablo 
Corporation has informed Teranga that it intends to subscribe for additional Teranga Shares to maintain 
its proportionate interest in Teranga.
As a result of the implementation of the Scheme, the other substantial shareholder, Van Eck Associates 
Corporation, will be diluted to a position where its holding will be approximately 6.7%.  No current 
Gryphon Shareholder will become a substantial shareholder in Teranga as a result of the Scheme.
Upon implementation of the Scheme and the acquisition by Teranga of all Gryphon Shares and the 
issue by Teranga of Teranga Share Appreciation Rights pursuant to the arrangements described in 
section 10.6, Teranga will have the following securities on issue:
Existing Teranga Shares 
Teranga Shares issued to Scheme Participants (including 
holders of Performance Rights on vesting of Performance 
Rights prior to Record Date) 
Teranga Shares issued on exercise of Tablo Corporation's 
pre-emptive rights 
Total 
 
Existing Teranga Stock Options 
Teranga Share Appreciation Rights
*Figures may change due to rounding under the Scheme.
6.5
Pro forma financial information
392,110,760 
70,639,710*
10,915,333*
473,665,803*
19,102,164
800,610
The following table shows the unaudited pro forma consolidated balance sheet of the Combined Group 
as at 31 March 2016, which is based on the unaudited consolidated balance sheet of Teranga as at 31 
March 2016 (as shown in section 5.6) and the unaudited consolidated balance sheet of Gryphon 
presented as at 31 March 2016 (as shown in section 4.5). This information has been presented for 
convenience purposes only, and is not intended to reflect the current financial position of either entity, 
nor that of the Combined Group.
The Combined Group pro forma financial information is presented in abbreviated form and does not 
include disclosures required by IFRS applicable to financial reports. All amounts are expressed in 
millions of United States dollars (“US$”).
68
COMBINED GROUP
PRO FORMA CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET
(Unaudited)
As at 31 March 2016
(US$m)
Historical
Teranga
31 Mar 2016
Gryphon
31 Mar 2016
Pro Forma
Adjustments
53.5
14.8
51.8 
11.3 
131.4
-
109.1 
-
194.2
238.9
-
23.3
8.0 
573.5
704.9 
 
 
62.3
12.4
22.4 
3.2 
100.3
13.7 
63.6 
28.6 
11.0 
116.9
217.2 
 
487.7
8.1
0.3
- 
- 
8.4
0.2
- 
1.2
1.8
-
4.1
-
- 
7.3
15.7 
 
 
2.1
-
- 
- 
2.1
- 
- 
0.2 
- 
0.2
2.3 
 
13.4
(2.0)
(2.5) 
10.1
5.6
59.8
(4.1)
(2.7)
53.0
58.6
-
-
- 
 
58.6
ASSETS 
Current assets 
Cash and cash 
equivalents1 
 
 
Trade and other 
receivables 
Inventories 
Other 
Total current 
assets 
Non-current 
assets 
Trade and other 
receiveables  
Inventories 
Available for sale 
financial assets 
Property, plant and 
equipment 
Mine development 
expenditures 
Exploration & 
evaluation 
expenditure 
Deferring income 
tax assets 
Other 
Total non-current 
assets 
Total assets 
LIABILITIES 
Current liabilities 
Trade and other 
payables 
Current income tax 
liabilities  
Deferred revenue 
Provisions 
Total current 
liabilities 
Non-current 
liabilities 
Borrowings 
Deferred revenue 
Provisions 
Other 
Total non-current 
liabilities 
Total liabilities 
 
NET ASSETS
Notes 
 
 
A
A 
C
B
B
Pro Forma
Consolidation
67.2
15.1
51.8 
11.3 
145.4
0.2
109.1 
1.2
196.0
298.7
-
20.6
8.0 
633.8
779.2 
 
 
64.4
12.4
22.4 
3.2 
102.4
13.7 
63.6 
28.8 
11.0 
117.1
219.5 
 
559.7
69
COMBINED GROUP
PRO FORMA CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET
(Unaudited)
As at 31 March 2016
(US$m)
Historical
Teranga
31 Mar 2016
Gryphon
31 Mar 2016
Pro Forma
Adjustments
385.2 
 
 
(1.0)
17.0
75.6 
 
 
 
 
476.8
10.9
487.7
175.1 
 
 
0.4
5.3
(168.1) 
 
 
 
 
12.7
0.7
13.4
(175.1) 
65.1 
10.1 
(0.4)
(5.3)
168.1 
(2.0) 
(2.5) 
(4.1) 
4.7 
58.6
-
58.6
EQUITY 
Share capital 
 
 
Foreign currency 
transaction reserve 
Other components 
of equity 
Retained earnings 
 
 
 
 
Equity attributable 
to shareholders 
Non-controlling 
interest 
Total equity
Notes 
 
 
B 
C
A 
A 
B
Pro Forma
Consolidation
460.4 
 
 
(1.0)
17.0
71.7 
 
 
 
 
548.1
11.6
559.7
1 At 31 March 2016, including VAT certificates received to date and VAT recoverable from the Republic of Senegal 
owing to Teranga (US$16.5 million), the combined pro forma consolidated cash position of the combined group would 
be US$83.7 million.
Notes to Pro forma Consolidated Balance Sheet
(a)
Basis of preparation
Amounts in the unaudited pro forma consolidated balance sheet and notes are represented in US$, 
unless otherwise indicated.  Gryphon’s balance sheet has been converted to US$ on the basis of A$1 = 
US$0.7668 (the rate prevailing as at 31 March 2016).
The unaudited pro forma balance sheet as at 31 March 2016 has been prepared as if the transaction 
described in paragraph (c) below had occurred on 31 March 2016.
Actual amounts recorded upon consummation of the Scheme will likely differ from those recorded in the 
unaudited pro forma balance sheet.  Any integration costs that may be incurred upon consummation of 
the Scheme have been excluded from the unaudited pro forma balance sheet.
The unaudited pro forma consolidated balance sheet should be read in conjunction with the historical 
financial statements and notes thereto of Teranga and Gryphon.
(b)
Significant accounting policies
See the pro forma adjustments noted below in paragraph (d) below for allowances for variations in 
accounting policies of Teranga and Gryphon made in the unaudited pro forma consolidated balance 
sheet for the Combined Group as depicted above. The Combined Group will report its financial 
information following implementation of the Scheme in accordance with IFRS, as issued by the IASB, 
adopting the accounting policies of Teranga.
(c)
The Scheme
On 19 June 2016, Teranga and Gryphon entered into a Scheme Implementation Agreement pursuant to 
which Teranga will acquire all of the Gryphon Shares by way of a scheme of arrangement under the 
Corporations Act.  Under the Scheme, each Gryphon Share will be exchanged for 0.169 Teranga CDIs, 
which trade on ASX, or, if elected, 0.169 Teranga Shares, which trade on the TSX.  Upon completion of 
the Scheme, Teranga Shareholders will own 85% of the Combined Group and Gryphon Shareholders 
will own approximately 15% of the Combined Group.  Teranga will indirectly own Gryphon’s 100% 
indirect interest in the Banfora Gold Project.
70
The total consideration offered for all of the outstanding Gryphon Shares (assuming exercise of all 
Performance Rights and the issue of the resulting Gryphon Shares) is valued at approximately US$65.1 
million, based on the closing price of a Teranga Share on the TSX on the Pre-Announcement Date of 
C$1.19 converted at US$1.2909  In conjunction with the Scheme, Tablo Corporation, Teranga’s largest 
shareholder with an approximate 13.4% ownership (calculated on a non-dilutive basis), intends to 
exercise its anti-dilution right that will result in an equity placement in Teranga of approximately US$10.1 
million, based on the trading price of a Teranga Share at the time the Scheme was announced.
There are currently 422,796,447 Gryphon Shares issued and outstanding of which 21,200,000 Gryphon 
Shares are directly owned by Teranga.  Teranga expects to issue an aggregate of up to 70.6 million 
Teranga Shares in connection with the Scheme, inclusive of Gryphon Performance Rights that will 
automatically vest into Teranga Shares upon approval by the Court of the Scheme in accordance with 
the terms of the Performance Rights, and form part of the Scheme. Further, the Share Appreciation 
Rights issued by Gryphon will be adopted by Teranga and become Share Appreciation Rights in respect 
of Teranga Shares, as adjusted for the Exchange Ratio and currency.
The Scheme is conditional upon approval by the Requisite Majority at the Scheme Meeting and is also 
subject to Australian and Burkina Faso regulatory approvals/consents, Court approval, and third party 
approvals, together with certain other conditions customary for a transaction of this nature. The Scheme 
is not subject to any due diligence or financing conditions.
The Scheme is expected to be accounted for by Teranga as the acquisition of a business.
The unaudited pro forma consolidated balance sheet assumes that the cost of acquisition will include the 
fair value of Teranga Shares issued based on the issuance of approximately 70.6 million Teranga 
Shares at US$0.9218 per share (based on the closing price of Teranga Shares on TSX of C$1.19 
converted at US$1.2909 on the Pre-Announcement Date, as the indicative purchase price under the 
Scheme for a total consideration of US$65,118,332. Under IFRS, the actual measurement date of the 
purchase price will occur on the date the consideration is paid.  Consequently, the value of the purchase 
price for accounting purposes will differ from the amount assumed in this unaudited pro forma 
consolidated balance sheet due to any further changes in the market price of Teranga Shares or in the 
number of Gryphon Shares issued and outstanding.
The preliminary purchase price allocation is subject to change and is summarized as follows:
Preliminary purchase price 
 
70,639,710 Teranga Shares issued on acquisition 
 
The purchase price was allocated as follows: 
 
Net working capital acquired (including cash) 
Available for sale financial assets 
Property, plant and equipment 
Mine development 
Deferred tax assets 
Non-controlling interest 
Net identifiable assets
(US$ million) 
 
65.1 
 
 
 
4.3 
1.2 
1.8 
59.8 
(2.7) 
0.7 
65.1
The fair value of the net assets of Gryphon to be acquired will ultimately be determined after 
implementation of the Scheme. Therefore, it is likely that the allocation of the purchase price of the net 
assets acquired will vary from those shown above and the differences may be material.
(d)
Pro forma assumption and adjustments to the consolidated balance sheet
A.
B.
The decrease in cash and cash equivalents for the recording of Teranga’s estimated expenses 
relating to the Scheme totalling US$2.0 million, which are excluded from the total consideration 
included in the purchase price, and Gryphon’s estimated change of control costs totalling 
US$2.5 million have been expensed by Gryphon.
The excess of total consideration above the reported net assets of Gryphon as at 31 March 
2016 is allocated to capitalised mine development expenditure. A deferred income tax liability 
has been recognised against deferred income tax assets held by Teranga based on the 
applicable tax rate in Burkina Faso and differential between the fair value and tax base of mine 
development expenditures acquired. Should the Scheme proceed, an independent valuer will
71
assess the fair value of identifiable net assets of Gryphon on completion of the Scheme (and 
after the final purchase price is determined at the time of issue of Teranga Shares). This 
independent valuation will determine the final allocation of the excess across mine development 
expenditure, property, plant and equipment, intangibles assets, deferred tax assets and 
liabilities and other assets and liabilities.
C.
In conjunction with the Scheme, Tablo Corporation, Teranga’s largest shareholder, intends to 
exercise its anti-dilution right that will result in an equity placement in Teranga of approximately 
US$10.1 million. This adjustment has been applied as an increase to cash and share capital.
If any separately identifiable intangible assets arising from the Scheme are considered to have finite 
lives, net profit after tax will decrease as a result of the requirement to amortise these intangible assets 
over their estimated useful lives with an expense to be recognised by way of charge against earnings.
72
7.  Scheme Consideration
73
7.1
Introduction
This section provides additional information regarding the Scheme Consideration, including:
(a)
(b)
(c)
information about the calculation of the Scheme Consideration (see section 7.2);
information about Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs and how Gryphon Shareholders (other 
than Ineligible Shareholders) can elect to receive the Scheme Consideration in the form of 
Teranga Shares rather than in the form of Teranga CDIs (see section 7.3); and
information about how the Sale Agent will sell the Teranga Shares attributable to Ineligible 
Shareholders (see section 7.4).
7.2
Scheme Consideration
If the Scheme becomes Effective, Gryphon Shareholders (other than Ineligible Shareholders) whose 
name appears in the Register at 5:00pm on the Record Date will be entitled to receive the Scheme 
Consideration from Teranga in consideration for the transfer of their Gryphon Shares to Teranga.
The Scheme Consideration comprises 0.169 Teranga CDIs for each Gryphon Share or, if elected, 0.169 
Teranga Shares for each Gryphon Share held at 5:00pm on the Record Date, with the total Scheme 
Consideration for any Gryphon Shareholder rounded down to the nearest whole number.   If no election 
is made, Gryphon Shareholders will receive Teranga CDIs.
If the Scheme becomes Effective, each Gryphon Shareholder (other than Excluded Shareholders and 
Ineligible Shareholders) whose name appears in the Register at 5:00pm on the Record Date:
(a)
(b)
will be entitled to receive the Scheme Consideration in the form of Teranga CDIs, along with 
holding statements for the Teranga CDIs; or
will, if a valid election is made to receive the Scheme Consideration in the form of Teranga 
Shares rather than Teranga CDIs, be entitled to receive the Scheme Consideration in the form 
of Teranga Shares, along with share certificates for the Teranga Shares.
The Teranga Shares that would otherwise have been issued to Ineligible Shareholders under the 
Scheme as Scheme Consideration will be issued to the Sale Agent for sale.  Ineligible Shareholders will 
receive a pro rata share of the net proceeds (in Canadian dollars) from the sale of all Teranga Shares 
sold by the Sale Agent (see section 7.4 for information on when an Ineligible Shareholder can expect to 
receive this payment).
7.3
Scheme Consideration election
Gryphon Shareholders (other than Ineligible Shareholders) can elect to receive the Scheme 
Consideration in the form of Teranga Shares listed on the TSX instead of Teranga CDIs listed on ASX, 
by making an election using the Election Form that accompanies this Scheme Booklet.  You should 
consider the information in this section before deciding whether to make an election.
The decision whether to elect to receive Teranga Shares listed on the TSX (rather than Teranga CDIs 
listed on ASX) will depend on your individual circumstances. You should seek advice from your own 
financial, legal or other professional adviser before deciding whether to make this election.
If the Scheme becomes Effective, by default, you will receive the Scheme Consideration in the form of 
Teranga CDIs listed on ASX, unless you are an Ineligible Shareholder (see section 7.4) or you make an 
election to instead receive Teranga Shares listed on the TSX by completing the Election Form in 
accordance with the instructions on that form.
(a)
Teranga Shares
Teranga Shares are common shares in the share capital of Teranga (common shares are essentially the 
equivalent of ‘ordinary shares’ in Australian companies).  Share certificates are evidence of legal title to 
Teranga Shares and should be kept in safe custody.  Loss, defacement or destruction of a share 
certificate for Teranga Shares will necessitate a process of issuance of a replacement certificate which 
may entail cost, time and appropriate indemnification and/or insurance.
74
Holders of Teranga Shares are entitled to one vote for each share on all matters to be decided on by 
shareholders at meetings of Teranga Shareholders (except matters requiring the vote of a specified 
class of shares).  On liquidation, dissolution or winding up of Teranga, the holders of Teranga Shares will 
be entitled to receive the remaining property and assets of Teranga after payment of all debts on a pro 
rata basis, but subject to rights attaching to any other class of shares issued by Teranga.  All Teranga 
Shares, when issued, are and will be issued as fully paid and non-assessable shares without liability for 
further calls or to assessment.  Further details regarding the rights attaching to Teranga Shares are set 
out in Annexure B.
Teranga Shares are listed on the TSX and trade in Canadian dollars.  Accordingly, investors who wish to 
trade Teranga Shares on the open market must do so over the TSX (Teranga Shares cannot be traded 
on ASX). Such trades must be undertaken through a broker entitled to trade on the TSX. Not all 
Australian brokers are able to trade securities on the TSX. The Australian dollar value of Teranga Shares 
will depend on the prevailing A$:C$ exchange rate from time to time.
(b)
Teranga CDIs
Each Teranga CDI represents one Teranga Share and confers a beneficial interest in that Teranga 
Share.  Teranga Shares represented by Teranga CDIs will be held by CDN on behalf of the holders of 
Teranga CDIs.  CDN is a wholly owned Subsidiary of ASX which operates as a depository nominee.  
CDN is appointed by Teranga to hold legal title to the Teranga Shares on behalf of the holders of the 
Teranga CDIs for their benefit.
Teranga CDIs are listed and traded on ASX in Australian dollars.
The key features of Teranga CDIs are summarised below.
General
Except for certain differences noted below, the rights attaching to Teranga CDIs are economically 
equivalent to the rights attaching to Teranga Shares, and Teranga will generally be required to treat 
holders of Teranga CDIs as if they were the holders of the Teranga Shares represented by those 
Teranga CDIs. This means that economic benefits such as dividends, bonus issues and rights issues will 
generally flow through to holders of Teranga CDIs as if they were the registered holders of the 
underlying Teranga Shares.
Voting
Holders of Teranga CDIs will be sent notices of general meetings of Teranga Shareholders at the same 
time as they are sent to Teranga Shareholders.
As holders of Teranga CDIs will not be the registered holders of the Teranga Shares represented by the 
Teranga CDIs, they will not be automatically entitled to vote in person at a general meeting of Teranga 
Shareholders.
However, the holder of a Teranga CDI will be able to direct CDN to cast votes in a particular manner on 
their behalf or they will be able to require CDN to appoint the holder (or a person nominated by the 
holder) as proxy to exercise the votes attaching to the Teranga Shares represented by the holder’s 
Teranga CDIs. In such latter case, a holder of a Teranga CDI representing a Teranga Share may, as 
proxy, attend and vote in person at a general meeting of Teranga shareholders. Except as mentioned in 
this paragraph, if a holder of Teranga CDIs wishes to attend and vote in person at a general meeting of 
Teranga Shareholders, the holder must first convert their Teranga CDIs into the underlying Teranga 
Shares in sufficient time before the record date for the meeting.
Takeovers
CDN must not accept a takeover offer in respect of any Teranga Shares representing Teranga CDIs 
except to the extent that holders of the relevant Teranga CDIs have authorised CDN to accept the offer. 
It is CDN’s responsibility to ensure that the bidder processes those acceptances.
75
Conversion of Teranga CDIs into Teranga Shares
Holders of Teranga CDIs may at any time convert their Teranga CDIs into the underlying Teranga 
Shares listed on the TSX by contacting:
•
•
the Teranga CDI subregistry (currently Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited), if their 
Teranga CDIs are held on the Teranga CDI issuer sponsored subregister; or
their broker, if their Teranga CDIs are held on the Teranga CDI CHESS subregister.
Requests for conversion will ordinarily be processed within one to three Business Days, although the 
time for conversion may take longer. Conversion is achieved by transferring the underlying Teranga 
Shares from CDN to the holder of the Teranga CDIs.
No trading of the underlying Teranga Shares can take place on the TSX until the conversion process has 
been completed.
Communications from Teranga
Teranga will communicate directly with holders of Teranga CDIs with respect to corporate actions and 
will send notices and other documents (such as notices of meetings) to holders of Teranga CDIs at the 
same time as they are sent to Teranga Shareholders.
Trading
Teranga CDIs can be traded on ASX. They are not listed and will not be tradeable on the TSX.  If a 
holder of Teranga CDIs wishes to trade on the TSX, they must convert the Teranga CDIs into the 
underlying Teranga Shares (see the conversion process described above).
Dividends
Dividend record and payment dates will be the same for Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs.
Any cash dividends or distributions payable in respect of Teranga CDIs will be converted by Teranga or 
its agent from Canadian dollars into Australian dollars, paid by Teranga to the Teranga CDI subregistry 
(currently Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited) on trust for the relevant holders of Teranga 
CDIs (net of any currency conversion costs) and then paid directly to the relevant holders of Teranga 
CDIs by the Teranga CDI subregistry on the payment date.
Please note that Teranga does not currently intend to pay any dividends.
Evidence of ownership
If Teranga CDIs are issued to you under the Scheme, you will receive a holding statement in respect of 
your Teranga CDIs rather than a share certificate or holding statement in respect of the underlying 
Teranga Shares.  Revised holding statements will be provided on a periodic basis if there is a change in 
the number of Teranga CDIs held by you.
Teranga CDIs may be held on an issuer sponsored subregister or on a CHESS subregister. If you 
receive Teranga CDIs under the Scheme, you will receive them:
•
•
on the Teranga CDI issuer sponsored subregister, to the extent they are issued as 
consideration for the transfer of Gryphon Shares held on the Gryphon issuer sponsored 
subregister; or
on the Teranga CDI CHESS subregister, to the extent they are issued as consideration for the 
transfer of Gryphon Shares held on the Gryphon CHESS subregister.
(c)
The principal differences between holding Teranga CDIs and Teranga Shares
The principal difference between holding a Teranga CDI and holding a Teranga Share is that the holder 
of a Teranga CDI has, through CDN, an indirect, beneficial interest in the Teranga Share underlying their 
Teranga CDI instead of directly owning that Teranga Share. This means that the holder of the Teranga 
CDI is not the registered holder of the underlying Teranga Share and therefore:
76
•
•
cannot directly trade the underlying Teranga Share; and
is a beneficial holder (rather than registered legal holder) of the underlying Teranga Share.
As noted in this section, there are certain differences which you should take into account in determining 
whether to elect to receive the Scheme Consideration in the form of Teranga Shares instead of Teranga 
CDIs.
For example, as mentioned above under ‘Voting’, a holder of a Teranga CDI cannot attend a Teranga 
general meeting as a shareholder but can direct CDN how to vote or to appoint the holder as proxy.
Teranga CDIs will be listed on ASX and Teranga Shares will be listed on the TSX
Teranga CDIs will be tradeable on ASX only.  This has the advantage that Teranga CDIs can be traded 
during Australian business hours using Australian brokers in prices quoted in Australian dollars.  
However, see section 8.1 for a discussion of the liquidity of the market for Teranga CDIs and the 
potential risk that they may trade at a discount to Teranga Shares on the TSX.
Exercise of shareholder rights
As holders of Teranga CDIs are not registered holders of the relevant Teranga Shares, the rights 
attaching to Teranga Shares which underlie their Teranga CDIs must be exercised by CDN.  A holder of 
Teranga CDIs may instruct CDN to exercise those rights on their behalf.  In contrast, a registered holder 
of Teranga Shares can directly exercise the rights attaching to their Teranga Shares in such manner as 
they choose.
Conversion of Teranga Shares into Teranga CDIs
If you elect to receive Teranga Shares instead of Teranga CDIs, it is possible to later convert them into 
Teranga CDIs (if, for example, you would like to trade on ASX).  You should contact Teranga’s transfer 
agent (Computershare Trust Company of Canada) if you wish to convert your Teranga Shares into 
Teranga CDIs.
(d)
How to make an election
To make an election, you should complete the Election Form accompanying this Scheme Booklet and 
return the Election Form in accordance with the instructions on that form. The deadline for receipt of 
Election Forms by the Gryphon Share Registry is 5:00pm on the Record Date (currently 6 October 
2016). If you do not make a valid election by 5:00pm on the Record Date, you will receive Teranga CDIs 
listed on ASX.
Other than in the case of a Gryphon Shareholder who is a trustee or nominee:
•
•
a Gryphon Shareholder (other than an Ineligible Shareholder) may only make an election in 
respect of their Scheme Consideration; and
if a Gryphon Shareholder (other than an Ineligible Shareholder) makes an election, it will be 
deemed to apply to all of their Scheme Consideration.
Election by trustees and nominees
If a Gryphon Shareholder holds one or more parcels of Gryphon Shares as trustee or nominee for, or 
otherwise on account of, another person, that Gryphon Shareholder may make separate elections in 
accordance with the election process in respect of those parcels (subject to that Gryphon Shareholder 
providing to Gryphon and Teranga any substantiating information they reasonably require) to reflect the 
fact that some of the underlying beneficiaries may prefer to receive the Scheme Consideration in the 
form of Teranga CDIs while others may prefer to receive the Scheme Consideration in the form of 
Teranga Shares.
In order to make separate elections, the trustee or nominee must establish distinct holdings in the 
Gryphon Share Register in respect of each parcel of Gryphon Shares and must make a separate 
election in respect of each parcel of Gryphon Shares.
77
However, the trustee or nominee may not accept instructions from an underlying beneficiary to make an 
election unless it is in respect of the Scheme Consideration attributable to all parcels of Gryphon Shares 
held by the trustee or nominee on behalf of that beneficiary.
Variation or withdrawal of an election
Once submitted, your Election Form will be irrevocable.
7.4
Ineligible Shareholders
(a)
Who are Ineligible Shareholders?
Restrictions in certain jurisdictions outside Australia, New Zealand and Canada may make it impractical 
or unlawful for Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs to be offered or issued under the Scheme to Gryphon 
Shareholders in those jurisdictions.
Under the terms of the Scheme, any Gryphon Shareholder whose address as shown in the Register at 
5:00pm on the Record Date is outside of Australia and its external territories, New Zealand or Canada 
will be regarded as an Ineligible Shareholder for the purposes of the Scheme, unless Teranga 
determines in its absolute discretion (acting reasonably) that it is lawful and not unduly onerous or 
impractical to issue Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares to Gryphon Shareholders in a particular country.
Ineligible Shareholders will not receive Teranga CDIs under the Scheme, nor will they be entitled to 
make an election to receive Teranga Shares as their Scheme Consideration. Instead, the Teranga 
Shares which would otherwise be required to be issued to that Gryphon Shareholder under the Scheme 
will be issued to the Sale Agent, to be held on trust for that Ineligible Shareholder.  The Sale Agent will 
then sell those Teranga Shares that would otherwise have been attributable to that Ineligible 
Shareholder and remit a pro rata share of the net proceeds from the sale of all Teranga Shares sold by 
the Sale Agent in Canadian dollars to the Ineligible Shareholder.
(b)
Role of the Sale Agent
If you are an Ineligible Shareholder, the Scheme Consideration, in the form of Teranga Shares, that 
would otherwise have been issued to you under the Scheme will be issued to the Sale Agent, as your 
nominee in trust, for sale by them and you will receive a pro rata share of the net proceeds from the sale 
of those Teranga Shares in Canadian dollars.
Teranga will appoint the Sale Agent, to sell the Teranga Shares that would otherwise have been 
attributable to Ineligible Shareholders.  The Sale Agent must sell the Teranga Shares that would 
otherwise have been attributable to Ineligible Shareholders within 20 Business Days after the 
Implementation Date.
The Sale Agent may sell those Teranga Shares in such manner, at such price and on such other terms 
as the Sale Agent determines in good faith. Teranga Shares will be sold on market on the TSX (with 
proceeds received by the Sale Agent in Canadian dollar).
Following the last sale of the Teranga Shares that would otherwise have been attributable to Ineligible 
Shareholders, the Sale Agent must, within 20 Business Days of the Implementation Date:
•
•
deduct any applicable brokerage, stamp duty and other selling costs, taxes and charges; and
remit the pro rata amount of the net proceeds of the sale in Canadian dollars to each Ineligible 
Shareholder.
The cash amount received as the proceeds of the sale by the Sale Agent will depend on the price at 
which the Teranga Shares can be sold by the Sale Agent at the relevant time and the amount of any 
applicable taxes and other selling costs incurred connection with the sale.  The brokerage fees payable 
by each Ineligible Shareholder will be equal to 1% of the proceeds of the sale by the Sale Agent on 
behalf of that Ineligible Shareholder.
An Ineligible Shareholder’s pro rata share of the proceeds may be more or less than the value of the 
Scheme Consideration which that Ineligible Shareholder would have received had they not been an 
Ineligible Shareholder. The market price of Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs is subject to change from 
time to time.
78
None of Gryphon, Teranga or the Sale Agent gives any assurance as to the price that will be achieved 
for the sale of the Teranga Shares that would otherwise have been attributable to Ineligible Shareholder 
by the Sale Agent.
7.5
Comparison of Australian and Canadian legal regimes
Gryphon is a public company incorporated in Australia and registered in Australia under the 
Corporations Act.  Gryphon is admitted to the official list of ASX.
Teranga is incorporated in Canada under the provisions of the Canada Business Corporations Act 
(CBCA), and in Canada, the shares of Teranga are listed on TSX. Teranga is a reporting issuer in the 
Canadian provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, New Brunswick, 
Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland and Labrador.
If the Scheme is implemented, the rights of Gryphon Shareholders who elect to receive Teranga Shares 
will, in respect of those Teranga Shares, be governed principally by Canadian federal law (including the 
CBCA), provincial securities legislation, the TSX Company Manual and Teranga’s articles and by-laws 
(known as ‘constating documents’). A copy of Teranga’s articles and by-laws are available by searching 
for the public documents filed by Teranga on the ASX website www.asx.com.au.
The rights of Gryphon Shareholders who receive Teranga CDIs will be governed by the ASX Settlement 
Rules and the ASX Listing Rules but, other than in certain limited situations, not by the Corporations Act.
Being a foreign company with a full listing on ASX of the Teranga CDIs, Teranga must comply with all of 
the ASX Listing Rules, subject to any specific waivers granted by ASX, in respect of the Teranga CDIs.  
In this regard, Teranga has been granted specific waivers by ASX from some listing rules (see 
section 10.12 for more detail).
A comparison of some of the material provisions of Australian company law and Canadian corporate law 
as they relate to Gryphon and Teranga respectively is set out in Annexure B, along with a description of 
certain securities laws and stock exchange rules where applicable.
Canadian corporate law is essentially embodied in the provisions of the relevant federal or provincial 
corporate statutes pursuant to which companies are incorporated, continued or otherwise regulated.  In 
the case of Teranga, the relevant statute is the CBCA.  In addition, Teranga is also subject to the 
Securities Act (Ontario), being the securities legislation of the province of Ontario and the securities 
legislation of each of the provinces in which Teranga is a reporting issuer.
79
8.  Risk factors
80
If the Scheme is implemented Gryphon Shareholders (other than Excluded Shareholders or Ineligible 
Shareholders) will be entitled to receive the Scheme Consideration in the form of Teranga Shares or 
Teranga CDIs.  The value of Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs will be influenced by a number of 
factors, many of which will be beyond the control of the Combined Group.
Some of these risks are either related to mining and exploration companies generally or already affect 
the Gryphon business which will form part of the Combined Group and are therefore risks to which 
Gryphon Shareholders already have some exposure.  There are however, a number of risks which will 
be new or potentially greater in impact than is currently the case in relation to Gryphon alone.
The risk factors presented in this section are not an exhaustive list of all risks and risk factors related to 
the Combined Group or the Scheme. Additional risks and uncertainties not currently known to Teranga 
or Gryphon may also have an adverse impact on the Combined Group’s business.
This section does not take into account the investment objectives, financial situation, position or 
particular needs of Gryphon Shareholders.  Each Gryphon Shareholder should consult their legal, 
financial or other professional adviser if they have any queries.
8.1
Risks related to the Scheme
(a)
Completion of the Scheme is subject to several conditions that must be satisfied or waived
The Scheme is subject to a number of conditions which are contained in clause 3 of the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement. Please refer to section 3.4 for further information regarding the conditions 
precedent to the Scheme. There can be no certainty, nor can Gryphon or Teranga provide any 
assurance, that these conditions will be satisfied or waived (where applicable), or if satisfied or waived 
(where applicable), when that will occur. In addition, several of the conditions precedent to the Scheme 
are beyond the control of Gryphon or Teranga, including, but not limited to, approval of the Scheme by 
the Requisite Majority of Gryphon Shareholders, and required regulatory and third party approvals and 
consents.
In particular, in respect of the Condition Precedent that no Gryphon Material Adverse Event occurs 
before 8:00am on the Second Court Date, it should be noted that a failure to secure the renewal or 
extension of the Key Permits by 8:00am on the Second Court Date would constitute a Gryphon Material 
Adverse Event.  The Key Permits are the Wahgnion Exploitation Licence, the Nogbele Exploration 
Permit and the Nianka Exploration Permit. 
 
As discussed in section 3.4, on the basis of Gryphon’s extensive discussions with the relevant authorities 
in Burkina Faso, Gryphon has no reason to believe that the extension to the Wahgnion Exploitation 
Licence and the renewal of the Nogbele Exploration Permit and the Nianka Exploration Permit will not be 
obtained.  However, there can be no guarantee that the renewal and extensions will be received by 
Gryphon from the relevant authorities in Burkina Faso or that they will be received before the Second 
Court Date.
If for any reason the conditions to the Scheme are not satisfied or waived (where applicable) and the 
Scheme is not completed, the market price of Gryphon shares may be adversely affected.
(b)
The Scheme Implementation Agreement may be terminated by Gryphon or Teranga in certain 
circumstances
Each of Gryphon and Teranga has the right to terminate the Scheme Implementation Agreement in 
certain circumstances. Please refer to section 10.13 for further information regarding the termination of 
the Scheme Implementation Agreement. Accordingly, there is no certainty that the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement will not be terminated by either Gryphon or Teranga before the 
implementation of the Scheme.
If the Scheme Implementation Agreement is terminated, there is no assurance that Gryphon will be able 
to find a party willing to pay an equivalent or greater price for Gryphon Shares than the price to be paid 
pursuant to the terms of the Scheme Implementation Agreement and the Scheme.
(c)
The issue of a significant number of Teranga Shares could adversely affect the market price of 
Teranga Shares
If the Scheme is implemented, a significant number of additional Teranga Shares will be available for 
trading in the public market. The increase in the number of Teranga Shares may lead to sales of such
81
shares or the perception that such sales may occur, either of which may adversely affect the market 
price of Teranga Shares.
(d)
Value of the Scheme Consideration is not certain
If the Scheme is implemented, Gryphon Shareholders (other than Excluded Shareholders and Ineligible 
Shareholders) will receive Scheme Consideration in the form of Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs.  The 
market value of the Scheme Consideration that will be issued will depend on the price at which Teranga 
Shares and Teranga CDIs trade on the TSX and ASX respectively after the Implementation Date.
Following implementation of the Scheme, the market price of Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs may 
fluctuate based on many variables, some of which are not directly related to the success of Teranga. In 
recent years, the securities markets have experienced a high level of price and volume volatility, and the 
market price of securities of many companies, particularly those considered to be junior companies, has 
experienced wide fluctuations which have not necessarily been related to the operating performance, 
underlying asset values or prospects of such companies.
(e)
Teranga CDIs may trade at a discount
The number of Teranga CDIs quoted on ASX may be less than the number of Teranga Shares listed on 
the TSX.
As a result, it is possible that the market for Teranga CDIs on ASX will be less liquid than the market for 
Teranga Shares on the TSX.  This may have the effect of reducing the volume of Teranga CDIs that can 
be bought and sold on ASX and the speed with which they can be bought and sold.  This reduced 
liquidity may also result in Teranga CDIs trading at a discount to Teranga Shares on the TSX.  However, 
a holder of Teranga CDIs can convert their Teranga CDIs into Teranga Shares tradeable on the TSX 
should the holder wish to access the market in Teranga Shares on the TSX.
(f)
Teranga may not maintain its ASX listing
There can be no guarantee that Teranga will maintain the listing of Teranga CDIs on ASX in the future.  
If Teranga were to de-list from ASX, holders of Teranga CDIs would need to convert them into Teranga 
Shares tradeable on the TSX and seek to trade through a broker authorised to trade on TSX.
(g)
Teranga is governed principally by Canadian law
Teranga is incorporated in Canada under the Canada Business Corporations Act (CBCA), and in 
Canada, the common shares of Teranga are listed on the TSX. Teranga is a reporting issuer in the 
Canadian provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, New Brunswick, 
Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland and Labrador.
If the Scheme is implemented, the rights of Gryphon Shareholders who elect to receive Teranga Shares 
will, in respect of those Teranga Shares, be governed principally by Canadian federal law (including the 
CBCA), provincial securities legislation, the TSX Company Manual and Teranga’s articles and by-laws 
(known as ‘constating documents’). A copy of Teranga’s articles and by-laws are available by searching 
for the public documents filed by Teranga on the ASX website www.asx.com.au.
The rights of Gryphon Shareholders who receive Teranga CDIs will be governed by the ASX Settlement 
Rules and the ASX Listing Rules but, other than in certain limited situations, not by the Corporations Act.
Being a foreign company with a full listing on ASX of the Teranga CDIs, Teranga must comply with all of 
the ASX Listing Rules, subject to any specific waivers granted by ASX in respect of the Teranga CDIs.  
In this regard, Teranga has been granted specific waivers from ASX of some ASX Listing Rules (see 
section 10.12(c) for more detail).
A comparison of some of the material provisions of Australian company law and Canadian corporate law 
as they relate to Gryphon and Teranga respectively is set out in Annexure B, along with a description of 
certain securities laws and stock exchange rules where applicable.
82
8.2
Risks to Gryphon if the Scheme does not proceed
(a)
Gryphon Shareholders will not receive the Scheme Consideration
If the Scheme is not implemented, Gryphon Shareholders will retain their Gryphon Shares and will not 
receive the Scheme Consideration.  If the Scheme is not implemented, Gryphon will remain listed on 
ASX and will continue to operate its business.  In those circumstances, Gryphon Shareholders will 
continue to be exposed to the risks and benefits of owning Gryphon Shares.
(b)
Gryphon Share price may fall
The Gryphon Directors believe that if the Scheme is not implemented, the Gryphon Share price may fall 
below its recent trading price.
(c)
Transaction costs will be incurred
If the Scheme is not implemented, Gryphon’s transaction costs will be borne by Gryphon alone, subject 
to any off-set by way of break fee payment from Teranga
(d)
Future capital requirements
If Gryphon remains a stand-alone entity, it will need to secure funding from alternative sources to 
develop its existing projects.  In these circumstances it is expected that Gryphon will investigate a range 
of possible transactions with alternative parties to assist with any funding requirements it may have.
8.3
Risks related to the Combined Group
(a)
No certainty that Teranga will pay dividends
Payment of any future dividends by the Combined Group will be at the discretion of the Teranga Board 
after taking into account many factors, including, but not limited to, Teranga’s operating results, financial 
condition and current and anticipated cash needs. At this time however, all of the Combined Group’s 
available funds are expected to be invested to finance the growth of its business and therefore investors 
cannot expect and should not anticipate receiving a dividend on the Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs in 
the foreseeable future. Further, Teranga’s ability to make dividend payments in the future could be 
constrained by government restrictions beyond Teranga’s control.
(b)
Dilution
Teranga may require additional funds to fund its exploration and development programs and potential 
acquisitions. If Teranga raises additional funding by issuing additional equity securities, such financing 
may substantially dilute the interests of Teranga Shareholders. Issuances of substantial amounts of 
Teranga’s securities, or the availability of such securities for sale, could adversely affect the prevailing 
market prices for Teranga’s securities. A decline in the market prices of Teranga’s securities could impair 
Teranga’s ability to raise additional capital through the sale of securities should it desire to do so.
(c)
Dependency on the Sabodala gold mine for substantially all operating revenue and cash flows
While the Combined Group may invest in additional mining and exploration projects in the future, the 
Sabodala gold mine along with its expanded Sabodala Mining Concession is likely to be the Combined 
Group’s only producing mining project for the foreseeable future, thereby providing substantially all of its 
operating revenue and cash flows. Consequently, a delay or difficulty encountered in the operations of 
the Sabodala gold mine would materially and adversely affect the Combined Group’s financial condition 
and financial sustainability. Any adverse changes or developments affecting the Sabodala gold mine, 
such as, but not limited to, the Combined Group’s inability to successfully complete any of the 
development projects, work programs or expansions, obtain financing on commercially suitable terms, or 
hire suitable personnel and mining contractors, may have a material adverse effect on the Combined 
Group’s financial performance, results of operations and liquidity.
In addition, the Combined Group’s business and results of operations could be materially and adversely 
affected by any events which cause the Sabodala gold mine to operate at less than optimal capacity, 
including among other things, equipment failure or shortages of spares, consumables and reagents, 
adverse weather, serious environmental and safety issues, any permitting or licensing issues and any 
failure to produce expected amounts of gold.
83
(d)
Revenues and financial performance dependent upon the price of gold
Future production from all of the Combined Group’s mining properties is dependent upon the price of 
gold and other metals and minerals being adequate to make these properties economic. Sustained low 
gold prices could reduce revenues through production declines due to cessation of the mining of 
deposits, or portions of deposits, that have become uneconomic at the then-prevailing market price; 
reduce or eliminate the profit that we currently expect from reserves; halt or delay the development of 
new projects; reduce funds available for exploration; and reduce existing reserves by removing ores from 
reserves that can no longer be economically processed at prevailing prices. Such declines in price 
and/or reductions in operations could cause significant volatility in the Combined Group’s financial 
performance. The Combined Group’s revenues will be derived primarily from the sale of gold. The price 
that the Combined Group obtains for gold is directly related to world market prices. The price of gold has 
historically fluctuated widely and is affected by numerous factors beyond the Combined Group’s control, 
including, but not limited to, industrial and retail supply and demand, exchange rates, inflation rates, 
price and availability of substitutes, actions taken by governments, changes in global economies, 
confidence in the global monetary system, forward sales of metals by producers and speculators as well 
as other global or regional political, social or economic events.
(e)
The failure to meet key production and other cost estimates may adversely affect the Combined 
Group’s cash flows
A decrease in the amount of or a change in the timing of the Combined Group’s mineral production 
outlook may impact the amount and timing of the Combined Group’s cash flow from operations. The 
actual impact of such a decrease on the Combined Group’s cash flow from operations would depend on 
the timing of any changes in production and on actual prices and costs. Any change in the timing of 
projected cash flows that would occur due to production shortfalls or labour disruptions or other reasons 
would, in turn, result in delays in receipt of such cash flows and in using such cash to, as applicable, 
reduce debt levels and fund operating and exploration activities, which may require additional borrowings 
to fund capital expenditures. The Combined Group currently does not have a working capital bank facility 
and therefore will depend on cash flow from operations to fund its liquidity needs.
It is likely that actual results and/or costs for the Combined Group’s projects will differ from current 
estimates and assumptions, and these differences may be material. In addition, experience from actual 
mining or processing operations may identify new or unexpected conditions that could reduce production 
below, and/or increase capital and/or operating costs above, current estimates. If actual results are less 
favourable than currently estimated, the Combined Group’s business, results of operations, financial 
condition and liquidity could be materially adversely impacted.
(f)
The performance of the Sabodala gold mine is subject to technical risks that may lead to 
increased costs and less profitability than estimated
The Sabodala gold mine, including its satellite deposit operations, is subject to technical risks in that it 
may not perform as designed. Increased development or expansion costs, lower output or higher 
operating costs may all combine to make the Sabodala gold mine less profitable than that expected at 
the time of the development decision. No assurance can be given that the Combined Group would be 
adequately compensated by third party project design, construction and supply companies in the event 
of equipment failure or that the project does not meet its expected design specifications.
(g)
Mine development uncertainties
There are significant risks associated with developing extensions to existing mines, such as Sabodala 
and the development of new mines as is intended for the Banfora Gold Project.  As a result of the 
substantial expenditures involved in development projects, developments are prone to material cost 
overruns versus budget. The capital expenditures and time required by the Combined Group to extend 
Sabodala and to develop the Banfora Gold Project are considerable and changes in cost or construction 
schedules can significantly increase both the time and capital required to extend or build the mine. 
Project development schedules are also dependent on obtaining the governmental approvals necessary 
for the operation of a mine. Substantial expenditures will be required to build mining and processing 
facilities for the Banfora Gold Project. The timeline to obtain these government approvals may be 
beyond the Combined Group’s control. It is not unusual in the mining industry for new mining operations 
to experience unexpected problems during the start-up phase, resulting in delays and requiring more 
capital than anticipated.
84
The Combined Group’s actual reserves and resources could be lower than estimates, which 
could adversely affect its operating results and financial condition
The Combined Group’s mineral resources and mineral reserves described in this Scheme Booklet, are 
estimates based on a number of assumptions, any adverse changes to which could require the 
Combined Group to lower its mineral resource and mineral reserve estimates. The Combined Group’s 
estimates of economically recoverable reserves are primarily based upon interpretations of geological 
models, which make various assumptions, such as assumptions with respect to prices, costs, 
regulations, and environmental and geological factors. These assumptions have a significant effect on 
the amounts recognised in the Combined Group’s technical reports and financial statements, and any 
material difference between these assumptions and actual events may affect the economic viability of 
the Combined Group’s properties or any project undertaken by the Combined Group.
Furthermore, actual prices, costs, regulations and environmental and geological factors often diverge 
from the assumed amounts because it is difficult to predict, among other things, metal prices, grades, 
production costs, stripping ratios, recovery rates, governmental regulations, the ability to obtain 
necessary permits, permit requirements, environmental factors, unforeseen technical difficulties, unusual 
or unexpected geological formations or work interruptions. In addition, there can be no assurance that 
mineral or other metal recoveries in small scale laboratory tests will be duplicated in a larger scale test 
under on-site conditions or during production and the volume and grade of reserves mined and 
processed and recovery rates may not be the same as currently anticipated. There can also be no 
assurance that any discoveries of new reserves will be made or that if a new discovery is made, that the 
Combined Group will be able to obtain the required extraction or mining licenses to recover the reserves.
For these and other reasons, there is no certainty that any of the mineral resources or mineral reserves 
will be realised or that the anticipated tonnages and grades will be achieved, that the indicated level of 
recovery will be realized or that reserves can be mined or processed profitably. Until a deposit is actually 
mined and processed, the quantity and grades of mineral resources and mineral reserves must be 
considered as estimates only. Valid estimates made at a given time may significantly change when new 
information becomes available.
Fluctuations in the prices of gold and other minerals, results of drilling, metallurgical testing and 
production and the evaluation of studies, reports and plans subsequent to the date of any estimate may 
require revision of such estimate. Any material reductions in estimates of mineral resources or mineral 
reserves could have a material adverse effect on the results of the Combined Group’s operations and 
financial condition.
Changes in the cost of energy, in the prices of commodities used in the Combined Group’s 
operations, and any other input may adversely affect the profitability of the Combined Group’s 
operations and financial condition
Any increase in the price of production inputs, including labour, fuel, particularly heavy fuel oil, mine 
consumables or other inputs could materially and adversely affect the Combined Group’s business and 
results of operations. Input costs can be affected by changes in factors including market conditions, 
government policies, exchange rates and inflation rates, which are unpredictable and outside the 
Combined Group’s control. In particular, the cost of fuel constitutes a significant part of the Combined 
Group’s operating expenses. Unanticipated increases in the price of these or other inputs could 
materially and adversely affect the Combined Group’s liquidity, business and results of operations.
The Combined Group will be dependent on critical supplies, a lack of which could impact 
production and development of projects
Timely and cost effective execution of the Combined Group’s mining operations and exploration activities 
are dependent on the adequate and timely supply of water, fuel, chemicals and other critical supplies.
If the Combined Group is unable to procure the requisite quantities of water, fuel or other inputs in time 
and at commercially acceptable prices or if there are significant disruptions in the supply of fuel, water or 
other inputs to the Sabodala gold mine or for the Combined Group’s exploration activities, the 
performance of the Combined Group’s business and results of operations could be materially and 
adversely affected.
(h)
(i)
(j)
85
(k)
The Combined Group will depend on key management and qualified operating personnel and 
may not be able to attract and retain such persons in the future
The Combined Group’s success depends to a significant extent upon the ability to attract, retain and 
train key management and technical personnel in Canada, Senegal and Burkina Faso (including those 
employed on a contractual basis). If the Combined Group is not successful in retaining or attracting 
personnel, its business may be adversely affected. The loss of the services of any of the Combined 
Group’s key management personnel could materially and adversely affect its business and results of 
operations.
In addition, the recruiting of qualified personnel is critical to the Combined Group’s success. As the 
Combined Group’s business grows, it will require additional key financial, administrative, mining, 
processing and exploration personnel as well as additional staff for operations. If the Combined Group is 
not successful in recruiting and training such personnel, it could materially and adversely affect its 
business, prospects and results of operations.
The Combined Group’s operations in Senegal and Burkina Faso will, and future operations in Côte 
d'Ivoire may, depend on its local employees and contractors. If the Combined Group is not successful in 
maintaining a positive relationship with its workforce and the communities surrounding its projects, it 
could find it difficult to attract and retain skilled workers, develop successful collaborations and generally 
build its business. Likewise, if the Combined Group’s relationship to its workforce or the communities 
surrounding its projects becomes strained, its business may be adversely affected.
(l)
Mining is inherently dangerous and subject to conditions or events beyond the Combined 
Group’s control, which could have a material adverse effect on the Combined Group’s business
The Combined Group’s business operations are subject to risks and hazards inherent in the mining 
industry. The exploration for and the development of mineral deposits involves significant risks, including 
environmental and safety hazards, industrial accidents, equipment failure, import/customs delays, 
shortage or delays in installing and commissioning plant and equipment, metallurgical and other 
processing problems, seismic activity, unusual or unexpected rock formations, wall failure, cave-ins or 
slides, burst dam banks, flooding, fires, interruption to, or the increase in costs of, services (such as 
water, fuel, particularly for heavy fuel oil, or transport), sabotage, community, government or other 
interference and interruption due to inclement or hazardous weather conditions. These risks could result 
in damage to, or destruction of, mineral properties, production and power facilities, dams or other 
properties, and could cause personal injury or death, environmental damage, pollution, delays in mining, 
increased production costs, monetary losses and possible legal liability.
The Combined Group’s current mines are open pit operations, and the stability of the mine pit walls is 
critical. Pit slope failure at any open pit operation may result in damage to, or destruction of, mines and 
other producing facilities, damage to life or property, environmental damage and possible legal liability, 
any of which may prevent or interrupt mining activities and have a material adverse effect on the 
Combined Group’s financial condition.
Mineral exploration is speculative and uncertain; there is no assurance mineral deposits on the 
Combined Group’s exploration properties will ever be classified as proven and probable mineral reserves 
as a result of continued exploration.
In addition, the Combined Group will be seeking mineral deposits on exploration projects where there 
are not yet established commercial quantities. There can be no assurance that economic concentrations 
of minerals will be determined to exist on the Combined Group’s property holdings within investors’ 
investment horizons or at all. The failure to establish such economic concentrations could have a 
material adverse outcome on the Combined Group and its securities, as major expenses may be 
required to locate and establish mineral reserves, to develop metallurgical processes and to construct 
mining and processing facilities at a particular site.
Whether income will result from projects undergoing exploration programs depends on the successful 
establishment of mining operations. Factors including, but not limited to, government regulations (such 
as those governing prices, taxes, royalties, land tenure, land use and environmental protection), costs, 
actual mineralisation, size and grade of mineral deposits, consistency and reliability of ore grades and 
commodity prices may affect successful project development. Few properties that are explored are 
ultimately developed into producing mines.
Further, some of the Combined Group’s exploration projects are with joint venture partners. Whether the 
Combined Group will be able to mine the identified resources will depend on whether it obtains an
86
(m)
exploitation permit or a mining concession from the Governments of Senegal, Burkina Faso or Côte 
d'Ivoire, and there can be no assurance that such a permit or concession will be obtained.
Illegal mining on the Combined Group’s property interests may delay its projects and raise 
disputes regarding the development or operation of commercial gold deposits and may also 
expose the Combined Group to potential responsibility for environmental, property and personal 
damage
Illegal mining is becoming more widespread in Senegal and Burkina Faso. Illegal miners have and may 
continue to trespass on the Combined Group’s properties and engage in dangerous practices including 
the use of mercury and dynamite in their operations, without any government regulation or oversight. 
The Combined Group is unable to continuously monitor its entire portfolio of property interests. The 
presence of illegal miners could also lead to project delays and disputes regarding the development or 
operation of commercial gold deposits, including disputes with Senegalese or Burkinabe governmental 
authorities regarding reporting of resources and mine production. The illegal activities of miners could 
cause pollution and other environmental damage (including from the use of mercury in recovery 
practices by certain of these illegal artisanal miners) or other damage to the Combined Group properties, 
as well as personal injury or death, for which the Combined Group could potentially be held responsible, 
all of which could have an adverse impact on the Combined Group’s future cash flows, earnings, results 
of operations and financial condition.
(n)
The Combined Group may not be able to obtain additional external financing on commercially 
acceptable terms, or at all to fund the development of the Banfora Gold Project and for other 
activities
Mining operations, exploration and development involve significant financial risk and capital investment. 
The Combined Group’s operations and expansion plans may also result in increases in capital 
expenditures and commitments.
The Combined Group may require additional funding to expand its business and may require additional 
capital in the future to, among other things, construct the Banfora Gold Project, further expand the 
Sabodala mill, build another mill, or develop/expand/redesign the existing mine pit or build other mines.  
In relation to the Banfora Gold Project in particular, there is a risk that cash flows from Sabodala, 
together with existing cash will not be sufficient to fund the development costs and that third party 
funding will be required.
No assurance can be given that such capital will be available at all or available on terms acceptable to 
the Combined Group.  The Combined Group may also need to seek funding from third parties if 
internally generated cash resources and available credit facilities, if any, are insufficient to finance these 
activities. Any debt financing, if available, may involve financial or other covenants which may limit the 
Combined Group’s operations and principal amounts under any debt financing arrangements entered 
into by the Combined Group may become immediately due and payable if it fails to meet certain 
restrictive covenants. Even if such funding was available, the Combined Group’s existing debt 
instruments, may contain provisions prohibiting it from financing such transactions. Outside of the 
Teranga Revolving Credit Facility, the Combined Group will depend on cash flow from operations to fund 
its liquidity needs. In the event that the Combined Group is unable or not permitted to obtain adequate 
additional financing on acceptable terms, or at all, to satisfy its operating, development and expansion 
plans, the Combined Group’s business and results of operations may be materially and adversely 
affected.
(o)
The Combined Group will have to continually replace and expand its reserves and resources
Because mines have limited lives based on proven and probable mineral reserves and mineral 
resources, the Combined Group will have to continually replace and expand its mineral reserves and 
mineral resources. The Combined Group’s ability to maintain or increase its production and therefore, 
the continuous success of its business, will be dependent on many factors including, but not limited to:
•
•
•
•
discovery and/or acquisition of new ore reserves;
securing and maintaining title to tenements and obtaining necessary consents and permits for 
exploration and mining;
successful design and construction of mining and processing facilities;
successful commissioning and operating of mining and processing facilities; and
87
(p)
•
the performance of the technology incorporated into the processing facility.
The Combined Group’s transactions may be challenged by tax authorities and its operations may 
be assessed, which could result in significant additional taxes, penalties and interest
If Teranga’s tax disputes with the Government of Senegal are not resolved favourably it would have a 
material adverse effect on the Combined Group’s financial position.
Mining tax regimes in foreign jurisdictions are subject to differing interpretations by the Combined Group 
and the relevant governmental entity and are subject to constant change and may include fiscal stability 
guarantees. The Combined Group’s interpretation of taxation law as applied to its activities may not 
coincide with that of the tax authorities. As a result, transactions may be challenged by tax authorities 
and the Combined Group’s operations may be assessed, which could result in significant additional 
taxes, penalties and interest. Teranga’s Senegalese operating subsidiary, SGO, was granted an 
exoneration from taxation, including value added tax and corporate income tax in the Sabodala Mining 
Convention, which ended on 2 May 2015, after which time a value added tax of 18% (which is not 
applicable to sales of gold) and corporate income tax rate of 25% is applicable. However, SGO was 
granted an extension to its refundable VAT exemption until 2 May 2022.
To date, neither Teranga nor any of its subsidiaries has any outstanding tax assessments, with the 
exception of all but US$1 million remaining in dispute under a 2011 tax assessment against SGO, its 
Senegalese operating entity. During the quarter ended 31 December 2011, SGO received a tax 
assessment from the Senegalese tax authorities claiming withholding taxes of approximately US$24 
million, such amount includes US$8 million of penalties relating to interest paid to SGML (Capital) 
Limited under the fleet lease facility, director’s fees and services rendered by offshore companies for the 
financial years 2008 to 2010. Teranga remains of the view that this remaining amount is not due and 
expects the assessment to be fully withdrawn with no material costs to Teranga.
(q)
The Combined Group will be subject to taxation in several different jurisdictions, and adverse 
changes to the taxation laws of such jurisdictions could have a material adverse effect on its 
profitability
The Combined Group may have exposure to greater than anticipated tax liabilities. The Combined Group 
will be subject to income taxes and other taxes in a variety of jurisdictions and its tax structure will be 
subject to review by both Canadian and foreign taxation authorities. The determination of its tax structure 
has required and continues to require significant judgment and there are transactions and determinations 
where the ultimate tax result is uncertain. There can be no assurance that taxation authorities will not 
seek to challenge the structure in the future. To the extent a taxing authority disagrees with any of the 
Combined Group’s determinations and its assessed additional taxes, or there are adverse changes in 
tax laws, it could have a material adverse effect on the Combined Group’s financial position.
(r)
Potential legal proceedings or disputes may have a material adverse effect on the Combined 
Group’s financial performance, cash flow and results of operations
Neither Teranga nor Gryphon is currently subject to material litigation. However, the Combined Group 
could become involved in disputes with governmental authorities, non-governmental organisations and 
other private parties in the future which may result in material litigation. The results of litigation cannot be 
predicted with certainty. If the Combined Group is unable to resolve such disputes favourably, the 
resulting litigation could have a material adverse impact on the Combined Group’s financial performance, 
cash flow and results of operations.
(s)
Enforceability of judgments
A majority of the assets and subsidiaries of the Combined Group are located outside of Canada and 
Australia. Accordingly, it may be difficult for investors to enforce within Canada or Australia any 
judgments obtained against the Combined Group including judgments predicated upon the civil liability 
provisions of applicable Canadian securities laws. Consequently, investors may be effectively prevented 
from pursuing remedies against the Combined Group under applicable Canadian corporate or securities 
laws, Australian laws or otherwise.
The Combined Group’s insurance will not cover all potential losses, liabilities and damage 
related to its business and certain risks are uninsured or uninsurable
The Combined Group’s business will be subject to a number of risks and hazards generally, including 
adverse environmental conditions and pollution, industrial accidents, labour disputes, unusual or
(t)
88
unexpected geological conditions, ground or slope failures, cave-ins, changes in the political or 
regulatory environment and natural phenomena such as inclement weather conditions, floods, 
earthquakes and dust storms. Such occurrences could result in damage to mineral properties or 
production facilities, personal injury or death, environmental damage to the Combined Group’s properties 
or others, delays in mining, monetary losses and possible legal liability.
Although the Combined Group will maintain insurance to protect against certain risks in such amounts as 
the Combined Group considers to be reasonable, the insurance may not cover all the potential risks 
associated with the Combined Group’s operations and insurance coverage may not continue to be 
available or may not be adequate to cover any resulting liability. It is not always possible to obtain 
insurance against all such risks and the Combined Group may decide not to insure against certain risks 
because of high premiums or other reasons. Moreover, insurance against risks such as environmental 
pollution or other hazards as a result of exploration and production is not generally available to us or to 
other companies in the mining industry on acceptable terms. Losses from these events may cause the 
Combined Group to incur significant costs that could have a material adverse effect upon the Combined 
Group’s financial performance and results of operations or otherwise affect the Combined Group’s 
insurability and reputation in the market.
If the Combined Group incurs losses not covered or not fully covered by its insurance policies, such 
losses may adversely affect the Combined Group’s business, operating results and financial condition.
(u)
Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates could significantly affect the Combined Group’s 
business, financial condition, results of operations and liquidity
The Combined Group’s expected future revenue, if any, will be in US dollars and while a significant 
portion of the Combined Group’s costs are in US dollars, a significant component is also in the local 
currency of Senegal and Burkina Faso, the CFA Franc, which is pegged to the Euro. Also, future capital 
raised by the Combined Group from offerings of securities or other financing arrangements may be in 
Canadian dollars, Australian dollars or another currency. As a result of the use of these different 
currencies, the Combined Group is subject to the risk of foreign currency fluctuations, which are affected 
by a number of factors that are beyond its control. These factors include economic conditions in the 
relevant country and elsewhere, and the outlook for interest rates, inflation and other economic factors. 
The prices of local materials and wages can be affected by currency exchange rates, which could 
negatively impact the Combined Group’s production costs. In addition, the Combined Group’s operations 
may have assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the US dollar, with translation 
foreign exchange gains and losses included from these balances in the determination of profit or loss. In 
the event that the Combined Group sells commodities and incurs costs in currencies other than US 
dollars, it will create exposure at the operational level, which may affect the Combined Group’s 
profitability as exchange rates fluctuate. Therefore, exchange rate movements in the Australian dollar, 
CFA Franc, Euro and other currencies may materially affect the Combined Group’s financial position and 
operating results. Currently, the Combined Group has not hedged against fluctuations in exchange rates, 
however, it may do so at a later date. If the Combined Group were to choose to hedge exchange rate 
risk, there is no assurance that it would be successful in reducing its exposure to currency fluctuations.
(v)
Licensing and other regulatory requirements in Senegal, Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire may be 
subject to amendment or reform which could make compliance more challenging
The Combined Group’s current and future operations will be subject to licenses, regulations and 
approvals of Senegalese, Burkinabe and Ivorian governmental authorities for exploration, development, 
construction, operation, production, marketing, pricing, transportation and storage of oil, taxation and 
environmental and health and safety matters. The Combined Group cannot guarantee that such licenses 
applied for will be granted or, if granted, will not be subject to possibly onerous conditions. Any changes 
to exploration and production, or production licenses, regulations and approvals, or their availability to 
the Combined Group may adversely affect its assets, plans, targets and projections.
(w)
The Combined Group requires licenses, permits and approvals from various governmental 
authorities to conduct its operations, any loss of which could have a material adverse effect on 
the Combined Group’s business
The Combined Group’s current and future operations require license, approvals and permits from 
various governmental authorities and such operations are and will be subject to laws and regulations 
governing prospecting, development, mining, production, exports, taxes, labour standards, occupational 
health, waste disposal, toxic substances, land use, surface rights, environmental protection, safety and 
other matters, and dependent upon the grant, or as the case may be, the maintenance of appropriate 
licenses, concessions, leases, permits and regulatory consents which may be withdrawn or made 
subject to limitations. The maintaining of tenements, obtaining renewals, or getting tenements granted,
89
often depends on the Combined Group being successful in obtaining required statutory approvals for the 
proposed activities and that the licenses, concessions, leases, permits or regulatory consents the 
Combined Group holds will be renewed as and when required. There is no assurance that such 
renewals will be given as a matter of course and there is no assurance that new conditions will not be 
imposed in connection therewith.
In addition, in Senegal, at each renewal of an exploration permit, the area of its perimeter is reduced by 
at least 25%. There can be no assurance that at the time of the renewal of the Combined Group’s 
exploration permits that the perimeter of the permit will not be reduced by more than 25%. In addition, in 
order to mine areas in the Combined Group’s Regional Land Package, it will need to obtain an 
exploitation permit or a mining concession, and there is no assurance that either will be obtained.
Companies engaged in the development and operation of mines and related facilities generally 
experience increased costs, and delays in production and other schedules as a result of the need to 
comply with applicable laws, regulations and permitting requirements. There can be no assurance that 
approvals and permits required to commence production on the Combined Group’s future mining 
properties or interests will be obtained. Additional permits and studies, which may include environmental 
impact studies conducted before permits can be obtained, may be necessary prior to operation of the 
properties in which we have interests and there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain or 
maintain all necessary licenses, approvals and permits that may be required to commence construction, 
development or operation of mining facilities at these properties on terms which enable operations to be 
conducted at economically justifiable costs.
Any inability to conduct the Combined Group’s mining operations pursuant to applicable authorisations 
would materially reduce the Combined Group’s production and cash flow.
(x)
The Combined Group’s workforce may be exposed to widespread pandemic
The Combined Group’s Sabodala mine site is situated in the Sabodala region of Senegal, a remote part 
of the country. The Combined Group’s Sabodala mine camp and operations represent a concentration of 
personnel working and residing in close proximity to one another. Further, the Sabodala mine site 
receives frequent visitors from all over the world, and a number of expatriate employees frequently travel 
abroad. Should an employee or visitor become infected with a serious illness that has the potential to 
spread rapidly, this could place the Combined Group’s Sabodala workforce at risk.
The 2014 outbreak of the Ebola virus in several African countries is one example of such an illness. 
Teranga takes every precaution to strictly follow industrial hygiene and occupational health guidelines, 
and medical services are in place along with pandemic management protocols. There can be no 
assurance that a similar virus or another infectious illness will not impact the Combined Group’s 
personnel and ultimately its operations.
(y)
The Combined Group’s operations are subject to stringent environmental laws and regulations 
that could significantly limit its ability to conduct its business
All phases of the Combined Group’s Sabodala operations are subject to environmental regulation in 
Senegal. These regulations mandate, among other things, the maintenance of air and water quality 
standards and land reclamation, and also set limitations on the generation, transportation, storage and 
disposal of solid and hazardous waste. Environmental legislation in Senegal is evolving in a manner 
which will likely result in stricter operating standards and enforcement, restrictions on future exploration 
activities and reclamation obligations, increased fines and penalties for non-compliance, more stringent 
environmental assessments of proposed projects, and a heightened degree of responsibility for 
companies and their officers, directors and employees. There is no assurance that future changes in 
environmental regulation, if any, will not adversely affect the Combined Group’s Sabodala operations. In 
addition, future spills and environmental matters may arise, and environmental hazards may exist on the 
properties on which the Combined Group hold interests which are unknown to Teranga or Gryphon at 
present and which have been caused by previous or existing owners or operators of the properties or 
other third parties.
Environmental licenses, approvals and permits are currently and may in the future be required in 
connection with the Combined Group’s operations. To the extent such licenses, approvals or permits are 
required and not obtained, the Combined Group may be curtailed or prohibited from continuing the 
mining operations or from proceeding with planned exploration or development of mineral properties.
Failure to comply with applicable environmental laws, regulations and permitting requirements may result 
in enforcement actions thereunder, including orders issued by regulatory or judicial authorities causing 
operations to cease or be curtailed, and may include corrective measures requiring capital expenditures,
90
installation of additional equipment or remedial actions. Parties engaged in mining operations or in the 
exploration or development of mineral properties may be required to compensate those suffering loss or 
damage by reason of mining activities and civil or criminal fines or penalties may be imposed for 
violations of applicable laws, regulations or permitting requirements.
Amendments to current laws, regulations and permits governing operations and activities of mining and 
exploration companies, or more stringent implementation thereof, could have a material adverse impact 
on the Combined Group and cause increases in exploration expenses, capital expenditures or 
production costs, or reduction in levels of production at producing properties, or abandonment, 
substantial limits or delays in development of new mining properties.
(z)
Actual costs of reclamation are uncertain, and higher than expected costs could negatively 
impact the Combined Group’s results of operations and financial position
The Combined Group’s operations are subject to reclamation plans that establish the Combined Group’s 
obligations to reclaim properties after minerals have been mined from a site. These obligations represent 
significant future costs for the Combined Group and will be evaluated by the Combined Group on an 
annual basis.
As of 31 December 2015, the total estimated reclamation liability for Teranga’s mines (based on the 
footprint disturbed at the end of 2015) was approximately US $27.0 million on a discounted basis. 
Reclamation bonds or other forms of financial assurance are often required to secure reclamation 
activities. Currently, the Government of Senegal has not required Teranga to post any reclamation bond, 
guarantee or other financial sureties for future reclamation and rehabilitation obligations, but there can 
be no assurance that a reclamation bond, guarantee or surety may not be required in the future. If a 
reclamation bond is required, governing authorities can require companies to periodically recalculate the 
amount of a reclamation bond and may require bond amounts to be increased. It may be necessary to 
revise the planned reclamation expenditures and the operating plan for the mine in order to fund an 
increase to a reclamation bond. Reclamation bonds represent only a portion of the total amount of 
money that will be spent on reclamation over the life of a mine operation. The actual costs of reclamation 
set out in mine plans are estimates only and may not represent the actual amounts that will be required 
to complete all reclamation activity. If actual costs are significantly higher than estimates, it could have a 
material adverse effect on the Combined Group’s results from operations and financial position.
(aa)
The Combined Group will be subject to a variety of risks associated with joint ventures, which 
could result in a material adverse effect on its future growth, results of operations and financial 
position
Exploration, development and mining projects are often conducted through joint ventures and, in some 
cases, the title to such projects is in the name of the joint venture partner. In particular, several of the 
Combined Group’s exploration projects are currently being conducted with joint venture partners, some 
of them as title holders of the applicable permit, and it is expected that the Combined Group will continue 
to work with joint venture partners in the future. Joint venture arrangements may require the unanimous 
approval of the parties to the joint venture or their representatives for certain fundamental decisions 
relating to the governance and operations of the joint venture. This means that a party may have a veto 
right, or similar power, with respect to such decisions which could lead to a deadlock and negatively 
impact or limit the Combined Group’s business operations or financial position in the future. In addition, 
in certain instances, the Combined Group’s joint venture partners may unilaterally withdraw from its joint 
ventures.
(bb)
Mineral rights or surface rights to the Combined Group’s properties could be challenged or 
breached, which could have a material adverse effect on the Combined Group’s production and 
results of operations
The acquisition of title to mineral properties and ongoing compliance therewith is a very detailed and 
time-consuming process and may be disputed. There can be no assurances that the Combined Group’s 
interest in its properties is free from title defects or that the material contracts between the Combined 
Group and (the entities owned or controlled by) the relevant governments will not be unilaterally altered 
or revoked. Third parties may have valid claims underlying portions of the Combined Group’s interest, 
including prior unregistered liens, agreements, transfers or claims, and title may be affected by, among 
other things, undetected defects. For example, although the expanded Sabodala Mining Concession 
permits the Combined Group to explore and mine Niakafiri deposit, further exploration or mining will 
necessitate the physical displacement of Sabodala village, a population of approximately 3,000 persons. 
As a result, the Combined Group may be constrained in its ability to operate, or to enforce its rights with 
respect to, the Combined Group’s properties, including the area containing the Niakafiri deposit.
91
Further, the Governments of Senegal, Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire may fail to respect the contractual 
and statutory commitments it has made to Gryphon and Teranga (and their subsidiaries), respectively, in 
regards to their ability to explore, mine and operate their properties in Senegal,  Burkina Faso and Côte 
d'Ivoire. In such circumstances appeals to international arbitration may be pursued but the results and 
timing of such appeal cannot be predicted at this time. Therefore, there is no assurance that the 
Combined Group’s rights and title interests will not be revoked or significantly altered to the Combined 
Group’s detriment or that the rights and title interests will not be challenged or impugned by third parties 
or the Governments of Senegal, Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire directly.
(cc)
The Combined Group may be unable to identify or complete desirable acquisitions, investments 
or divestitures, and may be unsuccessful in integrating businesses and assets that the 
Combined Group may acquire
The Combined Group may consider making additional strategic acquisitions, divestitures or investments 
as a means of pursuing its corporate strategy. Acquisitions may be made by using available cash, 
incurring debt, issuing common shares in the capital of the Combined Group or other securities, or any 
combination of these. This could limit the Combined Group’s flexibility to raise capital, to operate, explore 
and develop its properties and make other acquisitions. In addition, when evaluating potential 
acquisitions or investments, the Combined Group cannot be certain that it will have correctly identified 
the risks and costs inherent in the acquired business or opportunity.
It is possible that the Combined Group may not identify suitable opportunities, or if it does identify 
suitable opportunities, that the Combined Group may not complete those transactions on terms 
commercially acceptable to the Combined Group or at all. The inability to identify suitable acquisition 
targets or divestiture opportunities or investments or the inability to complete such transactions could 
materially and adversely affect the Combined Group’s competitiveness and growth prospects. If the 
Combined Group successfully completes an acquisition or investment, the Combined Group could face 
difficulties managing the investment or integrating the acquisition into its operations. There can be no 
assurance that the Combined Group will be able to achieve the strategic purpose or benefits of such an 
acquisition or investment. If the Combined Group successfully completes a divestiture, there can be no 
assurance that it will obtain favourable consideration for such divestiture. These difficulties could disrupt 
the Combined Group’s ongoing business, distract its management and employees, and increase its 
expenses, any of which could materially and adversely affect the Combined Group’s business and 
results of operations.
(dd)
The Combined Group’s activities in Senegal, Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire in West Africa 
subject it to various political, economic and other risks that could negatively impact the 
Combined Group’s operations and financial condition
The Combined Group’s projects are located in Senegal, Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire in West Africa. 
The Combined Group’s tenure over the property rights and the conditions under which it operates, both 
during and after the exploration stage, are subject to the jurisdiction of the Governments of Senegal, 
Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire and in some cases political subdivisions within those countries. The laws 
and regulations governing the Combined Group’s tenure and operations are subject to alteration, and an 
adverse alteration to those laws and regulations could have a material adverse effect on the Combined 
Group. In addition, exposure of the Combined Group’s projects and operations to political risk comprises 
part of the evaluations, perceptions and sentiments of investors. An adverse change in investors’ or 
potential investors’ tolerance of political risk could have a material adverse effect on the Combined 
Group. Although the Combined Group believes it has good relations with the Governments of Senegal, 
Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire, there can be no assurance that the actions of present or future 
governments will not materially adversely affect the Combined Group’s business or financial condition.
Given the conduct of the Combined Group’s operations in West Africa, the Combined Group is exposed 
to various levels of political, economic and other natural and man-made risks and uncertainties, over 
which it has no or limited control. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, economic, 
social or political instability, terrorism, hostage taking, military repression, labour unrest, the risks of war 
or other forms of civil unrest, expropriation and nationalisation, illegal mining, renegotiation, nullification 
or adoption of new laws or regulations concerning existing concessions, licenses, permits and/or 
contracts, extreme fluctuations in currency exchange rates, high rates of inflation, changes in taxation 
policies, restrictions on foreign exchange and repatriation, validity of export rights and payment of duties, 
changing political conditions, currency controls, customs regulations policies, changes or adoption of 
new laws affecting foreign ownership, government participation or control or working conditions and 
governmental regulations that favour or require the awarding of contracts to local contractors or require 
foreign contractors to employ citizens of, or purchase supplies from, a particular jurisdiction.
92
Changes, if any, in mining or investment policies or shifts in political attitudes in any jurisdiction in which 
the Combined Group operates may adversely affect its operations or profitability and viability. Operations 
may be affected in varying degrees by government regulations with respect to, but not limited to, 
restrictions on prospecting, development, production, price controls, export controls, currency 
remittance, income taxes, royalties, expropriation of property, foreign investment, maintenance of claims, 
environmental legislation, land use, forestry, land claims of local people, water use and mine safety.
Failure to comply strictly with applicable laws, regulations and local practices relating to mineral rights 
applications and tenure, could result in loss, reduction or expropriation of entitlements, or the imposition 
of additional local or foreign parties as joint venture partners with carried or other interests. The 
occurrence of these various factors and uncertainties cannot be predicted and any of them could have 
an adverse effect on the Combined Group’s operations or profitability.
In addition, the Government of Senegal holds a 10% free-carried interest in SGO, Teranga’s subsidiary 
which operates the Sabodala gold mine and actions that require the approval of its board of directors, 
which includes two representatives of the Government of Senegal. Further, if any of the Combined 
Group’s current or future exploration licenses are converted into a mining concession, pursuant to the 
Senegal Mining Code the Combined Group will be required to provide a 10% free-carried interest in the 
entity granted the concession to the Government of Senegal and provide board representation.
(ee)
The Combined Group may be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of foreign courts or may not be 
successful in subjecting foreign persons to the jurisdiction of courts in Canada which could 
hinder it from enforcing its rights
In the event of a dispute arising at the Combined Group’s Senegalese operations including in relation to 
the Sabodala Mining Concession and the Sabodala Mining Convention dated 7 April 2015, the 
Combined Group may be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of foreign courts or may not be successful 
in subjecting foreign persons to the jurisdiction of courts in Canada. The Combined Group may also be 
hindered or prevented from enforcing its rights with respect to a governmental entity or instrumentality 
because of the doctrine of sovereign immunity. The dispute provisions of the Sabodala Mining 
Convention stipulate that any dispute between the parties thereto is to be submitted to international 
arbitration. However, there can be no assurance that a particular governmental entity or instrumentality 
will either comply with the provisions of these or any other agreements or voluntarily submit to 
arbitration. The Combined Group’s inability to enforce its rights could have an adverse effect on the 
Combined Group’s future cash flows, earnings, results of operations and financial condition.
Further, any dispute with Senegalese, Burkinabe or Ivorian governmental authorities may also adversely 
affect the Combined Group’s relationship with the government, which could impact the development and 
operation of its current and future projects in those countries.
(ff)
Uncertainties in the interpretation and application of laws and regulations in the countries in 
which the Combined Group operates may affect the Combined Group’s ability to comply with 
such laws and regulations, which may increase the risks with respect to its operations
The courts in Senegal, Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire may offer less certainty as to the judicial outcome 
or a more protracted judicial process than is the case in more established economies. Businesses can 
become involved in lengthy court cases over simple issues when rulings are not clearly defined, and the 
poor drafting of laws and excessive delays in the legal process for resolving issues or disputes 
compound such problems. Accordingly, the Combined Group could face risks such as: (i) effective legal 
redress in the courts of Senegal, Burkina Faso or Côte d'Ivoire being more difficult to obtain, whether in 
respect of a breach of law or regulation, or in a contract or an ownership dispute, (ii) a higher degree of 
discretion on the part of governmental authorities and therefore less certainty, (iii) the lack of judicial or 
administrative guidance on interpreting applicable rules and regulations, (iv) inconsistencies or conflicts 
between and within various laws, regulations, decrees, orders and resolutions, or (v) relative 
inexperience of the judiciary and courts in such matters.
Enforcement of laws in Senegal, Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire may depend on and be subject to the 
interpretation placed upon such laws by the relevant local authority, and such authority may adopt an 
interpretation of an aspect of local law which differs from the advice that has been given to the Combined 
Group by local lawyers or even previously by the relevant local authority itself. Furthermore, there is 
limited relevant case law providing guidance on how courts would interpret such laws and the application 
of such laws to the Combined Group’s contracts, joint ventures, licenses, license applications or other 
arrangements. Thus, there can be no assurance that contracts, joint ventures, licenses, license 
applications or other legal arrangements will not be adversely affected by the actions of foreign 
government authorities and the effectiveness of and enforcement of such arrangements, including 
provisions in the Sabodala Mining Concession and the Sabodala Mining Convention.
93
(gg)
The Combined Group’s ability to repatriate funds from Senegal or any other foreign country may 
be hindered by the legal restriction of the countries in which it operates
The Combined Group expects to generate cash flow and profits at its foreign subsidiaries, and it may 
need to repatriate funds from those subsidiaries to fulfil its business plans, in particular in relation to 
ongoing expenditures at the Combined Group’s Senegalese development assets, and make debt service 
payments. In addition, at times the Combined Group will be required to make cash deposits to support 
bank guarantees of its obligations under certain leases or amounts the Combined Group owes to certain 
vendors from whom it purchases goods and services. These cash deposits are not available for other 
uses as long as the bank guarantees are outstanding. As a result, the Combined Group may not be able 
to repatriate funds, or may incur tax payments or other costs when doing so, due to legal restrictions or 
tax requirements at local subsidiary levels or at the parent company level, which could be material. In 
light of the foregoing factors, the amount of cash that appears on the Combined Group’s balance sheet 
may overstate the amount of liquidity it has available to meet its business or debt obligations.
Although Teranga has not historically experienced difficulties in repatriating capital, there is no 
assurance that the Government of Senegal or any other foreign country in which it may operate in the 
future will not impose additional restrictions on the repatriation of earnings to foreign entities. Any 
inability to repatriate funds could have a material adverse effect on the Combined Group’s liquidity. As of 
2015 and beyond, the Combined Group is required to repatriate 100% of gold proceeds into Senegal in 
compliance with applicable exchange control regulations.
(hh)
The Combined Group’s directors may have interests that conflict with its interests
Certain of the Combined Group’s directors are, and may continue to be, involved in the mining and 
mineral exploration industry through their direct and indirect participation in companies, partnerships or 
joint ventures which are potential competitors of the Combined Group. Situations may arise in 
connection with potential acquisitions or investments where the other interests of these directors may 
conflict with the Combined Group’s interests. The Combined Group’s directors with conflicts of interest 
will be subject to and will follow the procedures set out in applicable corporate and securities legislation, 
regulations, rules and policies.
(ii)
The Combined Group may be unable to compete successfully with other mining companies
The mining industry is competitive in all of its phases. The Combined Group competes with other 
companies, some which have greater financial and other resources than the Combined Group and, as a 
result, may be in a better position to compete for future business opportunities. The Combined Group 
competes with other mining companies for the acquisition of mineral claims, leases and other mineral 
interests as well as for the recruitment and retention of qualified employees and other personnel. There 
can be no assurance that the Combined Group can compete effectively with these companies.
(jj)
The consequences of a mine closure could materially and adversely affect the Combined 
Group’s business and results of operations
In the future the Combined Group may be required to close the mine it operates. The key risks for mine 
closure include, without limitation, the (i) long-term management of permanent engineered structures 
and acid rock drainage; (ii) achievement of environmental closure standards; (iii) orderly retrenchment of 
employees and contractors; and (iv) relinquishment of the site with associated permanent structures and 
community development infrastructure and programs to new owners. The successful completion of these 
items is dependent on the ability to successfully implement negotiated agreements with the relevant 
government, community and employees. The consequences of a difficult closure range from increased 
closure costs and handover delays to ongoing environmental impacts and damage to corporate 
reputation if desired outcomes cannot be achieved, which could materially and adversely affect the 
Combined Group’s business and results of operations.
(kk)
The outbreak, or threatened outbreak, of any severe communicable disease in Senegal. Burkina 
Faso or Côte d'Ivoire could materially and adversely affect the overall business environment in 
Senegal or Burkina Faso
The outbreak, or threatened outbreak, of any severe communicable disease including Ebola, in Senegal, 
Burkina Faso or Côte d'Ivoire could materially and adversely affect the overall business environment in 
Senegal or Burkina Faso, particularly if such outbreak is inadequately controlled. This in turn could 
materially and adversely affect domestic labour supply. As substantially all of the Combined Group’s 
revenue is currently derived from the Combined Group’s Senegal operations, any labour shortages in 
Senegal could materially and adversely affect the Combined Group’s business and results of operations. 
In addition, if any of the Combined Group’s employees is affected by any severe communicable disease,
94
it could adversely affect or disrupt the Combined Group’s production and materially and adversely affect 
its results of operations as the Combined Group may be required to close its facilities to prevent the 
spread of the disease. The spread of any severe communicable disease in Senegal or Burkina Faso 
may also affect the operations of the Combined Group’s suppliers, which could materially and adversely 
affect its business and results of operations.
In particular, malaria and other diseases such as HIV/AIDS represent a serious threat to maintaining a 
skilled workforce in the mining industry throughout Africa and are a major healthcare challenge faced by 
the Combined Group’s operations in Africa. There can be no assurance that the Combined Group will 
not lose members of its workforce or see its workforce man-hours reduced or incur increased medical 
costs as a result of these health risks, which could materially and adversely affect the Combined Group’s 
business and results of operations.
95
9.  Australian tax implications of the
Scheme
96
9.1
Australian taxation outline
The following is a general description of the Australian tax consequences of the Scheme (assuming it 
becomes Effective).  The comments set out below are relevant only to those Shareholders who hold 
their Gryphon Shares on capital account.  The description is based upon the Australian law and 
administrative practice in effect at the date of this Scheme Booklet, but is general in nature and is not 
intended to be an authoritative or complete statement of the laws applicable to the particular 
circumstances of a Shareholder.
The information below does not apply to Scheme Participants:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
who hold their Gryphon Shares on revenue account or as trading stock, such as banks and 
share trading entities;
who are temporary residents of Australia for Australian taxation purposes;
who hold their Gryphon Shares in connection with a business carried on through a permanent 
establishment outside their country of residence;
in respect of any performance rights or share appreciation rights in Gryphon; or
are subject to the taxation of financial arrangements rules in Division 230 of the Income Tax 
Assessment Act 1997 (Cth) in relation to gains and losses on their Gryphon Shares.
Gryphon Shareholders should seek independent professional advice in relation to their particular 
circumstances.  This taxation advice should specifically consider whether the Gryphon Shareholder is 
entitled to CGT scrip-for-scrip rollover relief in connection with the Scheme.
Shareholders who are tax residents of a country other than Australia (whether or not they are also 
residents, or are temporary residents, of Australia for tax purposes) should take into account the tax 
consequences of the Scheme under the laws of their country of residence, as well as under Australian 
law.
9.2
Australian resident shareholders
(a)
Australian Capital Gains Tax (CGT)
The Scheme will result in the disposal by Gryphon Shareholders of their Gryphon Shares to Teranga.  
This change in the ownership of the Gryphon Shares will constitute a CGT event A1 for Australian CGT 
purposes.
The date of disposal of the Gryphon Shares for CGT purposes will be the Implementation Date.
(b)
Calculation of capital gain or capital loss
Shareholders may make a capital gain on the disposal of Gryphon Shares to the extent that the capital 
proceeds from the disposal of the Gryphon Shares are more than the ‘cost base’ of those Gryphon 
Shares (the availability of CGT scrip-for-scrip rollover relief is discussed below).  Conversely, 
Shareholders may make a capital loss to the extent that the capital proceeds are less than their ‘reduced 
cost base’ of those Gryphon Shares.
•
Cost base
The ‘cost base’ of the Gryphon Shares generally includes the cost of acquisition and any 
incidental costs of acquisition and disposal that are not deductible to the Shareholder.  The 
‘reduced cost base’ of the Gryphon Shares is usually determined in a similar, but not identical, 
manner.
•
Capital proceeds
The capital proceeds received in respect of the disposal of each Share should be the market 
value of the 0.169 Teranga CDIs or, if elected, 0.169 Teranga Shares, received per Gryphon 
Share.
97
(c)
CGT discount
Australian resident Scheme Participants who are individuals, complying superannuation entities, 
trustees or life insurance companies may be entitled to reduce the amount of any capital gain made on 
the disposal of their Gryphon Shares if they have held their Gryphon Shares for at least 12 months 
before the Implementation Date (this reduction is referred to as the CGT discount).
The CGT discount, if it is available, is applied only after any available capital losses have been applied 
to reduce the capital gain.
The discount rate is 50% for individuals and trustees, and 33.3% for complying superannuation entities 
and life insurance companies (where the life insurance company qualifies for the CGT discount).
The CGT discount is not available to Scheme Participants:
•
•
that are companies; or
who acquired their Gryphon Shares before 21 September 1999 where the Scheme Participant 
chose to index the cost base of their Gryphon Shares for CGT purposes.
Capital gains and capital losses made by a Scheme Participant in a year of income from all sources are 
aggregate to determine whether they make a net capital gain or capital loss for the year of income. A net 
capital loss is not deductible from the assessable income for a Scheme Participant. However, a net 
capital loss may be able to be carried forward to offset capital gains made by the Scheme Participant in 
future years of income, subject to various requirements being met.
(d)
CGT roll-over relief
Australian resident Scheme Participants who participate in the Scheme may be eligible for CGT scrip-
for-scrip rollover relief.
In broad terms, eligible Scheme Participants who choose to obtain CGT scrip-for-scrip rollover relief 
disregard the CGT consequences of disposing of their Gryphon Shares under the Scheme, including the 
capital gain or capital loss that arises.
Scheme Participants will generally need to choose CGT scrip-for-scrip rollover relief before lodging their 
income tax return for the year of income in which the CGT event happens. This should, as discussed 
above, be the year of income in which the Implementation Date occurs.
Choosing to obtain CGT rollover relief can simply be evidenced by excluding the relevant capital gain in 
respect of which the CGT rollover relief is chosen from the Scheme Participant’s tax return.
The receipt by Scheme Participants of Teranga CDIs rather than the underlying Teranga Shares should 
not preclude qualification for the CGT rollover relief on the basis that the Teranga CDIs will be CHESS 
Units of Foreign Securities.
(e)
Future disposal of Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares
A Scheme Participant may wish to dispose of any Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares acquired under the 
Scheme at a later time. If the Scheme Participant chose to obtain CGT rollover relief on the disposal of 
their Gryphon Shares under the Scheme, the cost base and acquisition date of the Teranga CDIs or 
Teranga Shares they acquired under the Scheme may be different.
In particular, for those Scheme Participants who were eligible for and chose to obtain CGT rollover relief 
in respect of their Gryphon Shares, the CGT rollover relief rules will determine the cost base of any 
Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares and their time of acquisition.
In general terms, where CGT rollover relief is chosen, the cost base of the Teranga CDIs or Teranga 
Shares will be equal to the existing cost base of the Shares exchanged under the Scheme.
In those circumstances, each Teranga CDI or Teranga Share should also be deemed to have been 
acquired by the relevant Scheme Participant on the same date as the date the original Gryphon Share 
which gave rise to the entitlement to the Teranga CDI or Teranga Share was acquired. This deemed 
acquisition date will be relevant for indexation or the availability of the CGT discount concession. For all
98
other CGT purposes, Scheme Participants should be taken to have acquired their Teranga CDIs or 
Teranga Shares at the time they are issued, which should be the Implementation Date.
Where CGT rollover relief is not chosen or is not available, the cost base of the Teranga CDIs or 
Teranga Shares should be equal to the market value of the Gryphon Shares exchanged under the 
Scheme. In this case, the Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares should be taken to have been acquired at 
the time they are issued, which should be the Implementation Date.
9.3
Non-resident shareholders
For a Gryphon Shareholder who:
(a)
(b)
is not a resident of Australia for Australian tax purposes; and
does not hold their Gryphon Shares in carrying on a business through a permanent 
establishment in Australia;
the disposal of Gryphon Shares will generally only result in Australian CGT implications if:
(c)
(d)
that Shareholder together with its associates held an interest of 10% or more in Gryphon at the 
time of disposal or for a 12 month period within 2 years preceding the disposal (referred to as a 
“non-portfolio interest”); and
more than 50% of the market value of Gryphon’s assets is attributable to direct or indirect 
interests in “taxable Australian real property” (as defined in the income tax legislation).
The cost base of the Teranga CDIs or the Teranga Shares for non-resident Shareholders participating in 
the Scheme should be equal to the market value of the Gryphon Shares exchanged under the Scheme.  
The Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares should be taken to have been acquired at the time they are 
issued, which will be the Implementation Date.
If you hold a “non-portfolio” interest in Gryphon, you should obtain independent advice as to the tax 
implications of sale, and whether any protection will be available under a relevant double tax treaty.
A non-resident Shareholder who has previously been a resident of Australia and chose to disregard a 
capital gain or loss on ceasing to be a resident will be subject to Australian CGT consequences on 
disposal of the Gryphon Shares as set out in section 9.2.
9.4
Australian goods and services tax (GST)
Gryphon Shareholders should not be liable to GST in respect of a disposal of those Gryphon Shares 
pursuant to the Scheme.
Shareholders may incur GST on costs (such as third party brokerage and adviser fees) that relate to the 
Scheme.  Shareholders that are registered, or required to be registered, for GST may not be entitled to 
full input tax credits for any GST payable on such costs but may be entitled to “reduced input tax credits” 
(at the rate of 75%) for some acquisitions.  This will depend on each Shareholders’ individual 
circumstances.
9.5
Australian stamp duty
No stamp duty should be payable in any Australian jurisdiction by Gryphon Shareholders in respect of 
the disposal of their Gryphon Shares.
Further, no stamp duty should be payable in any Australian jurisdiction by Gryphon Shareholders in 
respect of the issue to them of Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares provided that no Gryphon Shareholder, 
either directly or when aggregated with interests held by associates of that Gryphon Shareholder, 
obtains an interest in Teranga of 90% or more on issuance of the Teranga CDIs or Teranga Shares to 
them.
99
10.  Additional information
100
This section sets out additional statutory information, as well as some additional information that may be 
of interest to Gryphon Shareholders.
10.1
Substantial Shareholders
As at the close of trading on the date of this Scheme Booklet, the following persons had notified 
Gryphon that they had voting power in 5% or more of Gryphon Shares:
Name
Number of Shares in which they have 
voting power
% of Shares
MM Asset Management Inc.*
39,671,424
Global X Management Company
31,493,217
Teranga Gold Corporation
21,200,000
9.38
7.45
5.01
* MM Asset Management Inc is the beneficial owner of Gryphon Shares held through Macquarie Group Limited as 
nominee.
10.2
Marketable Securities of Gryphon held by or controlled by Directors
No Marketable Securities of Gryphon are held or controlled by Gryphon Directors and no such persons 
are otherwise entitled to such securities as at the date of this Scheme Booklet other than as listed below, 
all of which are held beneficially:
Director
Class of securities
Number of securities
Mel Ashton
Fully paid ordinary shares
Stephen Parsons
Fully paid ordinary shares
Share Appreciation Rights
Performance Rights
Didier Murcia AM
Fully paid ordinary shares
1,000,000
7,036,310
3,551,863
5,000,000
402,173
Each Gryphon Director intends to vote any Gryphon Shares held by or on behalf of him as at the time of 
the Scheme Meeting in favour of the Scheme in the absence of a Superior Proposal.
Except as stated in this section of the Scheme Booklet:
(a)
(b)
(c)
there are no marketable securities of Gryphon held by or on behalf of Gryphon Directors as at 
the date of this Scheme Booklet;
there are no marketable securities of Teranga held by or on behalf of Gryphon Directors as at 
the date of this Scheme Booklet; and
there has been no dealing by any Gryphon Director in any marketable securities of Gryphon or 
Teranga in the four months preceding the date of this Scheme Booklet other than grant of 
5,000,000 Performance Rights to Stephen Parsons.
101
10.3
Benefits and agreements
(a)
Benefits of Managing Director
Under his employment agreement with Gryphon, in the event of a change of control of Gryphon, 
Gryphon is required to pay Stephen Parsons an amount equal to 1% of Gryphon’s market capitalisation 
as at the date of the change of control (capped at $2.5 million).  If the Scheme becomes Effective, this 
will constitute a change of control in Gryphon and Mr Parsons will be entitled to receive a payment of 
approximately $850,000 from Gryphon.
In addition, Stephen Parsons agreed to the deferral of a $325,000 bonus to which he became entitled in 
2013 on the condition that it would be paid upon a change of control of Gryphon.  If the Scheme 
becomes Effective, this will constitute a change of control in Gryphon and Mr Parsons will be entitled to 
receive  payment of this $325,000 from Gryphon in respect of the deferred bonus.
(b)
Benefits in connection with retirement from office
It is not proposed that any payment or other benefit be made or given to any director, secretary or 
executive officer of Gryphon (or of its Related Bodies Corporate) as compensation for loss of, or as 
consideration for, or in connection with his or her retirement from, office in Gryphon or in any of its 
Related Bodies Corporate as a result of the Scheme other than in his or her capacity as a Gryphon 
Shareholder.
Gryphon pays premiums in respect of a directors and officers (D&O) insurance policy for the benefit of 
its Directors and executive officers.
(c)
Agreements connected with or conditional on the Scheme
Except as set out below or otherwise disclosed in this section:
•
•
•
no Gryphon Director has any other interests in a contract entered into by Teranga;
there are no contracts or arrangements between a Gryphon Director and any person, including 
Teranga in connection with or conditional on the outcome of the Scheme; and
no Gryphon Director has a material interest in relation to the Scheme other than in their 
capacity as a Gryphon Shareholder.
10.4
Capital structure of Gryphon
As at the date of this Scheme Booklet, Gryphon has 422,796,447 ordinary shares, 16,390,000 
Performance Rights and 4,737,341 Share Appreciation Rights on issue.
The Performance Rights are all held by current employees of Gryphon.  The Share Appreciation Rights 
are all held by current or former employees of Gryphon.
10.5
Implications of the Scheme for holders of Performance Rights
Under the terms of issue of the 5,000,000 Performance Rights issued to Stephen Parsons on 25 July 
2016, the Gryphon Board has a discretion to determine that the Performance Rights will vest in the 
event of a change of control of Gryphon and on what terms.  The Gryphon Board has exercised its 
discretion to determine that the Performance Rights will vest if Gryphon Shareholders approve the 
Scheme at the Scheme Meeting.
All other Performance Rights will, under their terms of issue, automatically vest if Gryphon Shareholders 
approve the Scheme at the Scheme Meeting.
If Gryphon Shareholders approve the Scheme at the Scheme Meeting then prior to the Record Date, 
Gryphon will issue one Gryphon Share per Performance Right on issue as at the Effective Date so that 
the former holders of Performance Rights will participate in the Scheme as a Gryphon Shareholder and 
receive the Scheme Consideration.
102
10.6
Implications of the Scheme for holders of Share Appreciation Rights
Gryphon and Teranga have entered into private treaty arrangements with each holder of Share 
Appreciation Rights under which the parties agree that, conditional on the Scheme becoming Effective, 
the Share Appreciation Rights will be cancelled and the former holders of Share Appreciation Rights will 
receive share appreciation rights in Teranga on terms that put them in an equivalent economic position.  
The Teranga share appreciation rights will be issued to holders of Share Appreciation Rights on the 
following basis: 
 
•
the number of Teranga share appreciation rights will be the same as the number of Share 
Appreciation Rights held by that holder adjusted only by the Exchange Ratio;
•
•
•
the strike price of the Teranga share appreciation rights will be the same as the strike price of 
the Share Appreciation Rights adjusted only by the Exchange Ratio and by the Canadian dollar 
to Australian dollar exchange rate as at the Implementation Date;
the expiry date of the Teranga share appreciation rights will the same as the expiry date of the 
Share Appreciation Rights; and
the Teranga SARs will not be subject to any vesting conditions (reflecting the fact that the 
Gryphon SARs have all vested).
As discussed in section 10.12(b), ASX has granted Gryphon a waiver in respect of Listing Rule 6.23.2 to 
permit the cancellation of up to a maximum of 4,737,341 Gryphon Share Appreciation Rights for 
consideration without obtaining the approval of Gryphon Shareholders.
10.7
Independent Expert
KPMG Corporate Finance has prepared the Independent Expert’s Report set out in Annexure A of this 
Scheme Booklet advising as to whether, in its opinion, the Scheme is in the best interests of 
Shareholders.
The Independent Expert has concluded that the Scheme is fair and reasonable and therefore is in the 
best interests of Shareholders, in the absence of a superior proposal.
10.8
Consents
The following parties have given and have not withdrawn, before the registration of this Scheme Booklet 
by ASIC, their written consent to be named in this Scheme Booklet in the form and context in which they 
are named:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
King & Wood Mallesons as legal adviser to Gryphon;
Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP as legal adviser to Gryphon (as to Canadian law);
Maxit Capital as financial advisor to Gryphon;
KPMG Corporate Finance as Independent Expert;
Snowden Mining Consultants Pty Ltd as independent technical specialist;
BDO Audit (WA) Pty Ltd as auditor of Gryphon;
Link Market Services Ltd as Gryphon’s Registry;
Teranga;
Ernst & Young LLP as auditor of Teranga;
DLA Piper Australia as legal advisor to Teranga (as to Australian law);
Stikeman Elliott LLP as legal advisor to Teranga (as to Canadian law); and
103
•
Cormark Securities Inc. as financial advisor to Teranga.
KPMG Corporate Finance has also given and has not withdrawn, before the time of registration of this 
Scheme Booklet with ASIC, its written consent to the inclusion of its Independent Expert’s Report in this 
Scheme Booklet in the form and context in which it is included and to all references in this Scheme 
Booklet to that Report in the form and context in which they appear.
Teranga has also given and has not withdrawn, before the time of registration of this Scheme Booklet by 
ASIC, its written consent to the inclusion of the Teranga Information in the form and context in which it is 
included and to all references in this Scheme Booklet to the Teranga Information in the form and context 
in which they appear.
Ernst & Young LLP has also given and not withdrawn, before the time of registration of this Scheme 
Booklet by ASIC, its written consent to the incorporation by reference in the Scheme Booklet of its audit 
report with respect to financial statements of Teranga for the years ended 31 December 2014 and 31 
December 2015.
10.9
Disclaimers
None of the persons referred to in section 10.8 have authorised or caused the issue of this Scheme 
Booklet and do not make or purport to make any statement in this Scheme Booklet other than those 
statements made in the capacity and to the extent the person has provided its consent, as referred to 
above.
To the maximum extent permitted by law, each person referred to in section 10.8 disclaims all liability in 
respect of, makes no representation regarding and takes no responsibility for, any part of this Scheme 
Booklet other than as described in this section with that person’s consent.
The Teranga Information has been prepared by and is the responsibility of Teranga.  Gryphon does not 
assume responsibility for the accuracy or completeness of the Teranga Information.
10.10  Fees
Each of the persons named in section 10.8 as performing a function in a professional, advisory or other 
capacity in connection with the Scheme and the preparation of this Scheme Booklet, will be entitled to 
receive professional fees charged in accordance with their normal basis of charging.
The fees for professional services paid or payable by Gryphon to:
•
•
•
•
•
the KPMG Corporate Finance (in respect of the Independent Expert’s Report) is $170,000;
Snowden Mining Consultants Pty Ltd (in respect of the Independent Technical Specialist 
Report which forms Appendix 7 to the Independent Expert’s Report) is $78,075;
King & Wood Mallesons to the date of this Scheme Booklet (including for Court related aspects 
of the Scheme) is approximately $350,000;
Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP to the date of this Scheme Booklet (as legal adviser in relation 
to Canadian law matters) is approximately C$40,000; and
Maxit Capital on implementation of the Scheme is a success fee of 2% of the transaction value, 
which based on the last traded price of Teranga CDIs on ASX on the Pre-Announcement Date. 
is approximately $1.79 million.
With respect to the fees for professional services paid or payable to Teranga’s advisors in connection 
with the Scheme:
DLA Piper Australia to the date of this Scheme Booklet (as legal adviser in relation to Australian 
law matters) is approximately $200,000;
Stikeman Elliott LLP to the date of this Scheme Booklet (as legal adviser in relation to Canadian 
law matters) is approximately C$85,000; and
•
•
104
•
Cormark Securities Inc. (as financial adviser) is approximately C$1,020,000.
10.11  Foreign jurisdictions
The distribution of this Scheme Booklet outside of Australia may be restricted by law and persons who 
come into possession of it should seek advice on and observe any such restrictions.  Any failure to 
comply with such restrictions may contravene applicable securities law.  Gryphon disclaims all liabilities 
to such persons.  Shareholders who are nominees, trustees or custodians are encouraged to seek 
independent advice as to how they should proceed.  No action has been taken to register or qualify this 
Scheme Booklet or any aspect of the acquisition in any jurisdiction outside of Australia.
10.12  ASIC relief and ASX waivers
(a)
ASIC relief
Paragraph 8302(h) of Part 3 of Schedule 8 of the Corporations Regulations requires this Scheme 
Booklet to set out whether, within the knowledge of the Directors, the financial position of Gryphon has 
materially changed since the date of the last balance sheet laid before the company’s annual general 
meeting or sent to Gryphon Shareholders in accordance with section 314 or 317 of the Corporations Act, 
being 30 June 2015.
ASIC has granted Gryphon relief from this requirement so that this Scheme Booklet only needs to set 
out whether, within the knowledge of the Directors, the financial position of Gryphon has materially 
changed since 31 December 2015 (being the last date of the period to which the financial statements for 
the half year ended 31 December 2015 relate).  See section 4.6 for details of the material changes in the 
financial position of Gryphon since 31 December 2015.
Gryphon will provide a copy of the financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2015 and 
the half year ended 31 December 2015 free of charge to anyone who requests a copy, prior to the 
Scheme being approved by the Court.
(b)
Gryphon ASX waivers
ASX has granted Gryphon a waiver in respect of Listing Rule 6.23.2 to permit the cancellation of up to a 
maximum of 4,737,341 Gryphon Share Appreciation Rights for consideration without obtaining the 
approval of Gryphon Shareholders.
The waiver application was made on the basis that Gryphon Shareholders are provided with information 
about the proposed treatment of the Gryphon Share Appreciation Rights in this Scheme Booklet and are 
therefore able to consider this information when determining whether to vote in favour of the Scheme.  
The waiver is conditional upon the Scheme being approved by the Court.
Further details regarding the treatment of the Gryphon Share Appreciation Rights are set out in 
section 10.6.
(c)
Teranga ASX waivers
Teranga has the benefit of the following waivers:
•
•
•
ASX Listing Rule 1.1, Condition 6: to the extent necessary to permit Teranga to apply for 
quotation only of Teranga CDIs.  ASX Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 6 requires an entity applying 
to list on ASX to seek quotation of all of its securities in its main class;
ASX Listing Rule 7.1: to the extent necessary to permit Teranga to issue securities without 
shareholder approval, subject to the Company complying and remaining subject to the TSX 
Manual with respect to the issue of new securities.  ASX Listing Rule 7.1 provides that an entity 
must not, subject to specified exceptions, issue or agree to issue more securities during any 12 
month period than that amount which represents 15% of the number of fully paid ordinary 
securities on issue at the commencement of that 12 month period;
ASX Listing Rule 10.11: to the extent necessary to permit Teranga to issue or agree to issue 
securities to a related party without shareholder approval subject to Teranga complying with the 
requirements of the TSX Manual and, where Teranga does seek shareholder approval, the 
votes of the relevant related party not being counted in respect of such resolution.  ASX Listing
105
Rule 10.11 requires an entity to obtain shareholder approval before issuing, or agreeing to 
issue, securities to a related party;
•
•
ASX Listing Rule 14.2.1: to the extent necessary to permit Teranga not to provide in its proxy 
form an option for holders of Teranga CDIs to cast a vote against any resolution to elect a 
director or to appoint an auditor subject to Teranga complying with relevant Canadian laws as 
to the content of proxy forms. ASX Listing Rule 14.2.1 requires that a proxy form, in respect of 
each resolution, provides for the security holder to direct the proxy to vote for the resolution, 
vote against the resolution, or abstain from voting on the resolution; and
ASX Listing Rule 14.3: to the extent necessary to permit Teranga to accept nominations for the 
election of directors in accordance with the shareholder proposal provisions of section 137 of 
the Canada Business Corporations Act.  ASX Listing Rule 14.3 requires that an entity must 
accept nominations for the elections of directors up to 35 business days (in the case of a 
meeting that members have requested directors to call, 30 business days) before the date of a 
general meeting at which directors may be elected, unless the entity’s constitution provides 
otherwise.
10.13  Key terms of the Scheme Implementation Agreement
(a)
Overview
Gryphon and Teranga entered into the Scheme Implementation Agreement on 19 June 2016.  The 
Scheme Implementation Agreement sets out the steps required to be taken by Gryphon and Teranga to 
give effect to the Scheme.  Key terms of the Scheme Implementation Agreement are summarised below.
(b)
Conditions Precedent
The Conditions Precedent are summarised in section 3.4 of this Scheme Booklet and are set out in full 
in clause 3.1 of the Scheme Implementation Agreement.
In relation to the Condition Precedent that no Gryphon Material Adverse Event occurs before 8:00am on 
the Second Court Date, it should be noted that a failure to secure the renewal or extension of the Key 
Permits by 8:00am on the Second Court Date would constitute a Gryphon Material Adverse Event.  The 
Key Permits are the Wahgnion Exploitation Licence, the Nogbele Exploration Permit and the Nianka 
Exploration Permit.
The Wahgnion Exploitation Licence expires in August 2016.  Under Article 53 of the Burkina Faso 
Mining Code 2015 a two year extension for the period to begin development and production activities 
can be obtained via a joint decree of the Burkina Faso Ministers of Mines and of Finance.  Gryphon has 
submitted an application to extend the Wahgnion Exploitation Licence.
The Nogbele Exploration Permit and the Nianka Exploration Permit expired on 8 July 2016.  The 
renewal process involves removing the areas which are currently subject to the Wahgnion Exploitation 
Licence from the exploration permit areas.  Gryphon has submitted a formal application under Article 42 
of the Burkina Faso Mining Code 2015 for the renewal of all exploration permits at Banfora with new 
lease boundaries.
On the basis of Gryphon’s extensive discussions with the relevant authorities in Burkina Faso, Gryphon 
has no reason to believe that the extension to the Wahgnion Exploitation Licence and the renewal of the 
Nogbele Exploration Permit and the Nianka Exploration Permit will not be received.  However, there can 
be no guarantee that the renewal and extensions will be received by Gryphon from the relevant 
authorities in Burkina Faso or that they will be received before the Second Court Date.
(c)
No shop
Gryphon has agreed that during the Exclusivity Period it must not, and must ensure that its 
representatives do not, solicit, invite, facilitate, encourage or initiate any Competing Proposal.
(d)
No talk
Gryphon has agreed that during the Exclusivity Period neither it nor its representatives will initiate, 
negotiate or enter into or participate in negotiations or discussions with any person regarding a 
Competing Proposal even if that Competing Proposal was not directly or indirectly solicited, encouraged 
or initiated by Gryphon.  The no talk restriction does not apply if the Gryphon Board has determined in
106
good faith that the Competing Proposal which was not solicited could reasonably be considered to 
become a Superior Proposal or failing to respond to such a Competing Proposal would be likely to 
constitute a breach of their fiduciary duties.
(e)
Notice of Competing Proposal
Gryphon has agreed that during the Exclusivity Period Gryphon must promptly inform Teranga if it or any 
of its representatives receives an unsolicited approach with respect to any Competing Proposal and 
must disclose the general nature of the approach.
(f)
Gryphon Break Fee
Gryphon has agreed to pay Teranga $805,000 if the Scheme does not proceed because:
•
•
•
•
•
•
any Gryphon Director fails to recommend, or recommends against, qualifies their support of or 
withdraws its recommendation or approval of, the Transaction, other than as a result of the 
Independent Expert opining that the Scheme is not in the best interests of Gryphon 
Shareholders or the fact that a Teranga Material Adverse Event has occurred and is continuing;
any Gryphon Director recommends or promotes a Competing Proposal;
the Court fails to approve the Scheme as a result of a material non-compliance by Gryphon 
with any of its obligations under the Scheme Implementation Agreement;
the Effective Date of the Scheme has not occurred prior to the End Date as a consequence of 
non-compliance by Gryphon with any of its obligations under the Scheme Implementation 
Agreement;
a Competing Proposal is announced before the date of the Scheme Meeting, the Scheme is 
not approved by the Gryphon Shareholders at the Scheme Meeting and, as contemplated by 
the Competing Proposal, a third party acquires voting power of 50% or more of Gryphon within 
twelve months of the Competing Proposal being announced; or
Teranga terminates the Scheme Implementation Agreement due to:
o
o
a material breach of a provision of the Scheme Implementation Agreement by 
Gryphon which continues for more than 5 Business Days following notice of such 
breach; or
Gryphon’s breach of its representations and warranties which cannot be remedied 
prior to the Second Court Date.
(g)
Teranga Break Fee
Teranga has agreed to pay Gryphon $805,000 if:
•
•
•
the Court fails to approve the Scheme as a result of a material non-compliance by Teranga with 
any of its obligations under the Scheme Implementation Agreement;
the Effective Date of the Scheme has not occurred prior to the End Date as a consequence of 
non-compliance by Teranga with any of its obligations under the Scheme Implementation 
Agreement; or
Gryphon terminates the Scheme Implementation Agreement due to
o
o
a material breach of the Scheme Implementation Agreement by Teranga which 
continues for more than 5 Business Days following notice of such breach; or
Teranga’s breach of its representations and warranties which cannot be remedied 
prior to the Second Court Date.
107
(h)
Termination by Teranga
Teranga may terminate the Scheme Implementation Agreement:
•
•
•
•
•
if Gryphon breaches any representation or warranty contained in the Scheme Implementation 
Agreement at any time prior to 8:00am on the Second Court Date and either:
o
the breach cannot be remedied prior to 8:00am on the Second Court Date and, had it 
been disclosed to Teranga prior to its entry into the Scheme Implementation 
Agreement, could reasonably be expected to have resulted in Teranga not entering 
into that agreement or entering into it on materially different terms; or
o
the breach amounts to a Gryphon Material Adverse Event;
if, at any time prior to 8:00am on the Second Court Date, a Gryphon Director fails to 
recommend the Scheme or the Transaction or makes or withdraws his or her recommendation 
that Gryphon Shareholders vote in favour of the Scheme or makes a public statement 
indicating that he or she no longer supports the Scheme;
if a Gryphon Prescribed Occurrence occurs prior to 8:00am on the Second Court Date;
if the Gryphon Board recommends a Superior Proposal at any time before 8:00am on the 
Second Court Date; or
if a Competing Proposal for Gryphon is announced, made, or becomes open for acceptance 
and, pursuant to that Competing Proposal, the bidder for Gryphon acquires voting power of 
50% or more of Gryphon and that Competing Proposal is (or has become) free from any 
defeating conditions.
(i)
Termination by Gryphon
Gryphon may terminate the Scheme Implementation Agreement:
•
•
•
•
if Teranga breaches any representation or warranty contained in the Scheme Implementation 
Agreement at any time prior to 8:00am on the Second Court Date and either:
o
the breach cannot be remedied prior to 8:00am on the Second Court Date and, had it 
been disclosed to Gryphon prior to its entry into the Scheme Implementation 
Agreement, could reasonably be expected to have resulted in Gryphon not entering 
into that agreement or entering into it on materially different terms; or
o
the breach amounts to a Teranga Material Adverse Event;
if, at any time prior to the Scheme Meeting, a majority of the Gryphon Directors have changed, 
withdrawn or modified their recommendation because a Superior Proposal has been received;
if the Gryphon Board wishes to, and proceeds to, recommend a Superior Proposal; or
if a Teranga Prescribed Occurrence occurs prior to 8:00am on the Second Court Date.
(j)
Termination by either party
Either party may terminate the Scheme Implementation Agreement:
•
•
if the End Date has passed before the Transaction has been implemented (other than as a 
result of a breach by the terminating party of its obligations under the Scheme Implementation 
Agreement);
if the other party is in material breach of the Scheme Implementation Agreement at any time 
prior to 8:00am on the Second Court Date and the material breach, the non-defaulting party 
has given notice to the defaulting party stating an intention to terminate the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement, and the material breach is not remedied within five Business Days 
from the time the notice was given;
108
•
•
•
if the required majorities of Gryphon Shareholders do not approve the Scheme at the Scheme 
Meeting;
if a Court or other Regulatory Authority has issued an order, decree or ruling or taken other 
action that permanently restrains or prohibits the Transaction and that order, decree, ruling or 
other action has become final and cannot be appealed; or
if there is a breach or non-fulfilment of a condition precedent which is not waived and there is 
failure to agree on an alternative means of completing the Transaction.
10.14  Regulatory
All regulatory approvals that are Conditions Precedent to the Scheme are set out in clause 3.1 of the 
Scheme Implementation Agreement.
As at the date of this Scheme Booklet Teranga has notified Gryphon that it has obtained the necessary 
approvals from TSX in relation to the conditional listing of the Teranga Shares to be issued as Scheme 
Consideration.
In addition, all ASX and ASIC relief approvals or consents that Gryphon considers are necessary to 
implement the Scheme as at the date of this Scheme Booklet have been granted or obtained.
10.15  Deed Poll
Teranga has entered into the Deed Poll in favour of the Shareholders under which Teranga has 
undertaken to issue and provide the Scheme Consideration if the Scheme becomes Effective.
The Deed Poll may be relied upon by any Shareholder despite the fact that they are not a party to it and 
each Shareholder appoints Gryphon as its agents to enforce their rights under the Deed Poll against 
Teranga.
10.16  Other information material to the making of a decision in relation to the Scheme
Except as set out in this Scheme Booklet, so far as your Directors are aware, there is no other 
information material to the making of a decision in relation to the Scheme, being information that is 
within the knowledge of any Director or any director of a Related Entity of Gryphon which has not 
previously been disclosed to Shareholders.
10.17  Supplementary information
Gryphon will issue a supplementary document to this Scheme Booklet if it becomes aware, between the 
date of lodgement of this Scheme Booklet for registration by ASIC and the Effective Date:
•
•
•
•
that a material statement in this Scheme Booklet is false or misleading in a material respect;
that there is a material omission from this Scheme Booklet;
of a significant change affecting a matter included in this Scheme Booklet has occurred; or
of a significant new matter that has arisen which would have been required to be included in 
this Scheme Booklet if it had arisen before the date of lodgement of this Scheme Booklet for 
registration by ASIC.
The form which the supplementary document may take will depend on the nature and timing of the new 
or changed circumstances.
109
11. Glossary
110
The following is a glossary of certain terms used in this Scheme Booklet.
Announcement Date
means the date on which the Scheme proposal was announced on 
ASX, being 20 June 2016.
ASIC
ASX
means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
means ASX Limited (ABN 98 008 624 691) or the Australian Securities 
Exchange, as appropriate.
ASX Listing Rules
means the official listing rules of ASX.
ASX Settlement Rules
means ASX Settlement Operating Rules of ASX Settlement Pty Ltd 
(ABN 49 008 504 532).
Banfora Gold Project
means Gryphon’s 100% owned gold project near Banfora located in the 
south-west of Burkina Faso, West Africa.
Burkina Faso Mining Code 
Consent
means the consent (if any) of the relevant authority in Burkina Faso 
under the Burkina Faso Mining Code 2015 for the deemed transfer of 
the Material Permits resulting from the Transaction.
Business Day
means Monday to Friday inclusive except New Year’s Day, Good 
Friday, Easter Monday, Christmas Day, Boxing Day and any other date 
that the ASX declares is not a business day.
Canadian Securities 
Authorities
CIM or CIM Standards
CDN
Combined Group
Competing Proposal
means the securities regulatory authorities in the provinces of Canada.
means Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy or Petroleum (CIM) 
Standard on Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves, adopted by the 
CIM Council on 20 August 2000.
means CHESS Depositary Nominees Pty Ltd (ABN 75 071 346 506) 
(AFSL 25414), in its capacity as depositary of CHESS Depositary 
Interests under the ASX Settlement Rules.
means Teranga and its Subsidiaries following implementation of the 
Transaction (when Gryphon will be a wholly-owned Subsidiary of 
Teranga).
means any proposal or offer received by Gryphon, any member of the 
Gryphon Group from a third party (other than Teranga or its Related 
Entities) to evaluate or enter into any transaction that is similar to the 
Transaction or under which (other than as required or contemplated by 
the Scheme):
(a)
(b)
(c)
other than with respect to on-market purchases of Gryphon 
Shares with no involvement by Gryphon (or a Related Entity 
of Gryphon), a person would acquire a relevant interest or 
voting power in 50% or more of Gryphon Shares or of the 
securities of any of member of the Gryphon Group;
a person would enter into, buy, dispose of, terminate or 
otherwise deal with any cash settled equity swap or other 
synthetic, economic or derivative transaction connected with 
or relating to 50% or more of Gryphon Shares or of the 
securities of any member of  the Gryphon Group;
a person would directly or indirectly acquire or obtain an 
interest (including an economic interest) in all or a substantial 
part or material part of the business conducted by, or property 
of, the Gryphon Group;
(d)
a person would acquire Control of Gryphon or any material
111
(e)
member of the Gryphon Group; or 
a person may otherwise acquire, or merge with, Gryphon or 
any member of the Gryphon Group (including by way of 
takeover bid, scheme of arrangement, capital reduction, sale 
of assets, sale of securities, strategic alliance, dual listed 
company structure or joint venture).
The variation of a proposal or offer constitutes a proposal or offer for 
the purposes of this definition.
has the meaning given to that term in section 50AA of the Corporations 
Act.
Control
Corporations Act
means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
Corporations Regulations
means the Corporations Regulations 2001 (Cth).
Côte d'Ivoire JVA
Court
Deed Poll
means the joint venture agreement between Teranga and Miminvest, 
pursuant to which Teranga will acquire a 100% interest in four 
exploration permits in the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire.
means the Federal Court of Australia.
means the deed poll dated 15 August 2016 executed by Teranga, set 
out in Annexure D.
Designated Directors
means non-executive directors of Teranga and its affiliates.
Designated Executives
means designated executive of Teranga, including Teranga’s named 
executive officers.
Director
DSU
DSU Plan
Effective
Effective Date
Election Form
End Date
Exchange Ratio
means a director of Gryphon.
means a Teranga deferred share unit.
means the Teranga Deferred Share Unit Plan, adopted on 24 March 
2014.
means, when use in related to the Scheme, the order of the Court 
made under section 411(4)(b) of the Corporations Act in relation to the 
Scheme coming into effect pursuant to section 411(10) of the 
Corporations Act.
means the date on which the Scheme becomes Effective.
means the form accompanying this Scheme Booklet, pursuant to which 
holders of Gryphon Shares (other than Ineligible Shareholders) may 
elect whether to receive their Scheme Consideration in the form of 
Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs.
means 31 December 2016, or such later date as agreed to in writing 
between Gryphon and Teranga.
means the exchange ratio of 0.169 Teranga Shares for each Gryphon 
Share contemplated in the Scheme Consideration.
Excluded Shareholder
means Teranga and any Related Body Corporate.
Franco Nevada
means Franco-Nevada (Barbados) Corporations.
112
Gold Stream Transaction
means a $135 million stream transaction with Franco Nevada 
Corporation to fund Teranga’s acquisition of the balance of OJVG that 
Teranga did not already own, and retire half of Teranga’s then US$30 
million loan facility with Macquarie Bank Limited.
Golouma Mining License
means the mining license granted to OJVG by Decree No. 2010-83 of 
26 January 2010, comprising a 212.6km2 landholding located in the 
Kedougou region of Senegal.
Gryphon
means Gryphon Minerals Limited ACN 107 690 657
Gryphon Board
means the board of directors of Gryphon.
Gryphon Group
means Gryphon and its Related Entities.
Gryphon Information
means all information contained in this Scheme Booklet, other than the 
Teranga Information and the Independent Expert’s Report.
Gryphon Material Adverse 
Event
Gryphon Prescribed 
Occurrence
has the meaning it has in the Scheme Implementation Agreement.
has the meaning it has in the Scheme Implementation Agreement.
Gryphon Share
means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of Gryphon.
Gryphon Shareholder
means each person who is registered on the Register as the holder of 
Gryphon Shares.
Gryphon Share Registry
means the manager from time-to-time of the Register.
Implementation Date
means the fifth Business Day after the Record Date, or such other date 
agreed to in writing between Gryphon and Teranga.
Independent Expert
means KPMG Corporate Finance.
Independent Expert’s 
Report
means the report of the Independent Expert, as set out in Annexure A.
Indicated Mineral Resource  means:
(a)
(b)
for the purposes of the CIM Standards, the meaning given to 
that term in the CIM Standards; and
for the purposes of the JORC Code, the meaning given to that 
term in the JORC Code.
Ineligible Jurisdiction
means any place outside Australia, New Zealand and Canada.
Ineligible Shareholder
means a Gryphon Shareholder whose address shown in the Register is 
in a jurisdiction outside Australia, New Zealand and Canada in which 
Teranga determines, acting reasonably, does not permit the issue of 
the Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs to that Gryphon Shareholder 
either unconditionally or after compliance with terms that Teranga 
reasonably regards as acceptable and practical.
Inferred Mineral Resource
means:
(a)
(b)
for the purposes of the CIM Standards, the meaning given to 
that term in the CIM Standards; and
for the purposes of the JORC Code, the meaning given to that 
term in the JORC Code.
113
JORC Code
means the Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, 
Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves, 2012 edition.
Key Permits
means the following licenses and permits:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Wahgnion Exploitation License
Nogbele Exploration Permit; and
Nianka Exploration Permit.
KPMG Corporate Finance
means KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd (of which 
KPMG Corporate Finance is a division) ABN 43 007 363 215.
LOM
means life of mine.
March 2016 AIF
Material Permits
means ’’the Annual Information Form of Teranga, dated 31 March 
2016.
means the following permits and licences granted under the Burkina 
Faso Mining Code 2015:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Wahgnion Exploitation License;
Nogbele Exploration Permit;
Nianka Exploration Permit;
Nogbele Sud Exploration Permit;
Dierisso Exploration Permit;
Zegudeougou Exploration Permit;
Baniri Exploration Permit;
Intiedougou Exploration Permit; and
Mougue Exploration Permit.
Measured Mineral Resource  means:
(a)
(b)
for the purposes of the CIM Standards, the meaning given to 
that term in the CIM Standards;  and
for the purposes of the JORC Code, the meaning given to that 
term in the JORC Code.
Miminvest
means Miminvest SA.
Mineral Reserve
means, for the purposes of the CIM Standards, the economically 
mineable part of a Measured Mineral Resource or Indicated Mineral 
Resource demonstrated by at least a preliminary feasibility study.  This 
study must include adequate information on mining, processing, 
metallurgical, and economic and other relevant factors that 
demonstrate, at the time of reporting, that economic extraction can be 
justified.  A mineral reserve includes diluting minerals and allowances 
for losses that may occur when the material is mined.
Mineral Resource
means:
(a)
(b)
for the purposes of the CIM Standards, the meaning given to 
that term in the CIM Standards; and
for the purposes of the JORC Code, the meaning given to that 
term in the JORC Code.
NI 43-101
means National Instrument 43-101.
114
Nianka Exploration Permit
means the Nianka Exploration Permit Arrété No. 2013-
133/MME/SG/DGMG originally granted on 8 July 2004.
Nogbele Exploration Permit  means the Nogbele Exploration Permit Arrété No. 2013-
031/MME/SG/DGMG originally granted on 8 July 2004.
Ore Reserves
has the meaning given to that term in the JORC Code.
OJVG
means the Oromin Joint Venture Group.
Performance Right
means a performance right granted by Gryphon.
Pre-Announcement Date
means 17 June 2016, being the last trading day prior to the 
announcement of the Scheme.
Probable Mineral Reserve
Proved/Proven Mineral 
Reserve
means, for the purposes of the CIM Standards, the economically 
mineable part of a Measured Mineral Resource demonstrated by at 
least a preliminary feasibility study.  This study must include adequate 
information in mining, processing, metallurgical, economic and other 
relevant factors that demonstrate, at the time of reporting, that 
economic extraction can be justified.
means, for the purposes of the CIM Standards, the economically 
mineable part of a Measured Mineral Resource demonstrated by at 
least a preliminary feasibility study.  This study must include adequate 
information on mining, processing, metallurgical, economic and other 
relevant factors that demonstrate, at the time of reporting, that 
economic extraction is justified.
Record Date
means the fifth Business Day following the Effective Date.
Regional Land Package
means the regional land package of eight exploration permits held by 
SMC, comprising a total land area of approximately 1,000km².
Register
means the share register of Gryphon kept pursuant to the Corporations 
Act.
Regulatory Authority
includes:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
a government or governmental, semi-governmental, 
administrative, fiscal or judicial entity or authority;
a minister, department, office, commission, delegate, 
instrumentality, tribunal, agency, board, authority or 
organisation of any government;
any regulatory organisation established under statute; and
in particular, ASX, ASIC, TSX, and the Canadian Securities 
Authorities.
Related Body Corporate
has the meaning given to that term in section 9 of the Corporations Act.
Related Entity
means, in relation to a party, any entity that is related to that party 
within the meaning of section 50 of the Corporations Act or which is an 
economic entity (as defined in any approved Australian accounting 
standard) that is Controlled by that party.
Requisite Majority
means, in relation to the Scheme Resolution, a resolution passed by:
(a)
unless the Court orders otherwise, a majority in number (more 
than 50%) of Gryphon Shareholders (other than Excluded 
Shareholders) who are present and voting, either in person or 
by proxy, attorney or in the case of a corporation its duly 
appointed corporate representative; and
115
RSU
RSU Plan
(b)
passed by at least 75% of the votes cast on the resolution.
means a Teranga restricted share unit.
means the Teranga Restricted Share Unit Plan, adopted by Teranga on 
24 March 2014.
Sabodala Gold Project
means the project operating at the Sabodala mine and mill located 
650km east of Dakar within the West African Birimian geological belt in 
Senegal.
Sabodala Mining 
Concession
Sabodala Mining 
Convention
means the mining concession granted to Teranga on 2 May 2007   by 
Ministerial Letter No. 00197MMIE/CT BG/mad.
means the agreement between the Government of Senegal and SGO, 
dated 7 April 2015, which regulates each party’s rights with respect to 
the exploration and exploitation of minerals within the Sabodala ML.
Sabodala ML
means the Sabodala mining license
Sabodala Technical Report  means the report titled ‘Technical Report on the Sabodala Project,
Sale Agent
Scheme
Senegal, West Africa’ prepared by Teranga and Roscoe Postile 
Associates Inc. prepared in accordance with National Instrument 43-
101 and dated 22 March 2016.
means a person appointed by Teranga to sell the Teranga Shares that 
are attributable to Ineligible Shareholders.
means the scheme of arrangement pursuant to Part 5.1 of the 
Corporations Act proposed between Gryphon and Gryphon 
Shareholders, as set out in Annexure C, together with any alterations 
or conditions made or required by the Court under section 411(6) of the 
Corporations Act and approved in writing by Teranga and Gryphon.
Scheme Booklet
means this booklet.
Scheme Consideration
means 0.169 Teranga CDIs or, if so elected, 0.169 Teranga Shares, for 
every one Gryphon Share.
Scheme Implementation 
Agreement
means the Scheme Implementation Agreement dated 19 June 2016 
between Gryphon and Teranga, as set out in Gryphon’s announcement 
to the ASX dated 20 June 2016.
Scheme Meeting
means the meeting of Gryphon Shareholders convened by the Court in 
relation to the Scheme pursuant to section 411(1) of the Corporations 
Act and includes an adjournment of that meeting.
Scheme Participant
means each person who is a Gryphon Shareholder as at 5:00pm on 
the Record Date (other than Teranga).
Scheme Resolution
Second Court Date
means the resolution to be proposed to the Gryphon Shareholders at 
the Scheme Meeting to approve the Scheme, set out in the Notice of 
Meeting in Annexure E.
means the first day on which an application made to the Court for an 
order pursuant to section 411(4)(b) of the Corporations Act approving 
the Scheme is heard or, if the application is adjourned or subject to 
appear for any reason, the day on which the adjourned or appealed 
application is heard.
Second Court Hearing
means the hearing of the application made to the Court for an order 
pursuant to sections 411(4)(b) of the Corporations Act approving the 
Scheme.
116
SEDAR
means System for Electronic Documents Analysis and Retrieval, the 
mandatory document filing and retrieval system for Canadian public 
companies.
Share Appreciation Rights
means a share appreciation right granted by Gryphon.
SGO
SMC
means Sabodala Gold Operations SA.
means Sabodala Mining Company SARL.
Stock Option
means an option to acquire a Teranga Share.
Stock Option Plan
means the Teranga Stock Option Plan.
Subsidiary
has the meaning given to that term in section 9 of the Corporations Act.
Superior Proposal
means a bona fide Competing Proposal that the Gryphon Board, acting 
reasonably and in good faith, and after taking advice from its legal 
advisers and financial advisors, determines:
(a)
(b)
is reasonably capable of being completed on a timely basis, 
taking into account all aspects of the Competing Proposal and 
the person making it, including without limitation having 
regard to legal, regulatory and financial matters and any 
conditions precedent; and
would or would be reasonably likely, if completed in 
accordance with its terms, to be more favourable to Gryphon 
Shareholders than the Scheme, after taking into account all 
terms and conditions of, and the identity, reputation and 
standing of the person making, the Competing Proposal.
Teranga
means Teranga Gold Corporation.
Teranga’s 2015 Annual 
Report
means Teranga's annual audited financial statements and associated 
management discussion and analysis for the financial year ending 31 
December 2015.
Teranga Board
means the board of directors of Teranga.
Teranga CDI
means a CHESS Depositary Interest, issued by CDN, representing a 
beneficial interest in one Teranga Share, which trades on the ASX.
Teranga Information
means the information contained in the following sections:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
the Letter from the President & CEO of Teranga
under the heading “Teranga Reserves and Resources” in the 
Important notices section in section 1.1(d);
section 5 (Information on Teranga);
section 6 (Information about the Combined Group);
sections 7.3(a) and 7.3(c) inclusive (Scheme Consideration)
section 8.3 (Risks related to the Combined Group) and
section 10.12(c) (Teranga ASX waivers),
except in each case to the extent that information is based on 
information provided or prepared by or on behalf of Gryphon.
Teranga Revolving Credit 
Facility
means Teranga's US$30 million senior secured revolving credit facility 
with Societe Generale for general corporate purposes and working 
capital needs.
117
Teranga Share
means a fully paid common share in the capital of Teranga, which 
trades on the TSX.
Teranga Shareholder
means a holder of Teranga Shares.
Teranga’s Share Registry
means Computershare Trust Company of Canada.
Transaction
TSF
TSX
means the acquisition by Teranga of all of the Gryphon Shares by 
means of the Scheme in accordance with the terms of the Scheme 
Implementation Agreement.
means tailings storage facility.
the Toronto Stock Exchange.
TSX Company Manual
means the official Toronto Stock Exchange Company Manual 
published by the TSX.
VWAP
means volume weighted average price.
Wahgnion Exploitation 
License
Wahgnion Exploitation License granted under Decree # 2014-675 
dated 1 August 2014, as subsequently amended.
118
Interpretation
In this Scheme Booklet (other than the Annexures):
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
except as otherwise provided, all words and phrases used in this Scheme Booklet have the 
meanings (if any) given to them by the Corporations Act;
headings are for ease of reference only and will not affect the interpretation of this Scheme 
Booklet;
words importing the singular, where the context requires, include the plural and vice versa and 
words importing any gender include all genders.  A reference to a person includes a reference 
to a corporation;
all dates and times are to Perth, Western Australia times;
a reference to $, A$, AUD and cents is to Australian currency, unless otherwise stated;
a reference to C$ and CAD is to Canadian currency, unless otherwise stated;
a reference to US$ and USD is to United States currency, unless otherwise stated; and
a reference to a section or Annexure is to a section in  or Annexure to this Scheme Booklet, 
unless otherwise stated.
119
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Annexure A – Independent Expert’s Report
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
120
KPMG Financial Advisory Services 
(Australia) Pty Ltd
Australian Financial Services Licence No. 246901 
235 St Georges Terrace 
Perth  WA  6000 
 
GPO Box A29  
Perth  WA  6837 
Australia
ABN: 43 007 363 215
Telephone: +61 8 9263 7171 
Facsimile: +61 8 9263 7129 
www.kpmg.com.au
ABCD
The Directors 
Gryphon Minerals Limited 
288 Churchill Avenue 
Subiaco WA 6008
25 July 2016
Dear Directors
1
INDEPENDENT EXPERT REPORT AND FINANCIAL SERVICES GUIDE
PART ONE – INDEPENDENT EXPERT REPORT
Introduction 
On 20 June 2016, Gryphon Minerals Limited (Gryphon or the Company) announced that it had entered 
into a Scheme Implementation Agreement (SIA) with Teranga Gold Corporation (Teranga), pursuant to 
which Teranga will acquire all of the issued capital of Gryphon, to be effected by way of a Scheme of 
Arrangement (the Scheme).   
In July 2016, Gryphon completed a $4.4 million1 private placement pursuant to which Teranga subscribed 
for 5% of Gryphon’s ordinary share capital at a price of $0.206 per new Gryphon share. 
Under the terms of the Scheme, Gryphon shareholders, other than Teranga and its associates, at the 
relevant Record Date2 (the Scheme Participants) can elect to receive either: 
•  0.169 (the Exchange Ratio) new Teranga common shares (Teranga Shares) for each Gryphon
ordinary share held; or
•  0.169 new Teranga CHESS Depository Interests (Teranga CDIs) for each Gryphon ordinary share
held
(the Scheme Consideration). 
The Teranga CDIs will trade on the Official List of ASX Limited (ASX) and the Teranga Shares will 
trade on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX). CDIs may be traded like shares and are frequently used for 
trading foreign company shares on the ASX.
1 All amounts in this report are denominated in Australian dollars ($ or AUD) unless specifically stated otherwise 
2 Record Date refers to 5.00pm (Sydney time) on the fifth business day after the date on which the Scheme becomes 
effective (Effective Date), or such later date as may be agreed to in writing by Gryphon and Teranga (Record Date)
KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd is affiliated with 
KPMG.   
 
KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG 
network of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG 
International Cooperative (“KPMG International”), a Swiss entity.
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Implementation of the Scheme will result in the Scheme Participants collectively holding an approximate 
15% interest of the merged entity (the Expanded Teranga).  
Gryphon is an Australian gold exploration and development company listed on the ASX. As at 
22 July 2016, Gryphon had a market capitalisation of approximately $71.9 million. Gryphon’s principal 
asset comprises the Banfora Gold Project (Banfora Project) located in Burkina Faso, West Africa. 
Gryphon is headquartered in Perth, Western Australia.  
Teranga is a Canadian domiciled gold production company listed on the TSX. As at 22 July 2016, 
Teranga had a market capitalisation of approximately $433.1 million3. Teranga’s principal assets 
comprise cash and the Sabodala Gold Project (Sabodala Project) located in Senegal, West Africa. 
Teranga is headquartered in Toronto, Canada.  
Completion of the Scheme requires the approval of Scheme Participants and the satisfaction of various 
conditions precedent (set out in Section 2.1). The Directors of Gryphon (the Directors) have, in the 
absence of a superior offer, unanimously recommended Scheme Participants vote in favour of the Scheme 
and, as at the date of this report, have not withdrawn or modified their recommendation. 
The Directors have requested KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd (of which KPMG 
Corporate Finance is a division) (KPMG Corporate Finance) prepare an Independent Expert Report 
(IER) to the Scheme Participants in relation to the Scheme. The purpose of the IER is to set out whether 
or not, in our opinion, the Scheme is in the best interests of the Scheme Participants as a whole. 
The specific terms of the resolutions to be approved by the Scheme Participants in relation to the Scheme 
are set out in the documents to be sent to the Scheme Participants (Scheme Booklet) to which this report 
is attached. This report should be considered in conjunction with and not independently of the 
information set out in the Scheme Booklet. 
KPMG Corporate Finance’s Financial Services Guide is contained in Part Two of this report.
Summary of the Scheme 
Broadly, the principal terms of the Scheme as they affect Gryphon shareholders are that Scheme 
Participants can elect to receive either: 
•  0.169 new Teranga Shares for each Gryphon ordinary share held; or 
•  0.169 new Teranga CDIs for each Gryphon ordinary share held  
Any fractional entitlement of a Scheme Participant to a part of a new Teranga Share or Teranga CDI will 
be rounded down to the nearest whole number. All new Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs issued pursuant 
to the Scheme will rank equally in all respects with all existing Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs on 
issue.
3 Based on the spot exchange rate of 1.00AUD:0.978 Canadian dollars (C$ or CAD)
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
2
2
2.1
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Further information in relation to the individual characteristics of Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs is set 
out in Section 7 in the Scheme Booklet. 
As set out in the Scheme Booklet, Tablo Corporation (Tablo) intends to exercise an anti-dilution right to 
maintain its proportionate interest in Teranga by subscribing for Teranga Shares, which, subject to the 
successful completion of the Scheme will result in an additional US$9.7 million4 equity placement to 
Tablo (the Tablo Placement). 
Conditions precedent 
Completion of the Scheme is subject to a number of conditions precedent as set out in the SIA, including: 
•  all regulatory and other approvals, consents, clearances and permissions to give the Scheme effect
having been obtained from all relevant bodies, including the Court, Australian Securities and 
Investments Commission (ASIC), ASX and TSX
•  Scheme Participants approving the Scheme by the requisite majorities 
• 
the independent expert concluding that the Scheme is in the best interests of Scheme Participants 
•  no material adverse change, prescribing occurrence or regulated event in respect of Gryphon or
Teranga
•  provision of consent under the Burkina Faso Mining Code. 
As at the date of this report, neither Gryphon nor Teranga were aware of any reason why the conditions 
precedent will not be satisfied.   
The SIA also includes clauses for both Gryphon and Teranga relating to mutual reimbursement fees of 
approximately $0.8 million, no shop and no talk provisions and various other standard provisions relevant 
to the Scheme, such as termination rights and the obligations of each company in the lead up to 
implementation. The full terms of the SIA can be obtained from the ASX announcements made by 
Gryphon and Teranga on 20 June 2016.  
Ineligible foreign securityholders will not receive Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs under the Scheme, but 
rather their holdings in Gryphon will be transferred to a sale nominee who will sell either Teranga Shares 
or Teranga CDIs they would otherwise be entitled to receive under the Scheme and remit the sales 
proceeds to them. Details as to ineligible foreign securityholders are set out in the Scheme Booklet. 
Further details in relation to the Scheme, are set out in the Scheme Booklet to which this report is 
attached and also in the SIA included with the Company’s announcement of the Scheme on 20 June 2016.
4 Based on an estimated subscription price of approximately $0.92 United States dollars (US$ or USD) per Teranga 
share as set in the Scheme Booklet
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
3
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
2.2
3
Electing to receive either Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs 
Scheme Participants can elect to receive the Scheme Consideration in the form of Teranga Shares listed 
on the TSX or Teranga CDIs listed on the ASX. 
Each Teranga CDI confers a beneficial interest upon the holder in a corresponding Teranga Share.  
Teranga CDIs will be held by a nominee company on behalf of the holders of Teranga CDIs. Teranga 
CDIs are listed and traded on the ASX. 
The key differences between Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs are that holders of CDIs cannot trade the 
underlying share directly and are a beneficial owner rather than a direct holder of the underlying Teranga 
Share. 
The key features of Teranga CDIs are set out in Section 7.3 of the Scheme Booklet and are summarised 
below: 
•  holders of the Teranga CDIs will have the same right to participate in dividends, bonus issues and
rights issues as holders of Teranga Shares and will be able to vote by instructing the nominee 
company to exercise their rights on their behalf
•  holders of Teranga CDIs may, at any time, convert their Teranga CDIs listed on the ASX into
Teranga Shares listed on the TSX by contacting either the Teranga CDI subregistry or their broker 
•  Teranga will communicate directly with holders of Teranga CDIs with respect to corporate actions 
and will send notices and other documents to holders of Teranga CDIs at the same time as they are 
sent to Teranga shareholders
•  Teranga CDIs may be traded on the ASX only. If a holder of Teranga CDIs wishes to trade on the
TSX, they must convert Teranga CDIs to underlying Teranga Shares
•  dividend record and payment dates will be the same for Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs.
Scope of Report 
Section 411(3) of the Corporations Act 2001 (the Act) requires that an explanatory statement issued in 
relation to a proposed scheme of arrangement under Section 411 of the Act include information that is 
material to the making of a decision by a member as to whether or not to agree with the relevant proposal. 
In this regard, the Directors have requested KPMG Corporate Finance to prepare an IER to satisfy the 
requirements of Section 411 (although there is no technical requirement in the current circumstances for 
an IER to be prepared in relation to the Scheme).  
In undertaking our work, we have referred to guidance provided by ASIC in its Regulatory Guides, in 
particular Regulatory Guide 111 ‘Content of expert reports’ (RG 111) which outlines the principles and 
matters which it expects a person preparing an IER to consider when providing an opinion on whether a 
transaction is “fair and reasonable”, and therefore “in the best interests” of Scheme Participants.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
4
3.1
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Basis of assessment 
RG 111 indicates the principles and matters which it expects a person preparing an independent expert 
report to consider. RG 111.18 states that where a scheme of arrangement is used as an alternative to a 
takeover bid, the form of analysis undertaken by the expert should be substantially the same as for a 
takeover bid. That form of analysis considers whether the transaction is “fair and reasonable” and, as 
such, incorporates issues as to value. In particular: 
• 
•  an offer is ‘fair’ if the value of the offer price or consideration is equal to or greater than the value of
‘fair and reasonable’ is not regarded as a compound phrase
the shares subject to the offer
•  an offer is ‘reasonable’ if it is ‘fair’ 
•  an offer might also be ‘reasonable’ if, despite being ‘not fair’, the expert believes that there are 
sufficient reasons for shareholders to accept the offer in the absence of any higher bid before the 
close of the offer.
RG 111 provides that an offer is fair if the value of the consideration is equal to or greater than the value 
of the shares subject to the offer. It is a requirement of RG 111 that the comparison be made assuming 
100% ownership of the ‘target’ and irrespective of whether the consideration is scrip or cash and without 
regard to the percentage holding of the bidder or its associates in the target prior to the bid. That is, 
RG 111 requires the value of the target to be assessed as if the bidder was acquiring 100% of the issued 
equity (i.e. on a controlling interest basis). In addition, RG 111 notes that the weight of judicial authority 
is that an expert should not reflect ‘special value’ that might accrue to the acquirer. 
Accordingly, when assessing the full underlying value of Gryphon, we have considered those synergies 
and benefits which would be available to more than one potential purchaser (or a pool of potential 
purchasers) of Gryphon. As such, we have not included the value of special benefits that may be unique 
to Teranga. Accordingly, our valuation of Gryphon has been determined without regard to the specific 
bidder, and any special benefits have been considered separately. 
Furthermore, where the consideration offered comprises scrip, ASIC considers that the value of the 
consideration offered should reflect the theoretical value of a minority holding in the expanded acquiring 
entity. Accordingly, in assessing the value of the Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs, assuming the 
completion of the Scheme, we have excluded any premium for control. 
Reasonableness involves an analysis of other factors that shareholders might consider prior to accepting 
an offer, such as but not limited to: 
• 
• 
•  any special value of the target to the bidder 
• 
•  any conditions associated with the Scheme
the bidder’s pre-existing shareholding in the target 
the liquidity of the market in the target’s and offeror’s shares
the likely market price of the target’s shares in the absence of the offer
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
5
4
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
• 
•
the likelihood of an alternative offer being made 
the consequences of not approving the Scheme
Summary of opinion 
In our opinion the Scheme is fair and reasonable to Scheme Participants and therefore is “in the 
best interests” of Scheme Participants, in the absence of a superior proposal. 
In arriving at this opinion, we have assessed whether the Scheme is fair, by comparing our assessed value 
of a Gryphon share on a controlling interest basis to our assessed value of the Scheme Consideration 
(based on the notional value of an Expanded Teranga share on a minority interest basis post the Scheme 
implementation) 
We have assessed the value of a Gryphon share, inclusive of a premium for control, to lie in the 
range of $0.11 to $0.18 per share, which compares, based on the Exchange Ratio, to our assessed 
value for the Scheme Consideration of between $0.12 to $0.16 per Gryphon share. As the Scheme 
Consideration falls within our assessed value range for a Gryphon share inclusive of a premium for 
control, we consider the Scheme to be fair. 
In arriving at our range of assessed values for both Gryphon and the Scheme Consideration, we have 
placed reliance on the report prepared by Snowden Mining Industry Consultants Pty Ltd (Snowden), the 
independent mining industry specialists engaged by Gryphon, and instructed by us, to assist in relation to 
the assessment of the value of the mineral asset interests held by each of Gryphon and Teranga. A copy of 
Snowden’s report is attached at Appendix 7. 
We would highlight to readers that our range of assessed values for each of Gryphon and the Scheme 
Consideration, are particularly sensitive to future gold price, gold production and operating costs 
assumptions. In this regard we note that: 
•  gold prices have exhibited a significant degree of volatility in recent times and there is a wide range 
of views on the part of commodity and market analysts as to future gold prices. KPMG Corporate 
Finance’s forecast gold price assumptions have been determined after consideration of the forecasts 
of various market analysts as well as prevailing forward curves. However, a wide range of 
assumptions could credibly be adopted, which could impact assessed fair values either positively or 
negatively
•  construction of the Banfora Project has not commenced and there is a degree of risk inherent in
development stage projects in comparison to the Sabodala Project, which is an established production 
project with better known operating profiles and parameters.
In this context, we would draw Scheme Participants’ attention to the sensitivity analysis set out in 
sections 12 and 13 of this report.  
Whilst we consider our range of assessed market values for Gryphon and the Scheme Consideration to be 
reasonable at the date of this report, we note that, depending on Scheme Participants’ views as to forecast 
gold prices, the prospects and operations of each of the Banfora Project and the Sabodala Project as well 
as the other exploration interests held by each of Gryphon and Teranga, it is conceivable that some
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
6
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Scheme Participants could potentially form a view that the value of Gryphon, inclusive of a premium for 
control, more appropriately lies at the top of our range of assessed fair values for Gryphon. In these 
circumstances Scheme Participants would conclude the Scheme is not fair. These Scheme Participants 
would then need to consider whether, despite not being fair, there are sufficient other factors to approve 
the Scheme. 
Whilst the Scheme has been assessed as being fair at the date of this report and therefore, pursuant to the 
operation of RG111 is deemed to be reasonable, in our view, although not “technically” necessary, we 
have also assessed the implications of the Scheme for Scheme Participants, the alternatives to the Scheme 
which are available to Gryphon and the Scheme Participants, and the consequences for Scheme 
Participants of not approving the Scheme. 
Other principal considerations for Gryphon shareholders other than those related solely to value are 
whether the benefits of  
•  holding a continued (albeit diluted) interest in Gryphon’s assets and a new pro-rata interest in
•
Teranga’s assets (including the producing Sabodala Project), and 
the opportunity to participate in any synergies realised by the Expanded Teranga (including any 
benefit of enhanced funding prospects in relation to the development of the Banfora Project compared 
to Gryphon as a stand-alone entity)
outweighs 
•
the uncertainty as to the final consideration to be realised by Gryphon shareholders, given the Scheme 
Consideration is in the form of new equity interests in Teranga,  
the transaction and implementation costs that will be incurred, and  
the dilution of the Scheme Participants’ interests in Gryphon’s existing assets.
• 
• 
The decision to approve the Scheme or not is a matter for individual Gryphon shareholders based on their 
views as to value, expectations about future market conditions and their particular circumstances 
including investment strategy and portfolio structure, risk profile and tax position. Gryphon shareholders 
should consult their own professional advisor, if in doubt, regarding the action they should take in relation 
to the Scheme. 
The principal matters that KPMG Corporate Finance has taken into consideration in forming its opinion 
that the Scheme is in the best interests of the Scheme Participants are set out in the remainder of this 
section.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
7
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
5 
5.1
Key considerations 
Fairness 
The Scheme Consideration to be received by Scheme Participants is fair 
In assessing the fairness of the Scheme to the Scheme Participants, we have compared the value of an 
existing Gryphon share, inclusive of a premium for control, to the value of the Scheme Consideration 
comprising 0.169 Teranga Shares or 0.169 Teranga CDIs on a portfolio basis (i.e. excluding a premium 
for control) assuming the Scheme is implemented. 
We have assessed the value of Gryphon, inclusive of a premium for control, to lie in the range of 
approximately $46.9 million to $79.8 million, or between approximately $0.11 and $0.18 per Gryphon 
share.  
Our range of assessed values for Gryphon has been prepared on a sum of the parts basis and incorporates 
corporate cost savings that would generally be available to a pool of purchasers. It does not include any 
potential strategic or operational benefits unique to Teranga associated with control of Gryphon. 
This compares to our assessed value of the Scheme Consideration on a minority basis assuming the 
Scheme is implemented of between $0.12 and $0.16 per Gryphon share at the Exchange Ratio. 
The chart below provides a comparison of our assessed valuation ranges for a Gryphon share and the 
Scheme Consideration in assessing fairness of the Scheme:
Figure 1: Comparison of our assessed valuation ranges for a Gryphon share and the Scheme 
Consideration
Scheme
Consideration
Gryphon share
$0.10
$0.12
$0.14
$0.16
$0.18
$0.20
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
Having regard to the dispersion of assessed fair values set out above, we consider that the Scheme 
Consideration is fair to Scheme Participants. 
In arriving at our range of values for each of Gryphon and the Scheme Consideration, we have placed 
reliance on the assumptions prepared by Snowden in relation to production scenarios, including 
appropriate Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves estimations, capital expenditure and operational cost
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
8
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
profiles in respect the Banfora Project and the Sabodala Project. In addition, Snowden has assessed the 
fair value of other mineral asset interests held by Gryphon or Teranga not captured in the production 
scenarios. Snowden’s report is attached as Appendix 7. We have discussed with Snowden the 
assumptions adopted by it and consider there to be a reasonable basis for the assumptions adopted by 
them based on information available at the date of this report. 
The production, operating cost and capital cost forecasts prepared by Snowden (the Technical Model(s)) 
were adjusted by us to reflect specific corporate matters, including the impact of royalties, corporate and 
withholding taxes, head office costs, financial instruments and other matters of judgement by us. 
We would highlight to readers that the range of values for the mineral assets of both Gryphon and 
Teranga at the stage of their development should be considered in light of the uncertainty surrounding 
various key assumptions, including but not limited to: 
•  Gryphon’s principal asset comprises the Banfora Project, which is subject to funding, development, 
economic, country and operating risks. Our values effectively assume that Gryphon will be able to 
obtain all necessary development funding required to bring the Banfora Project on stream and in the 
timeframe contemplated
•  our valuation of each of the Banfora Project and the Sabodala Project is particularly sensitive to gold
price, future production and capital and operating expenditure assumptions
•  Snowden has indicated its preferred values in respect of the Banfora Project Mineral Resources not
included in the Technical Models, the Sabodala Project Mineral Resources not included in the 
Technical Models and other exploration assets lie towards the low end of its range of assessed fair 
values
•  Snowden’s production case in respect of the Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves assumes the
successful transition from open pit to underground mining, which in turn requires a significant level 
of capital investment. Any variance in either the timing or costs required to complete this transition 
could impact values materially either positively or negatively
•  whilst Gryphon is confident they will be renewed in due course, we note that two exploration leases 
have expired and an exploitation lease is due to expire in August 2016 (all underpinning the Banfora 
Project). Should renewal not be achieved this is likely to have a significant adverse impact on 
assessed value.
Further details in relation to the basis of our valuations are set out in sections 12, 13 and 14 of this report.  
Our range of values for Gryphon on a control basis represents between a discount of 14% at the low end, 
and a premium of 48% at the high end to the volume weighted average price (VWAP) for a Gryphon 
share measured at various points prior to the date of announcement of the Scheme as set out below.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
9
5.2
5.2.1
VWAP
$ 
0.140 
0.140 
0.132 
0.131 
0.108
Low 
 $ 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12 
0.12
High 
 $ 
0.16 
0.16 
0.16 
0.16 
0.16
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Table 1: Scheme Consideration premium / (discount) to Gryphon’s share price prior to the 
announcement of the Scheme
Period up to and 
including  
17 June 2016
Assessed value of the Scheme Consideration
Premium / 
(Discount)
Premium / 
(Discount)
(14%) 
(14%) 
(9%) 
(8%) 
11%
1 day 
1 week 
1 month 
3 months 
6 months 
Source: Capital IQ and KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis  
Other considerations 
In accordance with RG111, a transaction is considered to be reasonable if it is fair. However, 
notwithstanding the regulatory guidance that suggests that the Scheme is reasonable because it is fair, we 
have also considered a range of other factors Scheme Participants may also wish to take into account in 
considering the Scheme.
14% 
14% 
21% 
22% 
48%
Advantages 
Based on the Exchange Ratio and the closing traded price for a Teranga share on the day prior to the 
announcement of the Scheme, Scheme Participants will receive a premium to recent trading prices 
Based on the Exchange Ratio and the closing trading price at last trading day prior to the announcement 
of the Scheme for Teranga Shares of C$1.19 ($1.25 on an AUD equivalent) and a Teranga CDI of $1.22, 
the implied premium of the Scheme Consideration over the VWAP of Gryphon shares at various points in 
the six months prior to the announcement of the Scheme is detailed in the table below. 
Table 2: Teranga’s closing traded price compared to Gryphon’s share price prior to the 
announcement of the Scheme
Period up to and 
including  
17 June 2016
Implied by Teranga’s closing traded price on 17 June 2016 
Teranga
Premium / 
(Discount)
Premium / 
(Discount)
VWAP
$ 
0.140 
0.140 
0.132 
0.131 
0.108
CDI 
 $ 
0.206 
0.206 
0.206 
0.206 
0.206
1 day 
1 week 
1 month 
3 months 
6 months 
Source: Capital IQ and KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis
47% 
47% 
56% 
57% 
91%
Teranga 
Share
$ 
0.211 
0.211 
0.211 
0.211 
0.211
51% 
51% 
60% 
61% 
95%
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
10
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Transactions in Australia are typically completed with an implied acquisition premium in the order of 
25 percent to 40 percent to the pre-trading equity price of the target, based on our analysis of publicly 
available data. We note that these premia generally include a component for operating synergies and 
special benefits that are not separately identifiable. Where little or no operating synergies or special 
benefits will be realised in a transaction, the pure control premium is likely to be at or below the lower 
end of observed premia. 
The premia implied by the Scheme Consideration over the VWAP for the various periods set out above 
lie above the range usually observed in Australian takeovers. 
We note however that the value of Gryphon and the Scheme Consideration at the meeting date could 
differ from prevailing prices, which reflect the market conditions as at the date of this report. Accordingly 
Scheme Participants will need to consider, inter alia, movements in Teranga’s underlying share price 
subsequent to the date of this report in deciding whether to approve the Scheme. 
Completion of the Scheme will enhance the prospects for the development of the Banfora Project 
Prior to the Scheme, Gryphon explored a number of debt and equity funding alternatives in relation to the 
development of the Banfora Project in its own right, as well as different processing routes and project 
configurations. However, the scale of the project vis-à-vis Gryphon and political unrest in Burkina Faso 
acted to dampen the enthusiasm of potential funders. 
Teranga is substantially larger than Gryphon, is already operating successfully in West Africa and is 
expected to continue to generate positive cash flow from the Sabodala Project. Accordingly, the Directors 
consider, and we concur, that the prospects of the Expanded Teranga being able to access equity and debt 
markets for the development of the Banfora Project to be better than Gryphon as a  
stand-alone entity. 
We would highlight to readers however that the Expanded Teranga’s pro-forma cash position of 
approximately US$66.8 5 million, combined with unused portion of Teranga’s existing debt facilities of 
approximately US$15 million, may be insufficient of themselves to meet the expected capital costs for the 
development of the Banfora Project. Whilst there is the potential that any shortfall may be able to be met 
from near term cash flow generated by the Sabodala Project, it is also possible that the Expanded Teranga 
may be required to seek additional equity and/or debt funding. Depending upon the form of the raising 
and prevailing market conditions, this may be dilutive to the Scheme Participants. 
Implementation of the Scheme will result in Scheme Participants holding an investment in a larger 
business which should lead to increased liquidity 
All else being equal, larger businesses tend to be more liquid investments then their smaller peers owing 
to larger free-floats, lower operating risk given the more diversified nature of their operations, and lower 
earnings volatility.
5 Including cash expected to be raised from the Tablo Placement and adjusted for expected transaction costs.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
11
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
5.2.2
The combination of Gryphon and Teranga will create a multi project West African gold company. If the 
Scheme is implemented, Scheme Participants will own up to approximately 15% of the Expanded 
Teranga. 
As a result of the Expanded Teranga’s increased scale, footprint and shareholder base, there appears to be 
a reasonable prospect that a greater number of investors may be attracted to the Expanded Teranga, which 
should result in a greater level of liquidity than is currently the case in respect of Gryphon or Teranga as 
stand-alone entities. 
We also note that, based on the current shareholder profiles of Gryphon and Teranga, the share register of 
the Expanded Teranga will remain relatively open immediately following implementation of the Scheme, 
as such we do not consider the prospects of the Expanded Teranga receiving a takeover offer in the future 
to be diminished as a result of implementing the Scheme. Indeed, it is arguable that given Teranga’s 
increased scale and multi-project status this may increase the attractiveness of the company to potential 
acquirers. Should an offer emerge in the future for Teranga, Scheme Participants who have continued to 
hold Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs would be entitled to participate in any takeover premium paid.
Disadvantages 
Current Gryphon shareholders will have a significantly diluted interest in Gryphon’s existing asset 
base 
In the event that the Scheme is successfully implemented, Scheme Participants will, in aggregate, hold up 
to a 15.0% shareholding in the expanded capital of Teranga. 
As such, the interest of Gryphon shareholders in Gryphon’s existing development and exploration assets 
will be significantly diluted. However, Gryphon shareholders will also receive a similar pro rata interest 
in Teranga’s more advanced Sabodala Project, which is already in production, its exploration assets and 
also any synergies and cost savings realised by Teranga as a result the integration of Gryphon. 
The Scheme does not provide certainty as to the value of consideration received 
As the consideration offered under the Scheme does not include a cash alternative, in the event the 
Scheme is implemented eligible Gryphon shareholders will receive new Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs 
in the Expanded Teranga.  
Whilst the assumptions adopted by us in determining our range of assessed values for a Gryphon share 
and the Scheme Consideration are considered reasonable at the date of this report, the value ultimately 
received by Gryphon shareholders for their Gryphon shares will be dependent upon the trading price for a 
Teranga Share or Teranga CDI at the time each eligible Gryphon shareholder decides to realise their 
investment.  
Future shareholder returns may be subject to increased foreign exchange risk 
The repatriation of future dividends and/or capital returns made by Teranga, if any, to Australian 
shareholders will be subject to currency risk, both positive and negative, due to future foreign currency 
movements.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
12
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
5.2.3
Ineligible foreign shareholders and involuntary disposal impact 
Restrictions in certain foreign countries may make it impractical or unlawful to offer or receive securities 
in those countries, therefore some Gryphon shareholders will be ineligible foreign shareholders. Teranga 
will not be obliged to issue Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs to ineligible foreign shareholders.  
In the event the Scheme is implemented, the Teranga Shares to which the ineligible foreign shareholders 
would otherwise have been entitled to will be issued to a nominee and realised, with the net proceeds of 
such sales distributed to the relevant ineligible foreign shareholders, notwithstanding that those ineligible 
foreign shareholders may have desired to retain an interest in the Expanded Teranga. Share trading in the 
Expanded Teranga shares may be impacted by the trading activity of the nominee appointed to realise the 
shares that would otherwise have been issued to the ineligible foreign shareholders.
Other matters 
Likelihood for a superior alternative proposal is uncertain 
Under the SIA, Gryphon is restricted from either soliciting or entering into discussions with third parties 
in relation to alternative proposals. However, the Directors would be required under their fiduciary duties 
to consider the merits of an alternative proposal should it arise. 
Prior to agreeing to put the Scheme to Scheme Participants, Gryphon undertook an extended process to 
identify development paths for the Banfora Project, including consideration and pursuit of various debt 
and equity funding alternatives. Under this process, Gryphon, and various advisors, engaged with a 
significant number of parties identified as being potential acquirers and / or funders. However, as at the 
date of announcement of the Scheme only Teranga had provided an offer likely to provide certainty to 
Gryphon shareholders. 
Whilst no alternative offers have been received by Gryphon since the date of the announcement, we note 
that a number of parties have over time expressed interest in investigating the merits of the Banfora 
Project. As such, whilst we consider the prospect of an alternative offer emerging to be unlikely, we do 
not consider it to be without prospect. 
CDIs have different characteristics and potentially reduced liquidity relative to a Teranga share 
Scheme Participants will have the option of choosing to receive the Scheme Consideration in the form of 
new Teranga Shares (to be listed on the TSX) or new Teranga CDIs (to be listed on the ASX).  
The key differences between new Teranga Shares and new Teranga CDIs are that holders of CDIs cannot 
trade the underlying share directly and are a beneficial owner rather than a holder of the underlying share. 
Economically the rights attaching to the CDIs are equivalent such that no practical difference exists as to 
rights associated with dividends, bonus issues and rights issues, whilst with respect to voting a holder 
must instruct the nominee to exercise their rights on their behalf. The CDIs have the advantage for 
Australian resident shareholders in that they will be traded on the ASX during Australian business hours 
in prices quoted in Australian dollars using local brokers.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
13
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
In relation to future trading, risks include: 
•  Teranga CDIs may be less liquid than Teranga shares, and therefore may trade at a discount to
•
Teranga shares trading on the TSX 
there may be higher volatility in the trading prices of Teranga CDIs relative to Teranga shares as a 
result of foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
Teranga CDIs can be converted into Teranga shares at any time and vice versa, however, there may be tax 
consequences associated with any such conversion. 
Incorporation in Canada 
Teranga is domiciled in Canada. Accordingly, the conduct and reporting responsibilities of Teranga are 
subject to the laws of Canada not Australian laws. With the resultant change in the domicile from 
Australia to the Canada, there may be some existing shareholders that for constitutional and/or other 
reasons are unable to hold shares in Teranga. In these circumstances such shareholders will be required to 
realise their investment in Teranga on market and, therefore, will no longer hold an interest in Teranga’s 
assets, or elect to take the CDI alternative under the Scheme. 
Further details in relation to the differences between the Australian and Canadian legal regimes are set out 
in Section 7 of the Scheme Booklet. 
Taxation implications for Scheme Participants 
In the event the Scheme is implemented, eligible Gryphon shareholders will receive 0.169 Teranga Shares 
or 0.169 Teranga CDIs for each Gryphon share currently held. Gryphon shareholders are strongly 
encouraged to read the outline of the taxation implications for Gryphon shareholders in respect of the 
Scheme are set out in Section 9 of the Scheme Booklet and, if any doubt, should seek their own 
independent taxation advice regarding the tax consequences of the Scheme. 
Transition risk 
There is a potential that various shareholders in the Expanded Teranga will seek to realise their portfolio 
holdings in the period immediately following implementation of the Scheme. In these circumstances, until 
the shareholder base of the Expanded Teranga is rebalanced, a risk exists of greater volatility in the 
Teranga share price and Teranga CDI price, at least in the short-term post the implementation of the 
Scheme, than may otherwise have been the case, all other things being equal. As noted previously the 
nominee appointed to realise Teranga shares on behalf of ineligible foreign Gryphon shareholders is 
likely to be a seller of Teranga shares during this period.
5.2.4
Consequences if the Scheme does not proceed 
In the event that the Scheme is not approved or any conditions precedent prevent the Scheme from being 
implemented, Gryphon will continue to operate in its current form and remain listed on the ASX. As a 
consequence: 
•  Gryphon shareholders will not receive the Scheme Consideration and the implications of the Scheme,
as summarised above, will not occur
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
14
6
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
•  Gryphon’s share price will likely fall. The current share price of Gryphon likely reflects the terms of
the Scheme and as such, in the absence of the Scheme, an alternative proposal or speculation 
concerning an alternative proposal, the Gryphon share price is likely to fall to levels consistent with 
trading prices prior to the announcement of the Scheme, with allowance for the impact of trends in 
broader equity markets since that date. Gryphon shares closed at $0.135 on the last trading day prior 
to the announcement of the Scheme, which compares to a closing price of $0.19 on 20 July 2016
•  Gryphon shareholders will continue to be exposed to the benefits and risks associated with an
investment in Gryphon. Gryphon is expected to need to secure additional funding from alternative 
sources to pursue the development of the Banfora Project and meet its ongoing commitments and 
exploration of its asset portfolio.
We have been advised by the Directors that Gryphon’s ability to fund the development of the Banfora 
Project will remain uncertain. Gryphon will be required to recommence its search for equity and debt 
funding parties. Given Gryphon has considered an extensive number of alternative corporate and project 
transactions over an extended period leading up to the announcement of the Scheme, none of which are 
considered by Gryphon to have likely been able to be successfully completed on terms as attractive as that 
currently being contemplated, in the event the Scheme Participants resolve not to support the Scheme 
there is no guarantee that a funding solution for the Banfora Project or transaction on more attractive 
terms than those offered under the Scheme would be identified.
Other matters 
In forming our opinion, we have considered the interests of the Scheme Participants as a whole. This 
advice therefore does not consider the financial situation, objectives or needs of individual Scheme 
Participants. It is not practical or possible to assess the implications of the Scheme on individual Scheme 
Participants as their financial circumstances are not known.   
The decision of the Scheme Participants as to whether or not to approve the Scheme is a matter for 
individuals based on, amongst other things, their risk profile, liquidity preference, investment strategy and 
tax position.  Individual Scheme Participants should therefore consider the appropriateness of our opinion 
to their specific circumstances before acting on it.  As an individual’s decision to vote for or against the 
proposed resolutions may be influenced by his or her particular circumstances, we recommend that 
individual Scheme Participants seek their own independent professional advice. 
Our report has been prepared solely for the purpose of assisting Scheme Participants in considering the 
Scheme. We do not assume any responsibility or liability to any other party as a result of reliance on this 
report for any other purpose.  Our opinion should not be construed to represent a recommendation as to 
whether or not Scheme Participants should elect to vote in favour of the Scheme. 
Neither the whole nor any part of our report or its attachments or any reference thereto may be included in 
or attached to any document, other than the Notice of Meeting and the Scheme Booklet to be sent to 
Scheme Participants in relation to the Scheme, without the prior written consent of KPMG Corporate 
Finance as to the form and context in which it appears. KPMG Corporate Finance consents to the 
inclusion of our report in the form and context in which it appears in the Scheme Booklet.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
15
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Our opinion is based solely on information available as at the date of this report as set out in Appendix 2. 
We note that we have not undertaken to update our report for events or circumstances arising after the 
date of this report other than those of a material nature which would impact upon our opinion. We refer 
readers to the limitations and reliance on information as set out in Section 7. 
References to an Australian financial year (i.e. the 12 months to 30 June) have been abbreviated to FY, 
and references to calendar years have been abbreviated to CY. 
The above opinion should be considered in conjunction with and not independently of the information set 
out in the remainder of this report, including the appendices.
Yours faithfully
Jason Hughes 
Authorised Representative
Bill Allen 
Authorised Representative
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
16
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
1 
1 
1 
2 
4 
6 
8 
15 
18 
20 
20 
30 
45 
50 
63 
73 
75 
77 
78 
84 
96 
101 
102 
103
Contents 
Independent Expert Report and Financial Services Guide 
Part One – Independent Expert Report 
1 
Introduction 
2 
Summary of the Scheme 
3 
Scope of Report 
4 
Summary of opinion 
5 
Key considerations 
6 
Other matters 
7 
Scope of the report 
8 
Industry overview 
9 
Profile of Gryphon 
10  Profile of Teranga 
11 
Impact of the Scheme 
12  Valuation of Gryphon 
13  Valuation of Teranga 
14  Assessment of the Scheme Consideration 
Appendix 1 – KPMG Corporate Finance disclosures 
Appendix 2 – Sources of information 
Appendix 3 – Overview of the gold industry 
Appendix 4 – Calculation of discount rates 
Appendix 5 – Selected listed companies 
Appendix 6 – Selected transactions 
Appendix 7 – Snowden – Independent Technical Specialist Report 
Part Two – Financial Services Guide
7 
7.1
7.2
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Scope of the report 
Purpose 
This report has been prepared by KPMG Corporate Finance for inclusion in the Scheme Booklet to 
accompany the Notice of Meeting convening a Court ordered meeting of Scheme Participants on or about 
17 September 2016 in accordance with Section 411 of the Act. The purpose of the meeting will be to seek 
approval of the Scheme. 
The sole purpose of this report is an expression of KPMG Corporate Finance’s opinion as to whether the 
Scheme is in the best interests of Scheme Participants. This report should not be used for any other 
purposes or by any other party. 
Limitations and reliance on information 
In preparing this report and arriving at our opinion, we have considered the information detailed in 
Appendix 2 of this report. In forming our opinion, we have relied upon the truth, accuracy and 
completeness of any information provided or made available to us without independently verifying it. 
Nothing in this report should be taken to imply that KPMG Corporate Finance has in any way carried out 
an audit of the books of account or other records of Gryphon or Teranga for the purposes of this report.  
Further, we note that an important part of the information base used in forming our opinion is comprised 
of the opinions and judgements of management. In addition, we have also had discussions with each of 
Gryphon’s and Teranga’s management and Snowden in relation to the nature of the business operations, 
specific risks and opportunities, historical results and prospects for the foreseeable future. This type of 
information has been evaluated through analysis, enquiry and review to the extent practical. However, 
such information is often not capable of external verification or validation. 
Gryphon and Teranga have been responsible for ensuring that information provided by them or their 
representatives is not false or misleading or incomplete. Complete information is deemed to be 
information which at the time of completing this report should have been made available to KPMG 
Corporate Finance and would have reasonably been expected to have been made available to KPMG 
Corporate Finance to enable us to form our opinion.   
We have no reason to believe that any material facts have been withheld from us but do not warrant that 
our inquiries have revealed all of the matters which an audit or extensive examination might disclose. The 
statements and opinions included in this report are given in good faith, and in the belief that such 
statements and opinions are not false or misleading.  
The information provided to KPMG Corporate Finance included forecasts/projections and other 
statements and assumptions about future matters (forward-looking financial information) prepared by or 
on behalf of the management of Gryphon and Teranga. Whilst KPMG Corporate Finance has relied upon 
this forward-looking financial information in preparing this report, Gryphon and Teranga remain 
responsible for all aspects of this forward-looking financial information. The forecasts and projections as 
supplied to us are based upon assumptions about events and circumstances which have not yet transpired. 
We have not tested individual assumptions or attempted to substantiate the veracity or integrity of such
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
18
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
assumptions in relation to any forward-looking financial information, however we have made sufficient 
enquiries to satisfy ourselves that such information has been prepared on a reasonable basis.   
Notwithstanding the above, KPMG Corporate Finance cannot provide any assurance that the forward-
looking financial information will be representative of the results which will actually be achieved during 
the forecast period. Any variations in the forward looking financial information may affect our valuation 
and opinion.   
It is not the role of the independent expert to undertake the commercial and legal due diligence that a 
company and its advisers may undertake. The Directors are responsible for conducting due diligence in 
relation to the Scheme. KPMG Corporate Finance provides no warranty as to the adequacy, effectiveness 
or completeness of the due diligence process, which is outside our control and beyond the scope of this 
report. We have assumed that the due diligence process has been and is being conducted in an adequate 
and appropriate manner. 
The opinion of KPMG Corporate Finance is based on prevailing market, economic and other conditions 
at the date of this report. Conditions can change over relatively short periods of time. Any subsequent 
changes in these conditions could impact upon our opinion. We note that we have not undertaken to 
update our report for events or circumstances arising after the date of this report other than those of a 
material nature which would impact upon our opinion.  
Disclosure of information 
In preparing this report, KPMG Corporate Finance has had access to all financial information considered 
necessary in order to provide the required opinion. Due to commercial sensitivity we have limited the 
level of disclosure in relation to certain key business arrangements however we have disclosed a summary 
of material information which we relied on in forming our view. 
Reliance on Technical Expert 
ASIC Regulatory Guides envisage the use by an independent expert of specialists when valuing specific 
assets. To assist KPMG Corporate Finance in the valuation of Gryphon’s and Teranga’s mineral assets, 
Snowden was engaged by Gryphon, and instructed by us, to prepare an independent technical report in 
relation to the development and operational forecast assumptions for the Banfora and Sabodala projects as 
well as the valuation of any mineral interests, such as exploration tenements, held by Gryphon or 
Teranga, not reflected in the forecasts in respect of the Banfora Project and the Sabodala Project (the 
Specialist Report). A copy of the Specialist Report, dated 22 July 2016, is attached to this report at 
Appendix 7. 
The Specialist Report was prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Australasian Code for 
Public Reporting of Technical Assessment and Valuation of Mineral and Petroleum Assets (2015 Edition) 
(the ValMin Code). 
ASIC Regulatory Guides recommend the fees payable to the technical specialists be paid in the first 
instance by the independent expert and claimed back from the party commissioning the independent 
expert.  KPMG Corporate Finance's preferred basis for appointment of independent technical specialists 
is that the client commissions, and pays the fees directly to, the technical specialist, whilst KPMG
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
19
7.3
7.4
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Corporate Finance defines the scope of work for the technical specialist.  We do not consider that the 
independence of the technical specialist is impaired by this arrangement. 
We have satisfied ourselves as to Snowden’s qualifications and independence from Gryphon and Teranga 
and have placed reliance on its report. 
Following discussion and enquiry with Snowden, the development and operational assumptions 
recommended by Snowden have been adopted in the cash flow projections used by us in assessing the 
values for Gryphon’s interest in the Banfora Project and Teranga’s interest in the Sabodala Project 
respectively. KPMG Corporate Finance was responsible for the determination of certain macroeconomic 
and other assumptions such as commodity prices, exchange rates, discount rates, inflation and taxation 
assumptions. 
The valuation methodologies adopted by Snowden in the Specialist Report in respect of mineral assets 
outside of the Banfora Project and Sabodala Project based on based on comparable transaction 
benchmarking.  
Due to the various uncertainties inherent in the valuation process, Snowden has determined a range of 
values within which it considers the value of each of these additional mineral assets to lie. The valuations 
ascribed by Snowden to the other mineral assets of Gryphon and Teranga have been adopted in our 
report.
Industry overview 
Gryphon’s and Teranga’s principal assets comprise interests and investments in gold production, 
development and exploration assets. Accordingly, the financial performance of Gryphon and Teranga is 
significantly impacted by developments in the international gold industry. To provide a context for 
assessing the prospects of Gryphon and Teranga, we have included at Appendix 3 an overview of recent 
trends in the international gold markets.
Profile of Gryphon 
Company overview 
Gryphon is an Australian gold exploration and development company which listed its shares on the ASX 
in 2004.  
Gryphon’s principal asset comprises its interest in the Banfora Project located in Burkina Faso. An 
overview of the Banfora Project is set out in Section 9.2. The Company also holds a portfolio of gold 
exploration assets in Burkina Faso. Further more detailed information in relation to the Banfora Project 
and Gryphon’s other mineral assets is set out in the Specialist Report which is attached as Appendix 7 of 
this report. 
The Banfora Project 
The Banfora Project is a development stage gold project located in Burkina Faso, West Africa. Gryphon 
has a 90% interest in the Banfora Project, with the Government of Burkina Faso holding a 10% free carry 
interest. The Banfora Project includes exploration licences covering over 1,000 square kilometres (km2)
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
20
8
9 
9.1
9.2
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
and a mining licence that covers 89 km2. The licences are located in a gold mining district and are 
accessible by road, in close proximity to the Banfora city and Bobo-Diolasso.  
In January 2013, Gryphon completed a bankable feasibility study (BFS) for the Banfora Project, which 
assumed an open-pit mining operation, a carbon-in-leach (CIL) gold processing plant and associated 
infrastructure with treatment capacity of two million tonnes per annum (Mtpa) of gold bearing ore.  
In August 2014, Gryphon completed an additional BFS for the Banfora Project, which proposed a 
contracting mining operation and conventional heap leaching (HL) gold processing plant and associated 
infrastructure with treatment capacity of 2Mtpa of gold bearing ore. 
In July 2015, Gryphon completed an optimisation study for the Banfora Project, which explored the 
merits of adding a 1Mtpa CIL circuit to the standalone 2Mtpa HL operation.   
A summary of the Ore Reserves and Mineral Resources contained within the Banfora Project area is set 
out in the table below. 
Table 3: Summary of the Banfora Project Ore Reserves and Mineral Resources 
Deposit
Au g/t1
Category  Million tonnes 
(Mt) 
 
4.0 
13.4 
17.4 
 
6.6 
60.4 
15.8 
82.8
Ore Reserves 
Banfora 
 
Total Ore Reserves 
Mineral Resources 
Banfora 
 
 
Total Mineral Resources 
Note:  
1.  Au g/t denotes number of grams of gold (Au) per tonne of ore 
2.  Mineral Resource amounts quoted are inclusive of Ore Reserves  
3.  Ore Reserve and Mineral Resource figures are for the HL scenario and have been obtained from the Scheme
Au 000 
ounces (oz) 
 
176 
650 
826 
 
310 
2,670 
660 
3,640
Proved 
Probable 
 
 
Measured 
Indicated 
Inferred
1.4 
1.5 
 
 
1.5 
1.4 
1.3
9.3
Booklet which indicates that the Ore Reserve and Mineral Resource figures have been reported in 
compliance with the Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore 
Reserves (JORC code) or that they have been approved for release in the form and context in which it 
appears by a Competent Person, as defined by the JORC code
Source: Gryphon management, the Scheme Booklet and ASX announcements 
Other mineral assets 
Golden Hill and Gourma projects 
Other mineral assets comprise Gryphon’s interest in the Golden Hill and Gourma gold exploration 
projects, in joint venture with ASX-listed Boss Resources. The tenements cover a total of 1,790 km2 
(Golden Hill covering 468 km2 and Gourma covering 1,322 km2) and are located in Burkina Faso. 
Gryphon currently owns 51% of the Golden Hill and Gourma projects and has the right to earn up to
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
21
9.4
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Audited 
30 Jun 14
Audited 
30 Jun 15
Reviewed 
31 Dec 15
Unaudited
31 Mar 16
80%. Gryphon’s interest in the joint venture will increase to 70% on delivery of a definitive feasibility 
study funded by Gryphon, and may increase to 80% if Gryphon decides to exercise its right to acquire an 
additional 10% interest in the joint venture for a consideration of $2.5 million.   
Sale of Gryphon’s Mauritanian gold and copper assets 
In March 2016, Gryphon received notice from Algold Resources Ltd (Algold) that it had exercised its 
option to acquire Gryphon’s Mauritanian gold and copper assets. Consideration paid to Gryphon by 
Algold included approximately 10.7 million ordinary shares in Algold. Algold is also required to pay 
Gryphon a further consideration of $1.5 million in cash and $1.5 million in cash or shares at the election 
of Algold on achievement of certain milestones. 
Historical financial performance 
Gryphon’s historical audited consolidated financial performance for FY14 and FY15 as well as the 
independently reviewed consolidated financial performance for the six-months ended 31 December 2015 
and unaudited financial performance for the nine-months ended 31 March 2016 are summarised below.  
Table 4: Gryphon's historical consolidated financial performance 
  
  
  
Revenue  
Other income  
Total Revenue 
Administrative expense 
Consultancy expense 
Employee benefits expense 
Share based payment expense 
Occupancy expense 
Compliance and regulatory expense 
Insurance expense 
Interest expense 
Depreciation expense 
Exploration and evaluation expense 
Fixed assets written off 
Foreign exchange gain/(loss) 
Total expenses 
Loss before income tax 
Income tax benefit 
Loss for the year 
Exchange differences on translation of 
foreign operations 
Changes in fair value of financial assets 
Total comprehensive loss for the year
$000 
 1,605  
 985  
 2,590  
 (1,089) 
 (651) 
 (1,348) 
 (834) 
 (204) 
 (114) 
 (233) 
- 
 (636) 
 (48,050) 
 (1,257) 
 444  
 (53,972) 
 (51,382)
$000 
 824  
 1,398  
 2,222  
 (1,018) 
 (389) 
 (1,962) 
 (285) 
 (243) 
 (197) 
 (178) 
- 
 (753) 
(12,727) 
 (437) 
 1,446  
 (16,743) 
 (14,521)
$000 
 208  
 192  
 400  
 (472) 
 (176) 
 (864) 
 79  
 (120) 
 (60) 
 (50) 
 (1) 
 (417) 
 (3,063) 
 (52) 
 (168) 
 (5,364) 
 (4,964)
$000
290  
 1,260  
 1,550  
 (712) 
 (266) 
 (1,207) 
 (17) 
 (179) 
 (63) 
 (76) 
(2) 
 (523) 
 (5,016) 
 (52) 
 (304) 
 (8,417) 
 (6,867)
(51,382)
(14,521)
(4,964)
195  
 2,298  
 (48,889)
135  
 (2,566) 
 (16,952)
105  
 (312) 
 (5,171)
125  
 (248) 
 (6,990)
-
-
-
-
(6,867)
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
22
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Weighted average ordinary shares on 
issue – 000  
Basic ordinary loss per share (cents per 
share)1,2 
Notes: 
1 
 
2.
Audited 
30 Jun 14
$000
Audited 
30 Jun 15
$000
Reviewed 
31 Dec 15
$000
Unaudited
31 Mar 16
$000
400,781
401,196
401,291
401,291
(12.8)
(3.6)
(1.2)
(1.7)
Basic loss per share is calculated by dividing net loss attributable to the members of the parent entity by 
the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year. 
As per the Annual Reports, diluted loss per share is not shown as the Company is in a loss-making 
position. 
Amounts may not add exactly due to rounding.
3. 
Source: Gryphon 2015 Annual Report and 2015 Half Year Report, Scheme Booklet and KPMG Corporate Finance 
Analysis 
Gryphon’s historical financial performance is consistent with a gold exploration and development 
company not yet in production.
9.5
Audited 
30 Jun 15
Reviewed 
31 Dec 15
Unaudited
31 Mar 16
Audited 
30 Jun 14
Historical financial position 
Gryphon’s historical audited consolidated financial position as at 30 June 2014 and 30 June 2015 as well 
as the independently reviewed consolidated financial position as at 31 December 2015 and unaudited 
financial position as at 31 March 2016 are summarised below.  
Table 5: Gryphon's historical financial position 
  
  
  
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Inventory 
Total current assets  
Trade and other receivables 
Financial assets 
Property, plant and equipment 
Exploration and evaluation expenditure 
Total non-current assets  
Total assets 
Trade and other payables 
Total current liabilities  
Provisions 
Total non-current liabilities 
Total liabilities 
Net assets  
Shares on issue – 000s
$000 
 34,306  
 1,943  
 34  
 36,283  
 331  
 3,106  
 3,434  
 3,318  
 10,189  
 46,472  
 4,469  
 4,469  
 478  
 478  
 4,947  
 41,525  
 401,012
$000 
 12,883  
 315  
 23  
 13,221  
 283  
 418  
 2,564  
 6,066  
 9,331  
 22,552  
 2,526  
 2,526  
 385  
 385  
 2,911  
 19,641  
 401,291
$000 
 18,453  
 928  
 23  
 19,404  
 267  
 540  
 2,878  
 5,139  
 8,824  
 28,228  
 2,917  
 2,917  
 420  
 420  
 3,337  
 24,891  
401,291
$000 
 10,636  
 420  
 16  
 11,072  
 257  
 1,550  
 2,417  
 5,377  
 9,601  
 20,673  
 2,784  
 2,784  
337 
 337  
 3,121  
 17,552  
 401,596
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
23
9.6
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
$000 
 0.03  
0.0% 
 4.0
Audited 
30 Jun 14
Audited 
30 Jun 15
Reviewed 
31 Dec 15
Unaudited
31 Mar 16
$000 
 0.10  
0.0% 
 8.1
$000 
 0.05  
0.0% 
 5.2
$000 
 0.06  
0.0% 
 6.7
Gearing represents total loans and borrowings divided by net assets. 
Current ratio represents current assets divided by current liabilities. 
Amounts may not add exactly due to rounding.
Net asset backing per share – cents 
Gearing -%1 
Current ratio – times2 
Notes: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Source: Gryphon 2015 Annual Report and 2015 Half Year Report, Scheme Booklet and KPMG Corporate Finance 
Analysis 
In relation to Gryphon’s historical consolidated financial positions above we note that financial assets 
comprise portfolio investments in two listed equity securities, Tawana Resources NL (Tawana) and 
Algold. Gryphon’s investment in Algold increased in March 2016 as a result of the sale of Gryphon’s 
Mauritanian gold and copper assets to Algold, with payment comprising shares in Algold, representing 
approximately 12% of Algold’s issued capital. As a result of various subsequent equity issues, Gryphon’s 
current interest in Algold has been diluted to approximately 10%.  
Statement of cash flows 
Gryphon’s historical audited consolidated cash flows for FY14 and FY15 as well as the independently 
reviewed consolidated cash flows for the six-months ended 31 December 2015 and unaudited cash flows 
for the nine-months ended 31 March 2016 are summarised below. 
Table 6: Gryphon's historical cash flows statement 
  
  
  
Payments for exploration and evaluation 
Refunded exploration and evaluation  
Payments to administration suppliers and 
employees 
Deposits paid 
Interest received 
Proceeds from research and development 
grant 
Interest paid 
Net cash (used in) operating activities 
Payments for exploration farm-ins 
Purchase of property, plant and equipment 
Refund of deposit paid on equipment 
Proceeds from disposal of financial assets 
Payments for the acquisition of financial 
assets
1,005  
- 
 (14,759) 
 (1,326) 
 (263) 
 500  
 -
-  
(1) 
 (4,982) 
 (926) 
 (49) 
 385  
 -
1,804  
- 
 (18,227) 
 (384) 
 (764)
Audited 
30 Jun 14
$000 
 (17,529)
Audited 
30 Jun 15
$000 
 (13,504) 
 541
Reviewed 
31 Dec 15
$000 
 (3,416)
-
(4,084) 
 (136) 
 1,718
-    
 1,562
(250)
(3,658)
(1,802)
(2,555) 
- 
 324
- 
 (2)   
 (7,905) 
 (238) 
 (62) 
 385  
 -
Unaudited
31 Mar 16
$000 
 (5,672)
-
-
-
-
-
-    
 857
-    
 237
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
24
9.7
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
-    
 -
Unaudited
31 Mar 16
$000
-    
 2
87  
 (7,818) 
 18,453  
 10,635
-    
 2
Audited 
30 Jun 15
$000 
 (12) 
 7
Audited 
30 Jun 14
$000
Reviewed 
31 Dec 15
$000
(588) 
 (5,570) 
 18,453  
 12,883
(1,094) 
 (15,853) 
 34,306  
 18,453
164  
 (18,063) 
 52,369  
 34,306
Payments for tenement acquisitions 
Refund of tenement fees 
Net cash provided by/(used in) from 
investing activities 
Net decrease in cash held 
Cash at beginning of period 
Cash at end of the period 
Notes: Amounts may not add exactly due to rounding. 
Source: Gryphon 2015 Annual Report and 2015 Half Year Report, Scheme Booklet and KPMG Corporate Finance 
Analysis 
Taxation 
Australia 
As at 30 June 2015, Gryphon had carried forward revenue tax losses of $12.8 million and carried forward 
capital tax losses of $3.1 million, which may be available to offset against future taxable income subject 
to meeting relevant statutory tests. 
Burkina Faso 
As at 31 December 2015, Gryphon had carried forward tax losses of $126 million6 held by its local 
Burkina Faso subsidiaries, which may be available to offset against future taxable income subject to 
meeting relevant statutory tests. 
The mining and metals industry in Burkina Faso is governed by the Burkina Faso General Tax Code, the 
Burkina Faso Mining Code (issued in 2015) and the UEMOA (West African Economic and Monetary 
Union) Mining Code (issued on 23 December 2003). The fiscal regime primarily consists of a 
combination of a corporate tax rate of 27.5% (reduced to 17.5% for mining companies that obtained a 
mining license before 9 July 2015), royalties and in relation to foreign distributions, 6.25% withholding 
taxes.  
During the mining exploitation phase, the government of Burkina Faso is entitled to free shares 
representing 10% of the capital of the mining company in accordance with the Burkina Faso Mining 
Code. The 10% interest is acquired in conjunction with the granting of the mining title. 
Gryphon has received independent taxation advice indicating it is expected that it would be possible to 
establish a corporate structure which should remove the prospect of double taxation between Burkina 
Faso and Australia in relation to the Banfora Project.
6 Based on the spot exchange rate of 1.00AUD:445 West African Franc (CFA Franc)
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
25
9.8
9.9
9.10
9.11
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Number of
shares held 000s
Dividends and franking credits 
Gryphon has not historically paid dividends and Gryphon management has advised that the Company 
does not have any franking credits available to it. 
Hedging 
Gryphon management has advised that the Company does not currently engage in hedging. 
Contingent liabilities 
Gryphon management has advised of two outstanding unfair dismissal claims which it considers to have 
no merit. The combined value of both claims is not expected by Gryphon to exceed $150,000.  
Share capital and ownership 
As at 20 July 2016, Gryphon had approximately 422.8 million ordinary shares on issue as summarised in 
the table below.  
Table 7: Equity ownership breakdown  
Shareholder 
HSBC Custody Nominees (Australia) Limited  
Citicorp Nominees Pty Limited  
Merrill Lynch (Australia) Nominees Pty Limited 
JP Morgan Nominees Australia Limited  
Buttonwood Nominees Pty Ltd 
Teranga 
ABN Amro Clearing Sydney Nominees Pty Ltd 
Denman Income Limited 
Pershing Australia Nominees Pty Ltd 
National Nominees Limited 
Total number of shares held by the top 10 shareholders  
Other shareholders  
Total number of shares on issue  
Source: Gryphon management 
As at the date of this report, current substantial shareholder notices had been received as set out below. 
Table 8: Substantial shareholder notices received by Gryphon 
Shareholder 
Macquarie Group Limited  
MM Asset Management 
Global X Management Company 
Teranga 
Source: Gryphon 2015 Annual Report, ASX Announcements
54,530 
50,532 
34,059 
33,067 
31,577 
21,200 
9,436 
3,750 
3,000 
2,936 
244,088 
178,709 
422,796
shares 
12.9 
12.0 
8.1 
7.8 
7.5 
5.0 
2.2 
0.9 
0.7 
0.7 
57.7 
42.3 
100.0
shares 
6.90 
6.85 
6.36 
5.01
% of issued
Number of
shares held 000s
% of issued
27,738 
27,520 
31,051 
21,200
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
26
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
$
0.870 
0.870 
0.235 
0.235
Exercise Price
Number of SARs
000s 
219 
355 
3,333 
830 
4,737
We note, the current interests in Gryphon’s issued capital held by the substantial shareholders may differ 
to what is set out above. 
Options 
At the date of this report, there were no options issued over ordinary shares in Gryphon. 
Share appreciation rights 
At the date of this report, Gryphon had approximately 4.7 million share appreciation rights (SARs) on 
issue as summarised in the following table.  
Table 9: SARs on issue 
Grant date 
Date of expiry 
20 Nov 12 
19 Nov 16 
4 Dec 12 
3 Dec 16 
20 Nov 13 
31 Dec 16 
20 Jan 14 
31 Dec 16 
Total 
 
Source: Gryphon management  
The SARs form part of the Company’s Equity Incentive Plan and give executives and employees the 
opportunity to subscribe for ordinary shares in Gryphon, at a fixed exercise price similar to an option 
instrument. Gryphon has advised that all SARs on issue have met their vesting conditions. 
Share performance rights 
Similarly to the SARs, share performance rights (SPRs) form part of the Company’s Equity Incentive 
Plan. Holders of the SPRs receive new Gryphon shares subject to the satisfaction of certain time and 
performance conditions, for nil consideration. On 25 November 2015, approximately 11.4 million SPRs 
were issued to various Gryphon executives and employees, expiring on 30 September 2018. 50% of the 
SPRs will vest if the Company commences construction prior to 30 September 2017 and the other 50% 
will vest if the Company achieves first gold pour by 30 September 2018.  
On 28 June 2016, an additional 5.0 million SPRs were issued to Gryphon’s Managing Director 
Mr Stephen Parsons, bringing the total share performance rights on issue to approximately 16.4 million. 
50% of the SPRs will vest if the Company commences construction prior to 31 December 2019 and the 
other 50% will vest if the Company achieves first gold pour by 30 December 2020. The Directors have 
discretion to determine whether the 5.0 million SPRs will vest (and on what terms) in the event the 
Scheme is approved.  
As set out at Section 10.5 of the Scheme Booklet, the Directors have determined that in the event the 
Scheme is approved, all outstanding SPRs will vest and form part of the Scheme.  
Share price and volume trading history 
The chart below depicts Gryphon’s daily closing price on the ASX over the 12 month period to 
17 June 2016, being the last trading day prior to Gryphon’s announcement of the Scheme, along with the 
daily volume of shares traded on the ASX as a percentage of total issued share capital over the period.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
27
9.12
9.13
9.14
9.15
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Figure 2: Gryphon daily closing price and volume of shares traded on the ASX
)
$
(
 
e
c
i
r
p
e
r
a
h
s
g
n
i
s
o
C
l
0.180
0.160
0.140
0.120
0.100
0.080
0.060
0.040
0.020
1
2
4
3
5
3.0%
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0.000
Jun-15
Jul-15
Aug-15
Sep-15
Oct-15
Nov-15
Dec-15
Jan-16
Feb-16
Mar-16
Apr-16
May-16
0.0%
Jun-16
Volume traded as % of total shares on issue
Closing share price ($)
e
u
s
s
i
n
o
 
s
e
r
a
h
s
 
l
a
t
o
t
 
f
o
%
 
s
a
d
e
d
a
r
t
 
e
m
u
o
V
l
Source: Capital IQ, KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis and ASX Announcements   
As illustrated in the figure above, Gryphon’s closing share price exhibited considerable volatility over the 
latter part of the period. The share price generally trended down to the end of January 2016, closing in the 
range of $0.046 to $0.07 over this period. On 18 April 2016, Gryphon’s share price jumped 
approximately 14.6%, with a turnover of approximately 3.5 million shares, closing at $0.11 following the 
announcement of exploration drilling results. Gryphon’s share price exhibited volatility following the 
announcement on 18 April 2016, before closing at $0.135 on 17 June 2016. 
Other than normal half year and full year financial reporting and quarterly activities reporting, significant 
announcements by Gryphon in the 12 months to 17 June 2016 that may have had an impact on its share 
price include: 
1. 
2.
6 July 2015 – Update in relation to the Banfora Project scoping study  
29 October 2015 – Announcement in relation to Gryphon’s intention to divest its interests in its 
Mauritanian gold and copper assets to Algold 
14 March 2016 – Notification from Algold of its intention to exercise its option to acquire 100% of 
Gryphon’s interest in the Mauritanian gold and copper assets  
18 April 2016 – Announcement of a high-grade underground exploration target identified at the 
Banfora Project 
4 May 2016 – Announcement of a new drilling program targeting various prospective drilling 
targets in Burkina Faso
3.
4.
5.
On 7 January 2016, 2.6% of issued share capital was traded largely due to a substantial shareholder 
selling down its interest.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
28
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Further details in relation to all announcements made by Gryphon to the ASX can be obtained from either 
Gryphon’s website or ASX’s website at www.asx.com.au.  
As illustrated in the figure below, Gryphon’s share price generally underperformed against the ASX All 
Ordinaries Gold Sector Index prior to April 2016 but performed strongly in the latter part of the period. 
Similarly, Gryphon underperformed relative to the ASX All Ordinaries prior to January 2016 but has 
significantly outperformed since that date, albeit displaying considerably greater volatility over the period 
than both indices and reflecting the strong performance of Gryphon’s share price since January 2016.
Figure 3: Gryphon's performance relative to the All Ordinaries and All Ordinaries Gold Index
e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p
e
v
i
t
a
e
R
l
200%
150%
100%
50%
0%
-50%
Jun-15
Jul-15
Aug-15
Sep-15
Oct-15
Nov-15
Dec-15
Jan-16
Feb-16
Mar-16
Apr-16
May-16
Jun-16
Gryphon
All Ordinaries Index
All Ordinaries Index - Gold
Source: Capital IQ and KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
Trading liquidity on the ASX 
The table below presents analysis in relation to the volume of trading in Gryphon’s shares on the ASX 
over various periods of time in the 12 month period to 17 June 2016, being the last trade day on the ASX 
prior to Gryphon’s announcement of the Scheme. 
Table 10: Trading liquidity in Gryphon shares on the ASX pre-announcement of the Scheme  
Period up to and 
including  
17 June 2016 
1 day 
1 week 
1 month 
3 months 
6 months
volume  
million 
1.0 
4.5 
25.8 
103.6 
154.4
shares 
0.2 
1.1 
6.4 
25.8 
38.4
high 
 $ 
0.145 
0.145 
0.160 
0.180 
0.180
low 
 $ 
0.135 
0.135 
0.110 
0.066 
0.046
VWAP
$
0.140 
0.140 
0.132 
0.131 
0.108
Share price
Share price
Cumulative
As a % of 
total issued
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
29
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
low 
 $ 
0.046
high 
 $ 
0.180
VWAP
$
0.093
As a % of 
total issued
Share price
Share price
volume  
million 
215.0
Period up to and 
including  
17 June 2016 
12 months 
Source: Capital IQ and KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis  
Gryphon shares have, prima facie, exhibited moderate liquidity over the 12 month period to 17 June 2016, 
with approximately 54% of total shares on issue traded, at an average daily volume of 0.87 million shares 
and daily value of approximately $81,000. We note that over this period Gryphon shares were traded on 
247 out of 253 available trade days on the ASX. In recent times the liquidity of Gryphon shares has 
increased, with approximately 26% of total shares on issue traded over the three month period to 17 June 
2016, representing an average daily trade volume of 1.67 million shares and value of approximately 
$220,000.  
An analysis of the volume of trading in Gryphon’s shares in the period from 18 June 2016 to 21 July 2016 
inclusive is set out below.  
Table 11: Trading liquidity in Gryphon shares on the ASX post-announcement of the Scheme 
Period from 
18 June 2016 
to 21 July 
2016 
33 days 
Source: Capital IQ and KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis
volume  
million 
94.9
Share price
Share price
VWAP
$ 
0.178
As a % of 
total issued
shares 
23.6
low 
 $ 
0.160
high 
 $ 
0.200
Cumulative
shares 
53.6
Cumulative
10 
10.1
10.2
Profile of Teranga 
Company overview 
Teranga is a Canadian gold exploration, development and production company dual-listed on the TSX 
and the ASX. Teranga’s principal asset comprises the Sabodala Project located Senegal, West Africa. The 
Sabodala Project includes the operating Sabodala mine and mill, the Golouma project, the Gora project 
and various exploration prospects at different stages of development.  
An overview of the Sabodala Project is set out below. Further more detailed information in relation to 
Teranga’s interest in the Sabodala Project and other exploration permits is set out in the Specialist Report 
attached as Appendix 7 to this report.  
The Sabodala Project 
The Sabodala gold deposit was originally discovered in 1961 and was acquired by Mineral Deposits 
Limited (MDL) in 2004.  
In May 2007, MDL received the Sabodala Mining Concession and open pit mining production 
commenced in March 2009.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
30
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
31 Dec 13 
4,540 
3,152 
207 
1,033
31 Dec 14 
6,174 
3,622 
212 
865
31 Dec 15 
7,748 
3,421 
182 
965
In November 2010, Teranga completed the indirect acquisition of the Sabodala Project and various 
exploration tenements by way of a restructuring and demerger from MDL.  
In April 2015, the Sabodala Project was expanded to include the Golouma project and the Gora project. 
A summary of the recent gold production and all-in sustaining costs at the Sabodala Project (on a 100% 
basis) is set out below. 
Table 12: Historical gold production and cash costs at the Sabodala Project 
 
Ore mined (000 t) 
Ore milled (000 t) 
Gold produced (000 oz) 
All-in sustaining costs (US$/oz) 
Source: Teranga 2014 and 2015 Annual Report 
A summary of the Mineral Reserves and Mineral Resources contained within the Sabodala Project area as 
at 31 December 2015 is set out below. 
Table 13: Summary of Sabodala Project Mineral Reserve and Mineral Resource 
 
Mineral Reserves 
Open pit 
 
Underground 
Stockpiles 
Total Mineral Reserves 
Mineral Resources 
Open pit 
 
Underground 
Total Measured and Indicated 
Open pit 
Underground 
Total Mineral Resources 
Note:  
1.  Mineral Resource amounts quoted are inclusive of Mineral Reserves  
2.  Mineral Reserve and Mineral Resource figures from the 2015 Annual Report have been reported in 
compliance with the Canadian Securities Administrators National Instrument 43-101 Standards for 
Disclosure for Mineral Projects regulations.
Category 
 
Proved 
Probable 
Probable 
Proved 
 
 
Measured 
Indicated 
Indicated 
 
Inferred 
Inferred
Au Moz 
 
0.3 
1.6 
0.4 
0.4 
2.6 
 
0.9 
2.8 
0.7 
4.5 
0.4 
0.5 
5.4
Au g/t 
 
1.5 
1.4 
5.0 
0.8 
 
 
1.2 
1.6 
3.8 
 
1.2 
3.4
Mt 
 
6.0 
36.0 
2.2 
15.3 
59.3 
 
25.0 
54.4 
6.0 
85.4 
10.3 
4.9 
100.6
10.3
Source: Teranga 2015 Annual Report, ASX announcements 
Other mineral assets 
Teranga currently has nine exploration permits encompassing approximately 1,000 km² of land 
surrounding the Sabodala Project. Exploration is focused on identifying both flat-lying, near-surface
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
31
10.4
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Unaudited
31 Mar 16 
US$000 
 79,198  
 (52,531) 
 26,667  
 (1,413) 
 (1,573) 
 (967) 
 (948) 
 (1,071) 
 - 
 (1,483) 
 (4,960) 
 (12,415) 
 14,252  
 (4,909) 
 9,343
Audited 
31 Dec 14 
US$000 
 260,588  
 (210,128) 
 50,460  
 (2,772) 
 (10,934) 
 (2,543) 
 (911) 
 (9,484)
standalone deposits, as well as smaller high-grade satellite deposits that are within trucking distance of 
the centrally located Sabodala mill. 
Historical financial performance 
Teranga’s historical audited consolidated financial performance for CY13, CY14, CY15 and unaudited 
financial performance for the three-months ended 31 March 2016 are summarised below.  
Table 14: Teranga’s historical consolidated financial performance 
  
  
  
Revenue  
Cost of sales 
Gross profit 
Exploration and evaluation expenditures 
Administration expenses  
Corporate social responsibility expenses 
Share-based compensation 
Finance costs 
Non-cash impairment charge 
Net foreign exchange gains/(loss) 
Other income/(expenses) 
Total expenses 
Profit/(loss) before income tax 
Income tax (expense)/benefit 
Profit/(loss) for the year 
Change in fair value of available for sale 
financial asset (net of tax) 
Reclassification of income, net of tax 
Total comprehensive profit/(loss) for the 
year 
Weighted average ordinary shares on issue 
– 000  
Basic and diluted ordinary earnings/(loss) 
per share (cents per share)1,2 
Notes: 
1. 
 
2.
Audited 
31 Dec 13 
US$000 
297,927 
(195,531) 
102,396 
(5,405) 
(10,857) 
(1,763) 
(813) 
(12,148) 
- 
(1,233) 
(10,507) 
(42,726) 
 59,670 
 -   
 59,670
Audited 
31 Dec 15 
US$000 
 224,620  
 (174,884) 
 49,736  
 (2,525) 
 (10,835) 
 (2,853) 
 (1,761) 
 (3,159) 
 (90,000) 
 1,901  
 1,381  
(107,851) 
 (58,115) 
 2,502  
 (55,613)
Basic earnings / loss per share is calculated by dividing net profit / loss attributable to the members of 
the parent entity by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year. 
Diluted earnings and loss per share is calculated by dividing net profit or loss for the year attributable to 
members of the parent entity by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the 
year plus the weighted average number of ordinary shares that would be issued on the conversion of all 
the dilutive potential options into ordinary share. 
Amounts may not add exactly due to rounding. 
Historical expenses reclassified in accordance with the Scheme Booklet.
3. 
4. 
Source: Teranga 2014 and 2015 Annual Report, Scheme Booklet, KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis
-    
 2,013  
 (1,982) 
(26,613) 
 23,847  
 (1,536) 
 22,311
2
270,705
340,867
360,211
360,211
54,214
22,310
(55,613)
(6,418) 
 962
(1)
-
19
5
(14)
-    
 -
-    
 -
9,343
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
32
10.5
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
In relation to Teranga’s historical consolidated financial performance above we note that the reported net 
loss of approximately US$55.6 million as at 31 December 2015, is largely attributable to the 
US$90.0 million non-cash impairment charge in relation to long-lived assets and recorded goodwill.  
Historical financial position 
Teranga’s historical audited consolidated financial position as at 31 December 2013, 31 December 2014 
and 31 December 2015 and unaudited consolidated financial position as at 31 March 2016 are 
summarised below. 
Table 15: Teranga’s historical financial position 
  
  
  
Cash and cash equivalents 
Restricted cash 
Trade and other receivables 
Inventories 
Other current assets 
Total current assets  
Inventories 
Equity accounted investment 
Property, plant and equipment 
Mine development expenditures 
Deferred income tax assets 
Other non-current assets 
Goodwill 
Total non-current assets  
Total assets 
Trade and other payables 
Borrowings 
Current income tax liabilities 
Deferred revenue 
Provisions 
Total current liabilities  
Borrowings 
Deferred revenue 
Provisions 
Other non-current liabilities 
Total non-current liabilities 
Total liabilities 
Net assets  
Shares on issue – 000s 
Net asset backing per share – US cents
Audited 
31 Dec 14 
US$000 
 35,810 
 -   
 1,562 
 66,639 
 8,995 
 113,006 
 91,057 
 -   
198,433 
260,719 
 11,879 
 7,917 
 41,776 
611,781 
724,787 
 53,909 
 3,946 
 -   
 21,814 
 1,936 
 81,605 
 -   
 92,184 
 16,704 
 18,399 
127,287 
208,892 
515,895 
352,801 
 1.46
Audited 
31 Dec 13 
US$000 
 14,961 
 20,000 
 7,999 
 67,121 
 5,762 
 115,843 
 63,081 
 47,627 
 219,540 
 181,605 
 -   
 947 
 -   
 512,800 
 628,643 
 56,891 
 70,423 
 -   
 -   
 1,751 
 129,065 
 3,946 
 -   
 14,336 
 10,959 
 29,241 
 158,306 
 470,337 
 316,801 
 1.48
Audited 
31 Dec 15 
US$000 
 44,436  
 -    
 15,701  
 57,529  
 9,381  
 127,047  
 106,898  
 -    
 193,426  
 237,046  
 23,098  
 8,701  
 -    
 569,169  
 696,216  
 62,545  
 -    
 8,685  
 19,155  
 2,588  
 92,973  
 13,450  
 72,190  
 28,236  
 11,098  
 124,974  
 217,947  
 478,269  
 392,001  
 1.22
Unaudited
31 Mar 16 
US$000 
 53,498  
 -    
 14,799  
 51,802  
 11,338  
 131,437  
 109,115  
 -    
 194,153  
 238,937  
 23,279  
 8,060  
 -    
 573,544  
 704,981  
 62,349  
 -    
 12,367  
 22,374  
 3,245  
 100,335  
 13,706  
 63,616  
 28,615  
 10,987  
 116,924  
 217,259  
 487,722  
392,107 
 1.24
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
33
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Unaudited
31 Mar 16 
US$000 
2.8% 
 1.3
Amounts may not add exactly due to rounding.
Audited 
31 Dec 15 
US$000 
2.8% 
 1.4
Audited 
31 Dec 14 
US$000 
0.8% 
 1.4
Audited 
31 Dec 13 
US$000 
15.8% 
 0.9
Gearing -% 
Current ratio – times 
Notes: 
1. 
Source: Teranga 2014 and 2015 Annual Report, Scheme Booklet, KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
In relation to Teranga’s historical consolidated financial positions above we note that: 
•  other current assets and non-current assets as at 31 December 2015 largely reflect advanced royalty 
payments made by Teranga to the Government of Senegal. Teranga is required to make payments in 
consideration for a waiver of the right by the Government of Senegal to acquire an additional equity 
interest in certain exploration licenses converted to mine licenses when ore is processed through the 
Sabodala Project processing mill 
trade and other payables of US$62.5 million as at 31 December 2015 consist of trade payables, other 
sundry creditors and accrued expenses as well as: 
- 
- 
-
royalties payable of US$11.0 million to the Republic of Senegal 
a reserve payment of US$1.9 million payable to the Republic of Senegal  
a contingent cash consideration in relation to the acquisition of a 13% interest in the Oromin 
Joint Venture Group (OJVG). The contingent consideration may be payable based on the gold 
price and increases to OJVG’s mining reserves through to 2020, of which US$3.8 million was 
accrued upon finalisation of the purchase price allocation in 2014. As at 31 December 2015, 
US$0.5 million had been recorded as a current liability  
accrued dividends of US$7.8 million payable to the Government of Senegal, in respect of its 
10% minority interest in the Sabodala Project earnings for the 2013, 2014 and 2015 calendar 
years.
•
-
•  other non-current liabilities as at 31 December 2015 refer to:
-
a social development fund which involves making a payment of US$15 million to the 
Government of Senegal at the operation end. As at 31 December 2015, Teranga recorded a non-
current liability of US$7.6 million (in net present value (NPV) terms). Due to a change in the 
expected payment date from 2023 to 2029, Teranga recorded a recovery of US$2.8 million 
within other income
-  US$3.5 million (in NPV terms) representing the non-current portion of the potential additional
OJVG cash consideration described above.
10.6
Statement of cash flows 
Teranga’s abridged historical audited consolidated cash flows for CY13, CY14, CY15 and unaudited 
consolidated cash flows for the three-months ended 31 March 2016 are summarised below.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
34
ABCD
48,185
25,806
Audited 
31 Dec 13 
US$000 
 59,670  
 -
Audited 
31 Dec 14 
US$000 
 22,311  
 -
30,722 
 (14,672) 
 -   
 -   
 (8,409) 
 (41,189) 
 74,307 
 (20,000) 
 -
44,062  
 (8,089) 
 (21,002) 
 1,536  
 (19,693) 
 4,078  
 49,009  
 20,000  
 (112,500)
Table 16: Teranga's abridged historical cash flows statement 
  
  
  
Net profit/(loss) for the year 
Impairment charge 
Depreciation of property, plant and 
equipment 
Depreciation of capitalised mine 
development costs 
Inventory movements - non cash 
Deferred gold revenue recognised 
Deferred income tax recovery/(expense) 
Decrease/(increase) in inventories 
Other adjustments 
Net cash provided by operating activities 
Decrease/(increase) in restricted cash  
Acquisition of OJVG 
Expenditures for property, plant and 
equipment 
Expenditures for mine development 
Acquisition of intangibles 
Proceeds on disposal of property, plant and 
equipment 
Net cash (used in) investing activities 
Net proceeds from equity offering 
Proceeds from Franco-Nevada gold stream 
Repayment of borrowings 
Drawdown from equipment finance facility 
Drawdown from revolving credit facility 
Financing costs paid 
Interest paid on borrowings 
Proceeds from stock options exercised 
Dividend payment to Senegal Government  
Net cash (used in)/provided by financing 
activities 
Effect of exchange rates on cash holdings  
Net decrease/(increase) in cash held 
Cash at beginning of period 
Cash at end of the period 
Notes: 
1. 
Source: Teranga 2014 and 2015 Annual Report, KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis
38 
 (89,018) 
 -   
 -   
 (12,282) 
 12,755 
 -   
 (1,200) 
 (7,054) 
- 
 (2,700)
(10,481) 
 431 
 (24,761) 
 39,722 
 14,961
-    
 -
(1,000) 
 (3,340) 
- 
 -
83,252  
 1  
 20,849  
 14,961  
 35,810
(17,344) 
 (51,603) 
 (109)
(3,567) 
 (15,346)
-
-
(111,413) 
 25,367  
 135,000  
 (72,775)
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Audited 
31 Dec 15 
US$000 
 (55,613) 
 90,000
Unaudited
31 Mar 16 
US$000 
 9,343  
 -
22,703
5,762
19,526  
 7,458  
 (22,653) 
 (11,219) 
 (14,164) 
 (5,604) 
 30,434  
 -    
 -
(23,962) 
 (23,545) 
 (175)
- 
 (47,682) 
 17,337  
 -
(4,192) 
- 
 15,000  
 (2,025) 
 (247) 
- 
 -
25,873  
 1
8,626 
 35,810  
 44,436
5,235  
 2,917  
 (5,355) 
 (180) 
 1,599  
 4,822  
24,143
-    
 -
(7,015) 
 (7,331) 
 (36)
-
(14,382) 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
(444) 
18 
-
(426) 
 (273) 
 9,062  
 44,436  
 53,498
Amounts may not add exactly due to rounding.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
35
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
Taxation 
Canada 
As at 30 June 2015, Teranga had carried forward tax losses of US$52.3 million, which are available to 
offset against future taxable income in Canada subject to meeting relevant statutory tests. 
Senegal 
Teranga has advised that it does not have any carried forward tax losses in Senegal. The mining and 
metals industry in Senegal is governed by the Mining Code (issued 2003), however we note, a new draft 
Mining Code (issued in 2015) is currently being considered, but is not yet legislated. The fiscal regime 
primarily consists of a combination of corporate income tax at a rate of 25%, royalties and in relation to 
foreign distributions, 10% withholding taxes.  We note that in December 2015 Teranga applied for Export 
Free Status which, if granted, would result in a reduction in taxes payable by in relation to the Sabodala 
Project including, in particular, a reduction in the corporate income tax rate from 25% to 15%. 
Dividends 
Teranga has not historically paid dividends. 
Hedging 
On 26 November 2015, Teranga implemented currency hedges to mitigate its exposure to increases in 
costs due to increases in the Euro (€) relative to the USD. A total of €1.5 million is under contract through 
to February 2016 at a fixed €:USD exchange rate of 1.0656, which resulted in unrealised hedge gains of 
$40,000 as at 31 December 2015. 
In February 2016, Teranga entered into gold forward contracts with Société Générale to deliver 28,000 
ounces from March 2016 to August 2016 at an average price of US$1,201 per ounce. 
At the end of February 2016, Teranga entered into zero cost collars with Macquarie Bank. The 
agreements provide a guaranteed floor price of $1,150 per ounce and also provide exposure to the gold 
price up to an average of $1,312 per ounce. These agreements cover 15,000 ounces of production between 
October and December 2016. 
Contingent liabilities 
In 2013, Teranga made a payment of US$2.7 million with a further payment of US$2.7 million required 
once drilling activities recommence at Niakafiri. The further US$2.7 million payment represents an 
outstanding contingent liability as at 31 December 2015. 
Teranga has an outstanding assessment in the amount of US$1.0 million with the Senegalese tax authority 
in relation to its 2011 tax assessment, which Teranga has and continues to dispute. Teranga is confident 
that the tax assessment is without merit and will not result in material costs to Teranga. 
Deferred revenue 
On 15 January 2014, Teranga completed a transaction with Franco Nevada pursuant to which, Franco 
Nevada pre-purchased from Teranga:
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
36
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
10.12
Number of
shares held 000s
% of issued
•  22,500 oz of gold per annum for the first six years of the agreement  
•  6% of future gold production beyond the first six years, 
in compensation for the initial upfront payment of $135 million and an 80% discount to the spot price of 
gold for each ounce delivered above. 
Share capital and ownership 
Teranga’s issued capital comprises a mixture of Teranga’s shares and Teranga options. 
As at 19 July 2016, Teranga had approximately 392.1 million common shares on issue (of which 
39.6 million were represented Teranga CDIs) on the TSX as summarised in the table below.  
Table 17: Breakdown of Teranga Shares on the TSX  
Shareholder 
Tablo Corporation 
Van Eck Associates Corporation 
Ruffer LLP 
Dimensional Fund Advisors, L.P. 
Sentry Investments Inc. 
Heartland Advisors, Inc. 
OppenheimerFunds, Inc. 
BMO Asset Management Inc. 
Franklin Advisers, Inc. 
Stabilitas GmbH 
Total number of shares held by the top 10 shareholders  
Other shareholders  
Total number of shares on issue  
Source: Nasdaq IR Insight 
As at 19 July 2016, Teranga had approximately 39.6 million CDIs on issue, which trade on the ASX, as 
summarised in the table below.  
Table 18: Breakdown of Teranga CDIs on the ASX 
Shareholder 
Fidelity Management & Research Company 
Franklin Advisers, Inc. 
Degroof Banque Privée S.A. 
Dimensional Fund Advisors, L.P. 
Platt (Anthony) 
Toad Facilities Pty. Ltd. 
P G Howarth Pty. Ltd. 
Ackland (Penelope Margaret) 
URAM SA 
Gecko Resources Pty. Ltd.
held 000s 
3,338 
1,722 
1,047 
968 
560 
420 
354 
272 
263 
244
50,919 
32,083 
12,866 
11,804 
10,893 
10,000 
8,660 
6,937 
4,786 
3,204 
152,151 
239,955 
392,107
shares 
12.99 
8.18 
3.28 
3.01 
2.78 
2.55 
2.21 
1.77 
1.22 
0.82 
38.80 
61.20 
100.00
Number of CDIs
% of issued CDIs
8.43 
4.35 
2.64 
2.44 
1.41 
1.06 
0.89 
0.69 
0.66 
0.62
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
37
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Number of CDIs
% of issued CDIs
23.19 
76.81 
100.00
held 000s 
9,188 
30,430 
39,618
Shareholder 
Total number of CDIs held by the top 10 holders  
Other CDI holders  
Total number of CDIs on issue  
Source: Nasdaq IR Insight 
As at the date of this report, Teranga had the following substantial shareholders. 
Table 19: Substantial shareholders of Teranga 
Shareholder 
Tablo  
Van Eck Associates Corporation  
Source: Teranga management, Scheme Booklet 
Incentive Stock Option Plan 
Under an Incentive Stock Option Plan, stock options are granted to directors, officers, employees and 
consultants of Teranga. 
As at 30 June 2016, Teranga had approximately 19.1 million options over Teranga common shares on 
issue comprising approximately:  
•  11.7 million options exercisable at C$3.00 each, with various expiry dates between 26 November
shares 
13.0 
8.2
Number of
shares held 000s
50,919 
32,083
% of issued
2020 and 1 May 2024
•  3.6 million options exercisable at C$0.64 each, with an expiry date of 31 March 2020 
•  3.8 million options exercisable at C$0.67 each, with an expiry date of 31 March 2021.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
38
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
10.13
10.14
Share based payments 
 
Fixed Bonus Plan 
Under a Fixed Option Plan, Fixed Option Plan Units (Units) are granted to officers and employees of 
Teranga in lieu of participating in the Stock Option Plan. Each Unit entitles the holder upon exercise to 
receive a cash payment equal to the closing price of a Teranga share on the TSX on the business day prior 
to the date of exercise, less the exercise price. 
As at 30 June 2016, there were approximately 1.8 million Units outstanding, granted on 8 August 2012, 
31 March 2015 and 31 March 2016, with expiry dates ranging between 31 March 2020 to 24 February 
2022. Of the 1.8 million Units outstanding as at 30 June 2016, approximately 1.4 million Units had an 
exercise price of C$3.00, approximately 0.3 million Units had an exercise price of C$0.64 and 
approximately 0.1 million Units had an exercise price of C$0.67. 
As at 30 June 2016, Teranga assessed the total fair value of the Units to be in the order of approximately 
US$0.3 million. 
Restricted share units and deferred share units 
Teranga grants cash-settled awards in the form of restricted share units (RSUs) to officers and employees 
and deferred share units (DSUs) to directors. Each RSU and DSU granted has a value equal to the value 
of one Teranga share.  
The RSUs and DSUs have time based and/or performance based vesting conditions.  
As at 30 June 2016, Teranga had approximately 8.2 million RSUs and 1.9 million DSUs on issue and had 
recorded total liabilities of US$3.3 million relating to the RSUs and DSUs. 
Share price and volume trading history of Teranga shares 
The charts below depict the daily closing price of Teranga shares over the 12 month period to 
17 June 2016, being the last trade day prior to the announcement of the Scheme, along with the daily 
volume of Teranga shares traded as a percentage of total issued share capital over the period.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
39
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Figure 4: Daily closing price and volume of Teranga shares on the TSX
)
$
C
(
 
e
c
i
r
p
e
r
a
h
s
 
g
n
i
s
o
C
l
4
1
2
3
1.400
1.200
1.000
0.800
0.600
0.400
0.200
0.000
Jun-15
Jul-15
Aug-15
Sep-15
Oct-15
Nov-15
Dec-15
Jan-16
Feb-16
Mar-16
Apr-16
May-16
Volume traded as % of total shares on issue
Closing share price (CAD)
2.0%
1.8%
1.6%
1.4%
1.2%
1.0%
0.8%
0.6%
0.4%
0.2%
0.0%
e
u
s
s
i
n
o
 
s
e
r
a
h
s
 
l
a
t
o
t
 
f
o
%
 
s
a
d
e
d
a
r
t
 
e
m
u
o
V
l
Source: Capital IQ, KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis and ASX Announcements 
As illustrated in the figure above, the daily closing share price of Teranga shares exhibited considerable 
volatility over the period. The share price generally trended downwards, to the end of January 2016, 
closing in the range of approximately C$0.39 to C$0.80 over this period. Over the period post 
January 2016 to 17 June 2016 the price of Teranga shares increased significantly closing at C$1.19 per 
share on 17 June 2016.  
Other than normal half year and full year financial reporting and quarterly activities reporting, significant 
announcements by Teranga in the 12 months to 17 June 2016 that may have had an impact on its share 
price include: 
1.
22 September 2015 – Announcement in relation to Richard Young, the President and Chief 
Executive Officer of Teranga, presenting at the Denver Gold Forum, in addition to a corporate 
update outlining Teranga’s key operations results and strategic growth initiatives     
15 October 2015 – Announcement of a private placement to cornerstone investor, Tablo, for a 
consideration of C$22.7 million (39.2 million shares at a price of C$0.58 per Teranga share) 
24 March 2016 – Release of a 43-101 Technical Report prepared by Teranga and RPA Inc, a mining 
technical specialist, in relation to the Sabodala Project 
29 April 2016 – Announcement of record quarterly production results from the Sabodala Project for 
the three months ending 31 March 2016
2.
3.
4.
Further details in relation to all announcements made by Teranga to TSX can be obtained from either 
Teranga’s website or TSX’s website at www.tsx.com.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
40
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
As illustrated in the figure below, Teranga’s share price generally underperformed against the S&P/TSX 
Composite Gold Index prior to April 2016 but performed strongly in the latter part of the period. 
Similarly, Teranga underperformed relative to the S&P/TSX Composite Index prior to April 2016 but has 
significantly outperformed since that date, albeit displaying considerably greater volatility over the period 
than both indices and reflecting the strong performance of Teranga’s share price since January 2016.  
Figure 5: Teranga shares performance relative to the S&P/TSX Composite Index and the S&P/TSX 
Composite Gold Index
e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p
e
v
i
t
a
e
R
l
60%
40%
20%
0%
-20%
-40%
-60%
Jun-15
Jul-15
Aug-15
Sep-15
Oct-15
Nov-15
Dec-15
Jan-16
Feb-16
Mar-16
Apr-16
May-16
Teranga
S&P/TSX Composite Index
S&P/TSX Composite Index - Gold
Source: Capital IQ and KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
Trading liquidity of Teranga shares on the TSX 
The table below sets out the volume of trade in Teranga shares on the TSX over various periods of time in 
the 12 month period to 17 June 2016, being the last trade day on the TSX prior to Teranga’s 
announcement of the Scheme.  
Table 20: Trading liquidity in Teranga shares on the TSX pre-announcement of the Scheme  
Period up to and 
including  
17 June 2016 
1 day 
1 week 
1 month 
3 months 
6 months 
12 months 
Source: Capital IQ and KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis
volume  
million 
1.1 
6.6 
31.5 
99.9 
188.5 
275.0
shares 
0.3 
1.7 
8.0 
25.5 
48.1 
71.8
high 
 C$ 
1.190 
1.230 
1.230 
1.230 
1.230 
1.230
low 
 C$ 
1.160 
1.130 
0.870 
0.580 
0.380 
0.380
C$ 
1.179 
1.175 
1.050 
0.935 
0.729 
0.684
Share price
Share price
VWAP
Cumulative
As a % of 
total issued
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
41
10.15
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Teranga shares have, exhibited reasonable liquidity over the 12 month period to 17 June 2016, with 
approximately 71.8% of total shares on issue traded, at an average daily volume of 1.1 million shares and 
daily value of approximately C$745,800. We note over this period Teranga shares were traded on 251 out 
of 253 available trade days on the TSX.  
An analysis of the volume of trading in Teranga shares in the period from 18 June 2016 to 21 July 2016 
inclusive is set out below.  
Table 21: Trading liquidity in Teranga shares on the TSX post-announcement of the Scheme  
Period from 
18 June 2016 
to 21 July 
2016 
33 days 
Source: Capital IQ and KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
Share price and volume trading history of existing Teranga CDIs 
The chart below depicts the daily closing price of existing Teranga CDIs on the ASX over the 12 month 
period to 17 June 2016, being the last trade day prior to the announcement of the Scheme, along with the 
daily volume of existing Teranga CDIs traded as a percentage of total issued share capital over the period. 
Figure 6: Daily closing price and volume of existing Teranga CDIs on the ASX
volume  
million 
32.5
As a % of 
total issued
low 
 C$ 
1.010
high 
 C$ 
1.250
shares 
28.3
Share price
Share price
Cumulative
VWAP
C$ 
1.147
1.400
1.200
1.000
0.800
0.600
0.400
0.200
)
$
(
 
e
c
i
r
p
e
r
a
h
s
g
n
i
s
o
C
l
25.0%
20.0%
15.0%
10.0%
5.0%
e
u
s
s
i
n
o
 
s
I
D
C
l
a
t
o
t
 
f
o
%
 
s
a
d
e
d
a
r
t
 
e
m
u
o
V
l
0.000
Jun-15
Jul-15
Aug-15
Sep-15
Oct-15
Nov-15
Dec-15
Jan-16
Feb-16
Mar-16
Apr-16
May-16
0.0%
Jun-16
Volume traded as % of total shares on issue
Closing share price ($)
Source: Capital IQ, KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis and ASX Announcements 
Note: Total CDIs outstanding have been sourced from monthly ASX announcements as disclosed by Teranga  
As illustrated in the figure above, the daily closing price of Teranga CDIs exhibited considerable 
volatility over the period. The price generally trended downwards to the end of January 2016, closing in
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
42
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Cumulative
As a % of 
total issued
the range of approximately $0.39 to $0.81 over this period. Over the period post January 2016 to 17 June 
2016 the price of Teranga CDIs increased significantly closing at $1.22 per share on 17 June 2016. We 
note on 5 February 2016, Teranga CDIs experienced significant daily turnover with approximately 24% 
of total CDIs on issue being traded on that day alone, following the release of Teranga’s CY15 annual 
results causing a large sell-off by certain investors. 
Refer to section 10.14 above for significant announcements made by Teranga in the 12 months to 
17 June 2016. 
Trading liquidity of existing Teranga CDIs on the ASX 
The table below presents analysis in relation to the volume of trade in existing Teranga CDIs on the ASX 
over various periods of time in the 12 month period to 17 June 2016, being the last trade day on the ASX 
prior to Teranga’s announcement of the Scheme. 
Table 22: Trading liquidity in existing Teranga CDIs on the ASX pre-announcement of the Scheme  
Period up to and 
including  
17 June 2016 
1 day 
1 week 
1 month 
3 months 
6 months 
12 months 
Source: Capital IQ, KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis and ASX Announcements 
Existing Teranga CDIs have, prima facie, exhibited only limited liquidity in the three months prior to the 
announcement of the Scheme, but improved liquidity when measured over the total 12 month period to 
17 June 2016, with approximately 68.5% of total CDIs on issue traded, at an average daily volume of 
0.16 million CDIs and daily value of approximately $92,000. We note on 2 February 2016, existing 
Teranga CDIs experienced significant daily turnover with approximately 24% of total CDIs on issue 
being traded on that day, following the release of Teranga’s CY15 annual results causing a large sell-off 
by certain investors. Liquidity in existing Teranga CDIs over the 12 month period to 17 June 2016 would 
decrease to 44.8% if the trading on 5 February 2016 was excluded, at an average daily volume of 0.11 
million CDIs and a daily value of approximately $71,000. 
We note over this period existing Teranga CDIs were traded on 232 out of 253 available trade days on the 
ASX. In recent times, liquidity of existing Teranga CDIs has reduced, with approximately 8.3% of total 
CDIs on issue traded over the three month period to 17 June 2016, representing an average daily trade 
volume of 67,000 CDIs and value of approximately $70,000.
volume  
million 
0.0 
0.2 
1.9 
3.9 
22.3 
37.0
high 
 $ 
1.230 
1.250 
1.250 
1.250 
1.250 
1.250
low 
 $ 
1.200 
1.195 
0.930 
0.595 
0.385 
0.385
CDIs 
0.0 
0.4 
4.1 
8.3 
43.5 
68.5
Share price
Share price
VWAP
$
1.224 
1.211 
1.085 
1.007 
0.531 
0.579
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
43
10.16
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Share price
Share price
An analysis of the volume of trading in existing Teranga CDIs in the period from 18 June 2016 to 
21 July 2016 inclusive is set out below.  
Table 23: Trading liquidity in existing Teranga CDIs on the ASX post-announcement of the 
Scheme 
Period from 
18 June 2016 
to 21 July 
2016 
33 days 
Source: Capital IQ and KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
Share price trading history of existing Teranga CDIs against Teranga shares 
The chart below depicts the daily closing price of existing Teranga CDIs on the ASX against Teranga 
shares on the TSX over the 12 month period to 17 June 2016. The daily closing price of Teranga shares 
have been converted from CAD to AUD terms at the daily spot AUD:CAD exchange rate. 
Figure 7: Daily closing price of existing Teranga CDIs against Teranga shares
volume  
million 
0.9
low 
 $ 
0.813
VWAP
$ 
0.893
high 
 $ 
0.973
Cumulative
As a % of 
total issued
CDIs 
1.9
1.400
1.200
1.000
0.800
0.600
0.400
0.200
)
$
(
 
e
c
i
r
p
e
r
a
h
s
g
n
i
s
o
C
l
0.000
Jun-15
Jul-15
Aug-15
Sep-15
Oct-15
Nov-15
Dec-15
Jan-16
Feb-16
Mar-16
Apr-16
May-16
Jun-16
Closing price of Teranga CDIs (A$)
Closing price of Teranga Shares (A$)
Source: Capital IQ, KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis and ASX Announcements 
As illustrated in the figure above, when compared on a single currency basis (AUD terms), Teranga 
shares and existing Teranga CDIs traded largely at consistent prices over the 12 month period to 17 June 
2016.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
44
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
11 
11.1
11.2
Impact of the Scheme 
Gryphon and Teranga shareholders’ interest 
At the date of this report, Gryphon and Teranga had approximately 422.8 million7 and 392.1 million 
shares on issue respectively. Following the completion of the Scheme, the number of Teranga Shares to 
be issued having regard to the Exchange Ratio will be approximately 70.6 million8. The table below 
summarises the ownership structure should the Scheme be completed.      
Table 24: Shareholder ownership pre and post the Scheme
Shareholder
Post-Scheme issued shares
Expanded Teranga 
%
Pre-Scheme issued shares
Exchange 
Gryphon 
Ratio 
million 
0.169 
401.6 
0.169 
16.4
Scheme Participants 
Gryphon performance rights  
Total Gryphon shareholders 
Existing Teranga shareholders 
New shares issued to Tablo 
Total 
Source: ASX Announcements and KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
Gold assets of the Expanded Teranga 
Completion of the Scheme will provide the Expanded Teranga with a portfolio of exploration, 
development and production gold assets. A summary of the notional Expanded Teranga’s asset portfolio 
is illustrated below.
15% 
83% 
2% 
100%
million 
67.9 
2.8 
70.6 
392.1 
10.5 
473.3
7 Includes the private placement of 21.2 million new common Gryphon shares to Teranga in early July 2016 
8 Based on 422.8 million Gryphon ordinary shares on issue less the 21.2 million shares owned by Teranga plus 16.4 
million new Gryphon shares to be issued pursuant to the accelerated vesting of the outstanding Gryphon performance 
rights.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
45
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Figure 8: Summary of gold interests of the Expanded Teranga
11.3
11.4
Source: ASX Company Announcements 
Teranga intends to advance the Banfora Project into construction and operation. In the short-term, 
Teranga will focus on drilling programs, aiming to convert current Mineral Resources to Mineral 
Reserves and delineating additional Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves.  
Further information on each asset is detailed in the Specialist Report attached as Appendix 7 and in the 
Scheme Booklet. 
Board of Directors  
Teranga intends to appoint its nominees to the Gryphon Board following the completion of the Scheme. 
Teranga’s Board currently consists of nine directors and it is anticipated each existing Teranga director 
will continue as Teranga directors in the Expanded Teranga, if the Scheme is implemented. Details of 
current Teranga directors are set out in Section 5 of the Scheme Booklet. 
Proforma financial position 
Section 6 of the Scheme Booklet sets out for illustrative purposes only the proforma financial position of 
the Expanded Teranga in USD terms as at 31 March 2016, assuming the Scheme is completed, which is 
summarised below. 
Table 25: Expanded Teranga proforma financial position as at 31 March 2016
Teranga
Gryphon
Adjustments
Expanded 
Teranga 
Pro forma
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Inventories 
Other
US$M 
53.5 
14.8 
51.8 
11.3
US$M 
8.1 
0.3 
- 
-
US$M 
5.2 
- 
- 
-
US$M 
66.8 
15.1 
51.8 
11.3
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
46
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Teranga
Gryphon
Adjustments
Expanded 
Teranga 
Pro forma
US$M 
8.4 
0.2 
- 
1.2 
1.8 
-
US$M 
5.2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
59.8
US$M 
145.0 
0.2 
109.1 
1.2 
196.0 
298.7
ABCD
Total current assets 
Trade and other receivables 
Inventories 
Available for sale financial assets 
Property, plant and equipment 
Mine development expenditures 
Exploration & evaluation 
expenditure 
Deferred income tax assets 
Other 
Total non-current assets  
Total assets 
Trade and other payables 
Current income tax liabilities 
Deferred revenue 
Provisions 
Total current liabilities 
Borrowings 
Deferred revenue 
Provisions 
Other 
Total non-current liabilities 
Total liabilities 
Net assets 
Ordinary shares on issue (millions) 
Net assets per share 
Gearing (%) 
Current ratio (times) 
Note 1: Scheme Booklet indicates an AUD:USD exchange rate of 0.7668 (as at 31 March 2016) has been adopted for
4.1 
- 
- 
7.3 
15.7 
2.1 
- 
- 
- 
2.1 
- 
- 
0.2 
- 
0.2 
2.3 
13.4 
401.6 
0.03 
0.0% 
4.0
- 
20.6 
8.0 
633.8 
778.8 
64.4 
12.4 
22.4 
3.2 
102.4 
13.7 
63.6 
28.8 
11.0 
117.1 
219.5 
559.3 
473.3 
1.18 
2.4% 
1.4
(4.1) 
(2.7) 
- 
53.0 
58.2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
58.2 
81.2 
- 
- 
-
US$M 
131.4 
- 
109.1 
- 
194.2 
238.9
- 
23.3 
8.0 
573.5 
704.9 
62.3 
12.4 
22.4 
3.2 
100.3 
13.7 
63.6 
28.6 
11.0 
116.9 
217.2 
487.7 
392.1 
1.24 
2.8% 
1.3
the purpose of determining the pro forma financial position of the Expanded Teranga.
Source:  Scheme Booklet, KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
We make the following observations in relation to the Expanded Teranga’s proforma financial position as 
at 31 March 2016: 
•
the proforma financial position of the Expanded Teranga has been prepared on the basis of the 
unaudited consolidated financial position of Teranga as at 31 March 2016 and unaudited consolidated 
financial position of Gryphon as at 31 March 2016
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
47
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
•
•  Teranga and Gryphon both have net cash positions, which are not expected to be materially impacted 
by completion of the Scheme as the consideration to be provided to the Scheme Participants is in the 
form of new Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs  
the Expanded Teranga’s pro-forma cash position of approximately US$66.8 million combined with 
unused portion of Teranga’s existing debt facilities of approximately US$15 million may be 
insufficient of themselves to meet the expected capital costs for the development of the Banfora 
Project. Whilst there is the potential that any shortfall may be able to be met from near term cash flow 
generated by Teranga from the Sabodala Project, it is also possible that the Expanded Teranga may 
be required to seek additional equity and/or debt to fund this shortfall, the terms of which are not 
known at this time. If the Expanded Teranga is required to raise additional equity capital to fund the 
development of the Banfora Project there is the potential, depending upon the form of the raising and 
prevailing market conditions, for any such capital raising to be dilutive to the Scheme Participants
•  Teranga’s proforma net asset backing per share decreases from US$1.24 to US$1.18 
•  Teranga currently has approximately 392.1 million shares on issue. In the event the Scheme is
completed, Scheme Participants will hold approximately 15% in the Expanded Teranga (excluding 
any shares in Teranga that Scheme Participants may already hold and the interests of overseas 
shareholders whose shares will be realised following completion of the Scheme).
A more detailed discussion of the assumptions and adjustments incorporated in the proforma financial 
position of Teranga is set out in Section 6 of the Scheme Booklet. 
Transaction costs 
As set out in the Scheme Booklet, total transaction and implementation costs incurred by Gryphon and 
Teranga in relation to the Scheme are estimated to be approximately US$2.5 million and US$2.0 million 
respectively. 
Transaction and implementation costs associated with the Scheme incurred by Gryphon and Teranga 
primarily relate to financial advisory, legal, accounting, independent expert, tax and administrative fees, 
Scheme Booklet design and printing, share registry and other expenses. 
Potential cost savings and synergies  
We have been provided with a schedule prepared by Gryphon that sets out the Company’s assessment of 
the synergy benefits and cost savings likely to be available to a pool of purchasers (including Teranga) in 
acquiring a 100% interest in Gryphon. These synergy benefits and cost savings total in the order of 
approximately $2.9 million per annum (in 2017 pre-tax dollars) over the estimated life of Gryphon’s 
operations, with once-off associated costs in realising these benefits incurred in the first year following 
acquisition of $3.0 million (in 2017 pre-tax dollars). 
The quantum of these synergies has been estimated having regard principally to the matters set out below: 
•  an acquirer would realise significant head office wage and on-cost savings as a result of various 
management and head office functions being subsumed within the organisational structure of the 
acquirer
•  Directors’ fees – any acquirer would seek to rationalise the Board of Gryphon
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
48
11.5
11.6
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
•  audit and compliance costs – an acquirer is expected to realise economies of scale from consolidation 
in terms of statutory reporting and compliance requirements charged in respect of the enlarged entity 
when compared to two stand-alone entities.
•  external rent – Gryphon anticipates an acquirer would be able to realise cost savings associated with
the reduction of space requirements as a direct result of the reduction in head office executive and 
employee head count.
In considering the benefits of any acquisition of Gryphon, we believe an acquirer of Gryphon would also 
have regard to the fact that Gryphon’s future cash flow is expected to be sourced from Burkina Faso, 
West Africa. Burkina Faso’s former president was ousted as a result of a presidential coup in October 
2014, creating political and sovereign risk in the country. Following a period of political uncertainty and 
local elections, a new government was elected in November 2015. Economic commentators have forecast 
political stability to gradually improve in 2016 and 2017 under the new democratically elected 
government. 
In the event political stability does not materialise as expected, it could be argued that by adding 
Gryphon’s assets to its portfolio any acquirer would be increasing its exposure to sovereign risk. We have 
taken sovereign risk associated with the location of the Banfora Project into account in our valuation of 
the project. 
Synergies unique to Teranga 
Having regard to the existing operational profile and location of Teranga’s asset base it is not expected 
that Teranga will realise any significant direct cost savings that a general pool of purchasers may not 
otherwise be able to achieve, however, we consider that there are various benefits to Teranga from 
completing the Scheme that may be unique to Teranga, including:   
•
the acquisition of Gryphon’s Banfora Project will provide Teranga with immediate access to a high-
quality growth asset diversifying its asset base during a period of transition from open pit to 
underground mining at the Sabodala Project
11.7
•  acquisition of Gryphon’s Banfora Project will enable Teranga to remain a pure gold play whilst
•
creating a multi-jurisdictional gold producer in West Africa 
the potential for a market share price re-rating following the increase in the Expanded Teranga’s: 
-  market capitalisation  
- 
-  Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves
potential future production from the exploitation of the Banfora Project deposit
Whilst a number of these benefits involve a large degree of subjectivity and may not be easily 
quantifiable, they represent both potential benefits for the Expanded Teranga and key drivers in this 
transaction.   
We have not factored these special benefits unique to Teranga into our determination of the underlying 
value of Gryphon. We have however considered these benefits in our assessment of the reasonableness of 
the Scheme.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
49
12 
12.1
12.2
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Valuation of Gryphon  
Valuation methodology 
The principal assets of Gryphon comprise its interest in mineral assets at various stages of development, 
from early stage exploration to project development. Such assets have limited lives and future 
profitability and asset life depend upon factors that are inherently unpredictable.  
In our experience, the most appropriate method for determining the value of companies similar to 
Gryphon is on the basis of the value of the sum of the parts of the underlying net assets, with its principal 
development asset, the Banfora Project, being valued using the discounted cash flow (DCF) approach. 
The DCF methodology has a strong theoretical basis, valuing a business on the NPV of its future cash 
flows. It requires an analysis of future cash flows, the capital structure and costs of capital. This technique 
is particularly appropriate for start up companies and companies with a limited asset life, which is often 
the case with companies dependent upon depleting Mineral Reserves. Application of this technique 
generally requires a 5-year minimum period of analysis. In addition, a sensitivity analysis for variations in 
key assumptions adopted needs to be performed. 
ASIC Regulatory Guides envisage the use by an independent expert of specialists when valuing specific 
assets. To assist KPMG Corporate Finance in the valuation of Gryphon’s mineral interests, Snowden was 
engaged by Gryphon, and instructed by us, to prepare an independent technical expert report in relation to 
production scenarios, including appropriate Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves estimations, capital 
expenditure and operational cost profiles to be adopted by us in the preparation of forecast cash flows for 
Gryphon’s interest in the Banfora Project. In addition Snowden has assessed the value of Gryphon’s 
interest in other mineral assets not captured in the DCF valuation of the Banfora Project. A copy of 
Snowden’s Specialist Report, which was prepared in accordance with the ValMin Code, is attached to this 
report as Appendix 7. 
The development and operational assumptions recommended by Snowden have been adopted in the cash 
flow projections prepared by us in assessing the values of Gryphon’s interest in the Banfora Project.  
KPMG Corporate Finance was responsible for the determination of certain macroeconomic and other 
assumptions such as commodity prices, exchange rates, discount rates, inflation and taxation assumptions. 
Snowden has determined two key production scenarios, considering each of the HL or CIL development 
alternatives, which it considers reasonable for the purpose of KPMG Corporate Finance’s valuation and 
also a range of values within which it considers the value of each of the relevant interests in other mineral 
assets to lie. The valuations ascribed by Snowden to Gryphon’s interests in other mineral assets have been 
adopted in our report. 
Other assets and liabilities of Gryphon have been incorporated in our valuation based on book values as at 
31 March 2016, adjusted for subsequent material movements, as reasonable estimates of market value. 
Valuation summary 
We have assessed the market value of Gryphon as a whole, inclusive of a premium for control, to lie in 
the range of $46.9 million to $79.8 million, which equates to between $0.11 and $0.18 per Gryphon share. 
The market value of Gryphon was determined by aggregating the estimated market value of Gryphon’s 
interests in mineral assets, adding the assessed value of other assets and, if appropriate, deducting any
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
50
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
external borrowings and non-trading liabilities. The value of Gryphon has been assessed on the basis of 
market value, that is, the value that should be agreed in a hypothetical transaction between a 
knowledgeable, willing, but not anxious buyer and a knowledgeable, willing, but not anxious seller, 
acting at arm’s length. 
Our range of market values does not include any potential strategic or operational synergies that may be 
unique to individual investors. Accordingly, our range of values has been prepared independent of the 
specific circumstances of any potential bidder. 
Our range of assessed values is relatively wide reflecting that: 
•
the Banfora Project is yet to come into production and therefore incorporates a greater degree of 
subjectivity
•  a significant portion of value is attributable to Snowden’s assessment of the Banfora Project Mineral 
Resources not included in the Technical Model, which whilst assessing a “preferred” value closer to 
the bottom of its range, Snowden considers there to be significant upside having regard to recent 
transaction metrics
•  Gryphon’s mineral asset values were originally assessed in USD, the valuation range is amplified
when converted to AUD at the assessed spot exchange rate of AUD:USD 0.75.
Table 26: Summary of assessed market values of Gryphon inclusive of a premium for control 
Assessed Values 
Low  
$m
High  
$m 
 
28.2
21.1
10.5 
31.6 
42.1 
13.6 
4.2 
 (10.7) 
 (2.4) 
46.9 
422.8 
16.4 
439.2 
0.11
28.2 
56.4 
75.3 
13.6 
5.0 
 (11.6) 
 (2.4) 
79.8 
422.8 
16.4 
439.2 
0.18
Market values of Gryphon’s interests in mineral assets:
Banfora Project Ore Reserves (US$) - 90% interest 
Banfora Project Mineral Resources (not included in the 
Technical Model) and other mineral assets (US$)
Total mineral assets - US$ 
Total mineral assets - $2 
Add: Cash and cash equivalents  
Listed equity investments   
Less: Future corporate overheads
Other net liabilities 
Total equity value - $m  
Number of ordinary shares - undiluted (millions) 
Add: SPRs3 
Number of ordinary shares - diluted (millions) 
Value per share, inclusive of a premium for control - $
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
51
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
In the event the Scheme is approved, all outstanding SPRs will vest and form part of the Scheme.
Notes:  
1.  Figures may not add exactly due to rounding. 
2.  Converted at the spot exchange rate of 0.75 AUD:USD as at 20 July 2016. 
3. 
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance analysis and the Specialist Report 
Our range of assessed fair values for a Gryphon share of between $0.11 and $0.18 per share compares to a 
closing price for a Gryphon share on its last trading day prior to the announcement of the Scheme on 17 
June 2016 of $0.135, and to the closing price for a Gryphon share 21 July 2016 of $0.17, which likely 
includes the market’s assessment as to the impact of the Scheme. 
Valuation of Gryphon’s effective 90% interest in the Banfora Project Ore Reserves 
We have valued Gryphon’s 90% interest in the Banfora Project Ore Reserves as lying in the range of 
US$21.1 million to US$28.2 million. 
In forming our opinion we have developed, in conjunction with Snowden, a cash flow model reflecting 
the most likely forecast scenario for the Banfora Project, based on KPMG Corporate Finance’s and 
Snowden’s discussions with Gryphon’s management and other supporting documentation. As a result of 
its analysis, Snowden determined that whilst there was a reasonable basis for valuing the Banfora Project 
Ore Reserves using the DCF methodology, the Banfora Project Mineral Resources (not included in the 
Technical Model) were more appropriately valued using other methodologies for earlier stage mineral 
assets. 
Snowden provided two key production scenarios, one each for the HL and CIL development alternatives 
both of which it considers reasonable. We have considered Snowden’s assumptions and discussed them in 
detail with Snowden in the context of production and costing projections prepared by Gryphon. In 
particular, Snowden’s assessment that it was more appropriate to value the Banfora Project Mineral 
Resources outside of a DCF valuation methodology. Based on these discussions and enquiries, we 
consider the assumptions adopted by Snowden to have a reasonable basis.  
Based on our modelling and key valuation assumptions, we determined the HL alternative in relation to 
the processing of the Banfora Project Ore Reserves results in a higher NPV than the CIL development 
alternative at this time and, accordingly, have adopted this production scenario for the purpose of our 
valuation. 
Further details in relation to Snowden’s assumptions are set out in the Specialist Report at Appendix 7. 
Whilst it could be argued that, in theory, a discount should be applied to the proportionate values 
calculated to reflect that a DCF valuation provides a valuation of 100 percent of a project and accordingly 
incorporates a premium for control, whereas Gryphon has less than full control (90 percent interest) of the 
Banfora Project, we note that: 
•
the balance of the project’s shareholding is held by the Government of Burkina Faso, whose interest 
it is in to ensure a successful project
•  Gryphon will have control of the day to day operations at the mine.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
52
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Assumption
9.0 
2018 
1.4 
78% 
624.6 
745.1 
122.6
Unit 
Years 
Year 
g/t 
% 
000oz 
US$/oz 
US$M
In these circumstances, we do not consider Gryphon to be materially disadvantaged by holding less than 
full control and therefore a minority discount is not warranted. 
Key operational assumptions 
The principal operational assumptions provided by Snowden and adopted in our valuation of the Banfora 
Project Ore Reserves are summarised below.   
Table 27: Snowden’s key operating assumptions under the HL development scenario 
 
Mine life 
First year of production 
Average gold processing grade  
Average gold recovery
Total gold recovered 
Average operating cost per gold recovered (2016 dollars)
Total capital cost over life of mine (LOM) (2016 dollars) 
Source: Specialist Report 
Our ranges of assessed fair values for the Banfora Project Ore Reserves do not incorporate any terminal 
value. At the end of the discrete forecasting period we have adopted rehabilitation costs and salvage 
values, if any, as advised by Snowden. 
In reality, there may be a prospect of Gryphon achieving further success with its development and 
exploration programs resulting in an extension of mining inventory available for exploitation, which may 
extend the life of the Banfora Project’s operations past the end of the discrete forecast period based on the 
Ore Reserves. Snowden has however captured the value of existing Mineral Resources in its separate 
assessed values for the Banfora Project Mineral Resources not included in the Technical Model and other 
mineral assets.  
Given the prospect of additional exploration success beyond existing delineated Ore Reserves and 
Mineral Resources is, at best, uncertain, we do not consider a purchaser of the asset would ascribe any 
significant value to this at the current time. 
Key economic and financial assumptions 
Denominations of cash flows  
As the principal items of cash flow, including revenue as well as the majority of capital items and key 
operational supplies, in respect of the Banfora Project are denominated in USD, the NPV was calculated 
in USD.  
We note that whilst a small proportion of the overall cash costs incurred by Gryphon are expected to be 
denominated in CFA Franc (Burkina Faso’s local currency). Given the CFA Franc is pegged to the Euro 
and the long term inflation outlooks for Burkina Faso, the Euro and the USD are similar, we have not 
adjusted the USD forecast cash flows for potential exchange rate movements as these are not expected to 
be significant.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
53
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
2016 
1.5%
2017 
2.3%
2018 
2.2%
2016 
1,295
2019 
2.0%
2020 
2.0%
Inflation 
Inflation rate assumptions adopted by us in the DCF are set out in the table below.  
Table 28: Summary of inflation assumptions  
 
United States 
Source: Capital IQ, brokers’ notes, various economic commentaries and KPMG Corporate Finance analysis  
United States inflation was determined having regard to the forecasts of a range of brokers and economic 
commentators. Subsequent to 2020, the rate has been assumed to remain constant at 2.0% per annum for 
the United States. 
Commodity prices 
Gold price assumptions adopted by us in the DCF are set out in the table below.  
Table 29: Summary of nominal gold price assumptions  
2017 
 
1,300 
Gold (US$/oz) 
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
In determining our forecast gold price assumptions we have had regard to forecast gold prices published 
by various economic commentators and broking houses as well as the prevailing gold forward curve.  
Subsequent to 2020, we have assumed that the gold price will increase by the long term inflation rate for 
the United States. In effect, the gold price is assumed to remain constant in real USD terms post 2020. 
In selecting commodity prices and other macro economy assumptions, we have adopted what we consider 
to be reasonable inputs that a purchaser of long-term assets would adopt. 
Other assumptions 
Other key financial and economic assumptions adopted by us in assessing the value of the Banfora 
Project Ore Reserves include:  
•  corporate income tax rate of 17.5% for mining-related companies  
•
royalty charges for gold mining operations calculated as a percentage of turnover value of the sold 
extracted product and fixed as followed: 
•  3% if the price of gold is less than or equal to US$1,000/oz 
•  4% if the price of gold is between US$1,000/oz and US$1,300/oz 
•  5% if the price of gold is greater than US$1,300/oz
2018 
1,310
2019 
1,320
2020 
1,320
•  L’impôt sur les Revenus des Valeurs Mobilières (IVRM) – withholding tax on securities (dividends 
and interest) of 6.25% for mining-related companies (3.125% in the first three years of exploitation)
•  10% free carried interest to the benefit of the Government of Burkina Faso 
•  no additional tax payable on dividend receipts from Burkina Faso
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
54
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
•  a USD ungeared, post tax nominal discount rate in the range of 12.9% per annum to 15.2% per 
annum. The basis of our calculation of discount rates is discussed at Appendix 4 to this report
•  as advised by Gryphon, approximately US$37 million of the accumulated tax losses in Burkina Faso
that relate to past exploration expenditure relevant to the forecast production will be able to be 
capitalised and depreciated for tax purposes. Gryphon has received independent taxation advice 
confirming the transfer and depreciation of relevant past exploration expenditure is permitted.
Sensitivity analysis  
We have undertaken a sensitivity analysis around the mid-point of our valuation range for the Banfora 
Project Ore Reserves based on a range of key assumptions, the outcome of which is set out below. 
Figure 9: The Banfora Project Ore Reserves NPV sensitivity
-5%
5%
-9%
9%
37%
38%
WACC
Opex
Capex
-37%
-40%
Gold Price
-51%
Au recovered
-58%
5
10
15
20
25
NPV (US$m)
30
35
58%
58%
40
45
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
The sensitivity analysis indicates that the NPV of the Banfora Project Ore Reserves is particularly 
sensitive to movements in production levels, commodity prices and capital expenditure. We note the 
asymmetrical outcome of capital expenditure and commodity prices are driven by the government’s free 
carry of the share of capital expenditure and the tiered royalty rates based on gold prices. 
Valuation of Gryphon’s interest in the Banfora Project Mineral Resources and other mineral assets  
Snowden has valued Gryphon’s interest in the Banfora Project Mineral Resources that are not included in 
its forecast production for the Banfora Project Ore Reserves as well as interests in other mineral assets in 
the range of US$10.5 million to US$28.2 million as summarised in the table below.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
55
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Table 30: Summary of Snowden's valuation of other mineral assets held by Gryphon
Assessed Values 
Low  
$m
High  
$m 
17.8 
9.6 
0.8 
28.2
6.1 
3.6 
0.8 
10.5
Mineral Resources not included in the Technical Model 
Exploration 
Boss joint venture 
Total – US$ 
Source: Specialist Report 
In assessing these values, Snowden has adopted accepted methods for valuing mineral assets based on a 
market-based approach having regard to exploration and development transaction comparisons. Further 
details in relation to each of these assets and the valuation methodology adopted are set out in Specialist 
Report which is included at Appendix 7. 
It should be noted that the valuation of early stage / exploration assets as set out in the table above is 
highly subjective and uncertain and involves subjective assessments based on professional judgements 
made by Snowden. Whilst assessing a wide range of values for these assets, Snowden has indicated its 
preferred values in respect of the Banfora Project Mineral Resources not included in the Technical Model 
and other exploration assets lies towards the low end of its range of assessed values. 
Other assets 
Net assets not valued as part of Gryphon’s mineral assets comprise cash and sundry other assets and 
liabilities. Except as specifically noted below, having regard to their nature and quantum, these assets and 
liabilities have been incorporated in our valuation at net book values as at 31 March 2016.   
Cash 
We have adjusted Gryphon’s cash holding to reflect movements in cash to 30 June 2016 as advised by 
Gryphon management and the net proceeds of $4.4 million received from the private placement to 
Teranga in early July 2016, pursuant to which Teranga subscribed for 21.2 million new ordinary Gryphon 
shares (approximately 5% of Gryphon’s expanded ordinary share capital). Accordingly, we have adopted 
a cash balance for Gryphon of $13.6 million for the purpose of our valuation.  
Listed equity investments 
Gryphon currently holds 10.7 million shares in Algold and 13.5 million shares in Tawana, representing an 
ownership interest of approximately 10% and 9% in the respective companies. Whilst the final value of 
the Algold and Tawana shares held by Gryphon will be determined by the prevailing market price at the 
date of realisation, the closing price for an Algold and Tawana share on 20 July 2016 of $0.32 and $0.10 
implies a prima facie market value for Gryphon’s investment in Algold and Tawana in the order of 
$3.4 million and $1.4 million respectively. 
However, recent trading in Algold and Tawana shares prior to the date of this report, suggests that 
realisation of Gryphon’s current parcels of shares may, in the absence of a party being identified as 
desirous to acquiring Gryphon’s holding as single blocs, be required to be completed over an extended 
realisation period. Accordingly, we have applied a small discount to reflect these investments may not be
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
56
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
immediately liquid. At the high end of our range we have included small premium to reflect that 
Gryphon’s current holdings may attract a premium if able to be realised as single blocs. 
Future corporate overheads  
Gryphon incurs corporate overheads in relation to managing its business and maintaining its operating 
assets. These costs have not been incorporated into the valuation of Gryphon’s mineral assets set out 
above, and therefore it is necessary to deduct the present value of anticipated future management and 
administrative costs in relation to Gryphon’s operating assets from the value of the Company. Gryphon 
estimates that its corporate costs, in the absence of the Scheme, to be in the order of $4.4 million per 
annum (in 2017 pre-tax dollars). 
We have been provided with a schedule prepared by Gryphon that sets out the Company’s assessment of 
the direct synergies and cost savings likely to be available to a pool of purchasers in acquiring a 100% 
interest in Gryphon. These synergy benefits and cost savings total approximately $2.9 million per annum 
(in 2017 pre-tax dollars) over the life of the Gryphon’s operations, with a once-off cost of realisation of 
approximately $3.0 million (in 2017 pre-tax dollars). These synergies are expected to be realised as a 
result of economies of scale, elimination of duplication in running Gryphon as a separate public company 
and general finance and support costs. 
We have discussed with Gryphon’s management the basis of its assessment as to the level of synergies 
and cost savings that may be realised by a pool of purchasers. Whilst there is both downside risk and 
potential upside in relation to the final quantum and nature of the synergies that may ultimately be 
realised, we believe, based on information available as at the date of this report, that the numbers 
estimated by Gryphon are considered reasonable for the purpose of our evaluation. 
The NPV of these adjusted corporate costs, having regard to the nature of the Company’s assets, has been 
estimated to be in order of $10.7 million to $11.6 million. 
Share appreciation rights 
We have not adjusted our values for the SARs given they were out of the money as at the date of this 
report. 
Share performance rights 
In the event the Scheme is approved, all outstanding SPRs will vest into Teranga Shares and form part of 
the Scheme. We have adjusted Gryphon’s ordinary shares outstanding for the dilutionary impact of the 
16.4 million SPRs outstanding for the purpose of our valuation. 
Other valuation parameters 
KPMG Corporate Finance’s assessed values in respect of Gryphon’s assets and liabilities, the implied 
enterprise value for Gryphon is between approximately US$24.9 million and US$49.6 million. Based on 
the Company’s quoted Ore Reserves and Mineral Resources, the implied enterprise value to Ore Reserve 
and Mineral Resource ounce of contained gold equivalent multiples are as set out in the table below.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
57
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Table  31:  Ore  Reserve  and  Mineral  Resource  multiples  per  ounce  of  contained  gold  equivalent 
implied by our assessed values
Parameter
Low 
US$/oz 
30.1 
6.8
High 
US$/oz 
60.1 
13.6
Ore Reserves1,2 
Mineral Resources1,3,4 
Note:  
1.  Ore Reserve and Mineral Resource multiples implied by our assessed values are calculated using the most
recent stated Ore Reserve and Mineral Resource information for the Banfora Project, assuming the HL 
processing technique is adopted.
2.  Ore Reserves include Proved and Probable Reserves.  
3.  Mineral Resources include Measured, Indicated and Inferred Resources. 
4.  Mineral Resources are inclusive of Ore Reserves. 
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance analysis 
Comparison to listed company gold equivalent Reserve multiples 
Summarised in the figure below is a comparison of the results set out above with the value per Reserve 
ounce for a selection of listed gold companies implied by their market capitalisation as at 20 July 2016, a 
notional allowance for a premium for control of 25% to 40% and their most recent reported net 
debt/(cash) positions.  
Figure  10:  Reserve  multiples  per  ounce  of  contained  gold  equivalent  implied  by  selected  listed 
companies
687x
890x
500x
400x
300x
200x
100x
0x
40% premium
25% premium
No premium
High (60x)
Low (30x)
)
z
o
M
$
S
U
/
(
 
e
p
l
i
t
l
u
m
e
v
r
e
s
e
r
 
t
l
i
n
e
a
v
u
q
e
d
o
G
l
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis, Capital IQ, respective company announcements and Annual Reports
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
58
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
This analysis indicates a wide range of outcomes, however we note that the range of Ore Reserve 
multiples implied by our range of assessed market values for the enterprise value of Gryphon lies 
comfortably within the range of equivalent observed listed company Reserve multiples, albeit toward the 
low end. Given:  
•
the value of Gryphon is underpinned by the development stage Banfora Project, whereas many of the 
companies selected for comparison are in production
•  our selection of listed production/pre-production gold companies comprises companies with gold
•
projects located in West Africa. 
the discount rate adopted by us to value the Banfora Project Ore Reserves includes an additional 
adjustment to reflect development risk associated with bringing the project on stream as projected 
•  a number of the comparable companies are significantly larger than Gryphon, with more diversified
portfolios
•  Gryphon currently has a net cash position, which operates to reduce its implied enterprise value. In 
comparison, a number of the comparable companies are in a net debt position, which has increased 
their prima facie enterprise value and, in turn, the implied multiple
we consider this to be reasonable. 
In considering these outcomes we note however that these results need to be viewed with some caution as 
they do not capture such things as: 
•
the extent to which Reserves have been developed, their quality, location or proximity to 
infrastructure 
the weighting of Reserves to Resources and whether there is any imperative for conversion 
the quantum or timing of future operating and capital costs required to realise the underlying 
Reserves
• 
•
the gearing profile of each individual company.
•  potential timing differences by companies in reporting updated Reserves figures 
•  other assets and liabilities held by the selected companies not reflected in the Reserves balances 
• 
Accordingly , in our view this form of analysis should only be considered as a high level cross-check of 
the outcomes of other valuation methodologies. 
Comparison to listed company gold equivalent Resource multiples 
Summarised in the figure below is a comparison of the results set out above with the value per gold 
equivalent Resource ounce for a selection of listed gold companies implied by their market capitalisation 
as at 20 July 2016, an allowance, solely for comparison purposes, for a notional premium for control of 
25% to 40% and their most recent reported net debt/(cash) positions.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
59
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Figure  11:  Resource  multiples  per  ounce  of  contained  gold  equivalent  implied  by  selected  listed 
companies
442x 238x
516x
140x
120x
100x
80x
60x
40x
20x
0x
40% premium
25% premium
No premium
High (14x)
Low (7x)
)
z
o
M
/
$
S
U
l
i
l
(
 
e
p
i
t
l
u
m
 
e
c
r
u
o
s
e
r
 
t
n
e
a
v
u
q
e
 
d
o
G
l
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis, Capital IQ, respective company announcements and Annual Reports 
This analysis indicates a wide range of outcomes, however we note that the range of Mineral Resource 
multiples implied by our range of assessed market values for the enterprise value of Gryphon lie within 
the range of equivalent observed listed company Resource multiples, albeit toward the low end. 
In considering these outcomes we note that many of the comments in relation to the multiples implied by 
listed company Reserve multiples are equally relevant here. Our previous comments in relation to the use 
of the analysis simply as a high level cross-check also have equal application here. 
Further details of our analysis is set out in Appendix 5 to this report. 
Comparison to listed gold equivalent Reserve multiples implied by recent gold corporate transactions 
Summarised in the figure below is a comparison of the gold equivalent Ore Reserves multiples implied by 
the range of enterprise values for Gryphon with the implied value per gold equivalent Reserve ounce for a 
selection of recent corporate transactions involving companies with gold operations in West Africa.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
60
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Figure 12: Reserve multiples per ounce of contained gold equivalent implied by selected West 
African gold company transactions
q
p
$
250x
200x
150x
100x
50x
0
High (60x)
Low (30x)
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis, Capital IQ, respective company announcements and Annual Reports 
This analysis indicates a wide range of outcomes, however we note that the range of the Ore Reserve 
multiples implied by our range of assessed values for the enterprise value of Gryphon lies within the 
observed range. 
In considering the outcomes of the comparison to gold equivalent Reserve multiples implied by recent 
gold company transactions we note the following limitations: 
•  many of the previously mentioned comments in relation to the multiples implied by listed companies
•
•
have equal relevance here 
several of the transactions considered were likely completed under different prevailing market 
conditions and the market participants may have held different expectations in relation to the then 
prevailing gold prices 
the final price paid by the successful acquirer may incorporate an element of synergies and cost 
savings unique to that purchaser that it was required to pay away. This value is excluded from the 
commonly accepted definition of market value but is extremely difficult to quantify but if excluded 
could reduce the implied transaction multiples.
Accordingly, our previous comments in relation to the use of the analysis simply as a high level cross-
check have equal application here.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
61
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Comparison to listed gold equivalent Resource multiples implied by recent gold corporate transactions 
Summarised in the figure below is a comparison of the gold equivalent Mineral Resources multiples 
implied by the range of values for the enterprise value of Gryphon with the implied value per gold 
equivalent Resource ounce for a selection of recent corporate transactions largely involving companies 
with gold operations in West Africa. 
Figure 13: Resource multiples per ounce of contained gold equivalent implied by selected West 
African gold company transactions
70x
60x
50x
40x
30x
20x
10x
101x
126x
High (14x)
Low (7x)
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis, Capital IQ, respective company announcements and Annual Reports 
This analysis indicates a wide range of outcomes, however we note that the range of the Mineral 
Resource multiples implied by our range of assessed values for the enterprise value of Gryphon lies 
within the observed range, albeit toward the low end reflecting the Banfora Project is yet to be developed.  
Many of the previously mentioned comments in relation to the multiples implied by listed companies 
have equal relevance here as do our previous comments in relation to the use of the analysis simply as a 
high level cross-check have equal application here. 
Having regard to the above mentioned analysis we do not consider our range of enterprise values for 
Gryphon to be unreasonable. 
Further details of our analysis is set out in Appendix 6 to this report.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
62
13
13.1
13.2
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Valuation of Teranga 
Following implementation of the Scheme, the net assets of the Expanded Teranga will comprise its 
existing net asset base and the net assets acquired from Gryphon. Accordingly, in order to assess the value 
of the Scheme Consideration, it is necessary, in addition to determining the value of Gryphon’s net assets 
in Section 12 above, to determine the value of Teranga’s existing net asset base. 
Valuation methodology 
The principal assets of Teranga comprise its interest in mineral assets at various stages of development, 
from early stage exploration to production. Such assets have limited lives and future profitability and 
asset life depend upon factors that are inherently unpredictable.  
In our experience, the most appropriate method for determining the value of companies similar to 
Teranga is on the basis of the value of the sum of the parts of the underlying net assets, with its principal 
producing asset, the Sabodala Project, being valued using the DCF approach. 
Consistent with the valuation procedures undertaken for Gryphon, to assist KPMG Corporate Finance in 
the valuation of Teranga’s mineral interests, Snowden has prepared production scenarios, including 
appropriate Mineral Resources and Reserves estimations, capital expenditure and operational cost profiles 
to be adopted by us in the preparation of forecast cash flows for Teranga’s interest in the Sabodala Project 
Mineral Reserves. In addition Snowden has assessed the value of Teranga’s interest in the Sabodala 
Project Mineral Resources and other mineral assets not captured in the DCF valuation of the Sabodala 
Project. A copy of Specialist Report, is attached to this report as Appendix 7. 
Following our discussions and enquires with Snowden in the context of production and costing 
projections provided by Teranga, we are satisfied that there is a reasonable basis to adopt the development 
and operational assumptions recommended by Snowden in the cash flow projections prepared by us in 
assessing the values of Teranga’s interest in the Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves.  KPMG Corporate 
Finance was responsible for the determination of certain macroeconomic and other assumptions such as 
commodity prices, exchange rates, discount rates, inflation and taxation assumptions. The valuations 
ascribed by Snowden to Teranga’s interest in the Sabodala Project Mineral Resources not included in the 
Technical Model and other mineral assets have been adopted in our report. 
Other assets and liabilities of Teranga have been incorporated in our valuation based on book values as at 
31 March 2016, adjusted for subsequent material movements, as reasonable estimates of market value. 
Valuation summary 
We have assessed the market value of Teranga to lie in the range of $347.8 million to $445.1 million. 
The value of Teranga’s net assets was determined by aggregating the estimated market value of Teranga’s 
interests in mineral assets, adding the assessed value of other assets and, if appropriate, deducting any 
external borrowings and non-trading liabilities. The aggregate value of Teranga’s net assets has been 
assessed on the basis of market value, that is, the value that should be agreed in a hypothetical transaction 
between a knowledgeable, willing, but not anxious buyer and a knowledgeable, willing, but not anxious 
seller, acting at arm’s length.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
63
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
As Teranga is not the subject of the Scheme and will be the continuing, albeit expanded, entity following 
implementation of the Scheme, we have not included any impact of synergies that either a general pool of 
purchasers or a special purchaser may be able to realise. We note however that our range of assessed 
values will incorporate a degree of control premium in that the underlying cash flows have been prepared 
assuming full control of the same. 
Table 32: Summary of assessed values of Teranga’s net assets inclusive of a premium for control
Market values of Teranga’s interests in mineral assets:
Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves (US$) - 90% interest 
Sabodala Project Mineral Resources (not included in the 
Technical Model) and other mineral assets (US$)
Total mineral assets - US$ 
Add: Cash and cash equivalents  
Less: Borrowings
Future corporate overheads 
RSUs/DSUs payments 
Fixed bonus units payments
Total net assets (undiluted) - US$ 
Funds from exercise of options 
Total net assets (diluted) - US$ 
Total net assets (undiluted) - $2 
Notes:  
1.  Figures may not add exactly due to rounding. 
2.  Converted at the spot exchange rate of 0.75 AUD:USD as at 20 July 2016.
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance analysis and the Specialist Report
Assessed Values 
Low  
$m
241.4 
38.6
High  
$m 
 
262.0 
96.5
280.0 
54.8 
 (13.7) 
 (57.9) 
 (3.3) 
 (0.3) 
 259.6  
 0.7  
 260.3  
 347.8
358.5 
54.8 
(13.7) 
(65.0) 
 (2.0) 
 (0.2) 
 332.4  
 0.7  
 333.1  
 445.1
Valuation of Teranga’s effective 90% interest in the Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves 
We have valued Teranga’s 90% interest in the Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves as lying in the range of 
US$241.4 million to US$262.0 million. 
In forming our opinion we have developed, in conjunction with Snowden, a cash flow model reflecting 
the most likely forecast scenario for the Sabodala Project, based on KPMG Corporate Finance’s and 
Snowden’s discussions with Teranga’s management and other supporting documentation. Consistent with 
the approach taken for Gryphon, Snowden determined the Sabodala Project Mineral Resources (not 
included in the Technical Model) were more appropriately valued using alternative methodologies based 
on comparable transaction benchmarking. Accordingly, the forecast production scenario provided by 
Snowden reflects production of the Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves only. 
Further details in relation to these assumptions are set out in the Specialist Report at Appendix 7.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
64
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Whilst it could be argued that, in theory, a discount should be applied to the proportionate values 
calculated to reflect that a DCF valuation provides a valuation of 100 percent of a project and accordingly 
incorporates a premium for control, given that Teranga has less than full control (90 percent interest) of 
the Sabodala Project, we note that: 
•
the balance of the project’s shareholding is largely held by the Government of Senegal, whose 
interest it is in to ensure a successful project
•  Teranga has control of the day to day operations at the mine. 
In these circumstances, we do not consider Teranga to be materially disadvantaged by holding less than 
full control and therefore a minority discount is not warranted. 
Key operational assumptions 
The principal operational assumptions provided by Snowden and adopted in our valuation of the Sabodala 
Project Mineral Reserves are summarised below.   
Table 33: Snowden’s key operating assumptions  
 
Mine life 
Total ore processed 
Average gold processing grade  
Average gold recovery
Total gold recovered 
Average operating cost per gold recovered (2016 dollars)
Total capital cost over LOM (2016 dollars) 
Source: Specialist Report 
Our ranges of assessed fair values for the Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves do not incorporate any 
terminal value. At the end of the discrete forecasting period we have adopted rehabilitation costs and 
salvage values, if any, as advised by Snowden. 
In reality, there may be a prospect of Teranga achieving further success with its resource development 
and exploration programs resulting in an extension of mining inventory available for exploitation, which 
may extend the life of the Sabodala Project’s operations past the end of the discrete forecast period based 
on the Mineral Reserves. Snowden has however separately captured the value of existing Mineral 
Resources in its assessed values for the Sabodala Project Mineral Resources not included in the Technical 
Model and other mineral assets.  
Given the prospect of additional exploration success beyond existing delineated Mineral Reserves and 
Mineral Resources is, at best, uncertain, we do not consider a purchaser of the asset would ascribe any 
significant value to this at the current time.
Unit 
Years 
t 
g/t 
% 
000oz 
US$/oz 
US$M
Assumption
14.0 
57.5 
1.3 
90% 
2,252.6 
721.8 
190.7
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
65
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Key economic and financial assumptions 
Denominations of cash flows  
As the principal items of cash flow, including revenue as well as the majority of capital items and key 
operational supplies, in respect of the Sabodala Project are denominated in USD, the NPV was calculated 
in USD. 
We note that a small proportion of the overall forecast cash costs incurred will be denominated in CFA 
Franc (Senegal’s local currency). Given the CFA Franc is pegged to the Euro and the long term inflation 
outlooks for Senegal, the Euro and the USD are similar, we have not adjusted the USD forecast cash 
flows for potential exchange rate movements as these are not expected to be significant. 
Relevant economic and financial assumptions adopted in relation to Gryphon (refer to Section 12) have 
equal application in the valuation of Teranga, including USD commodity prices and inflation 
assumptions.  
Other assumptions 
Other key financial and economic assumptions adopted by us in assessing the value of the Sabodala 
Project Mineral Reserves include:  
•  corporate income tax rate of 25%9  
• 
•  withholding tax on foreign distributions (dividends and interest) of 10%  
•  10% free carried interest to the benefit of the Government of Senegal 
•  no additional tax payable on dividend receipts from Senegal 
•  Teranga’s marked to market hedging position of approximately US$1.9 million as at 30 June 2016
royalty charges of 5% based on gross revenue of gold sales
has been reflected in the forecast cash flows
•  other accrued project liabilities and the project related assets are reflected in forecast cash flows
based on draft balances as at 30 June 2016 as provided by Teranga
•  a USD ungeared, post tax nominal discount rate in the range of 10.1% per annum to 11.6% per 
annum. The basis of our calculation of discount rates is discussed at Appendix 4 to this report
9 We note that if Teranga’s application for Export Free Status is successful, the corporate income tax rate for the 
Sabodala Project will decrease to 15% which would increase our assessed value in respect of Teranga’s net assets to 
between $365.0 million and $464.7 million
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
66
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Sensitivity analysis  
We have undertaken a sensitivity analysis around the mid-point of our valuation range for the Sabodala 
Project Mineral Reserves based on a range of key assumptions, the outcome of which is set out below. 
Figure 14: The Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves NPV sensitivities
-5%
5%
-2%
2%
-3%
3%
-13%
13%
Capex
WACC
Opex
Gold Price
-19%
Au recovered
-20%
19%
20%
190
210
230
250
NPV (US$m)
270
290
310
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
The sensitivity analysis indicates that the NPV of the Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves is particularly 
sensitive to movements in production levels, commodity prices and operating expenditure.  
 Valuation of Teranga’s interest in the Sabodala Project Mineral Resources and other mineral assets  
Snowden has valued Teranga’s interest in the Sabodala Project Mineral Resources and other mineral 
assets not included in the forecasts for the Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves in the range of 
US$38.6 million to US$96.5 million, as summarised in the table below. 
Table 34: Summary of Snowden's valuation of other mineral assets held by Teranga
Mineral Resources not included in the Technical Model 
Exploration 
Total 
Source: Specialist Report 
In assessing these values, Snowden has adopted accepted methods for valuing mineral assets based on a 
market-based approach having regard to exploration and development transaction comparisons. Further
Values
Low 
US$m 
15.9 
22.7 
38.6
High 
US$m 
27.8 
68.7 
96.5
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
67
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
details in relation to each of these assets and the valuation methodology adopted are set out in Specialist 
Report which is included at Appendix 7. 
It should be noted that the valuation of early stage / exploration assets as set out in the table above is 
highly subjective and uncertain and involves subjective assessments based on professional judgements 
made by Snowden. Whilst assessing a wide range of values for these assets, Snowden has indicated its 
preferred values in respect of the Sabodala Project Mineral Resources and other exploration asset lies 
towards the low end of its range of assessed values. 
Other assets 
Net assets not valued as part of Teranga’s mineral assets comprise cash, borrowings and other sundry 
assets and liabilities. Except as specifically noted below, having regard to their nature and quantum, these 
assets and liabilities have been incorporated in our valuation at net book values as at 31 March 2016.   
Cash  
We have adjusted Teranga’s cash holding as at 31 March 2016 to reflect estimated cash generated in the 
period to 30 June 2016 as advised by Teranga management and the cash outlay of $4.4 million paid in 
relation to the private placement by Gryphon in early July 2016. Accordingly, we have adopted a cash 
balance for Teranga of US$54.8 million for the purpose of our valuation.  
Future corporate overheads  
Teranga incurs corporate overheads in relation to managing its business and maintaining its operating 
assets. These costs have not been incorporated into the valuation of Teranga’s mineral assets set out 
above, and therefore it is necessary to deduct the present value of anticipated future management and 
administrative costs in relation to Teranga’s operating assets from the value of the company. Teranga 
estimates its corporate costs to be in the order of US$8.0 million per annum (in 2017 pre-tax dollars). 
The NPV of these adjusted corporate costs, having regard to the nature of Teranga’s assets, has been 
estimated to be in order of US$57.9 million to US$65.0 million on a pre-tax basis. We have not assumed 
any value for a tax benefit attached to these costs given Teranga’s substantial accumulated tax losses in 
Canada and Teranga’s advice that future Canadian based income is expected to be minimal. 
RSUs, DSUs and fixed bonus units 
We have assessed the estimated cash outlay to be paid in respect of RSUs, DSUs and fixed bonus units on 
issue as at 30 June 2016 based on Teranga’s traded share price and our assessed values of Teranga. 
Proceeds from the exercise of options 
Teranga currently has 19.1 million options on issue, of which 1.1 million had vested and were “in the 
money” at the date of this report. Accordingly, we have assumed these options will be exercised and have 
included the funds to be received upon exercise of options in our range of fair market values.  
Other valuation parameters 
Based on KPMG Corporate Finance’s assessed values in respect of Teranga’s assets and liabilities, the 
implied enterprise value for Teranga is between approximately US$219.2 million and US$292.0 million. 
Based on Teranga’s quoted Mineral Reserves and Mineral Resources, the implied enterprise value to
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
68
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Mineral Reserve and Mineral Resource ounce of contained gold equivalent multiples are as set out in the 
table below. 
Table 35: Mineral Reserve and Mineral Resource multiples per ounce of contained gold equivalent 
implied by our assessed values
Low 
US$/oz 
84.3 
40.6
High 
US$/oz 
112.3 
54.1
Parameter
most recent stated Mineral Reserve and Mineral Resource information for the Sabodala Project
Mineral Reserves1,2 
Mineral Resources1,3,4 
Note:  
1.  Mineral Reserve and Mineral Resource multiples implied by our assessed values are calculated using the 
2.  Mineral Reserves include Proved and Probable Reserves.  
3.  Mineral Resources include Measured, Indicated and Inferred Resources. 
4.  Mineral Resources are inclusive of Mineral Reserves. 
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance analysis 
Comparison to listed company gold equivalent Reserve multiples 
Summarised in the figure below is a comparison of the results set out above with the value per Reserve 
ounce for a selection of listed gold companies implied by their market capitalisation as at 20 July 2016, a 
notional allowance for a premium for control of 25% to 40% and their most recent reported net 
debt/(cash) positions.  
Figure 15: Reserve multiples per ounce of contained gold equivalent implied by selected listed 
companies
687x
890x
500x
400x
300x
200x
100x
0x
40% premium
25% premium
No premium
High (112x)
Low (84x)
)
z
o
M
$
S
U
/
(
 
e
p
l
i
t
l
u
m
e
v
r
e
s
e
r
 
t
l
i
n
e
a
v
u
q
e
d
o
G
l
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis, Capital IQ, respective company announcements and Annual Reports
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
69
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
This analysis indicates a wide range of outcomes, however we note that the range of Mineral Reserve 
multiples implied by our range of assessed enterprise values for Teranga lies comfortably within the range 
of equivalent observed listed company Reserve multiples. We note, given the relative size of Teranga and 
that our range of values for Teranga is underpinned by the producing Sabodala Project we would expect it 
to trade at a premium to Gryphon, which can be observed when compared to the results set out in Figure 
10 and Figure 15 above. 
In considering these outcomes we note that many of the comments in the valuation of Gryphon in 
Section 12 in relation to the multiples implied by listed company Reserve multiples are equally relevant 
here. In particular we note that Teranga is in a strong net cash position, which has acted to dampen its 
implied multiples. 
Comparison to listed company gold equivalent Resource multiples 
Summarised in the figure below is a comparison of the results set out above with the value per gold 
equivalent Resource ounce for a selection of listed gold companies implied by their market capitalisation 
as at 20 July 2016, an allowance, solely for comparison purposes, for a notional premium for control of 
25% to 40% and their most recent reported net debt/(cash) positions. 
Figure 16: Resource multiples per ounce of contained gold equivalent implied by selected listed 
companies
442x 238x
516x
140x
120x
100x
80x
60x
40x
20x
0x
40% premium
25% premium
No premium
High (54x)
Low (41x)
)
z
o
M
$
S
U
/
(
 
e
p
l
i
t
l
u
m
e
c
r
u
o
s
e
r
 
t
l
i
n
e
a
v
u
q
e
d
o
G
l
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis, Capital IQ, respective company announcements and Annual Reports 
This analysis indicates a wide range of outcomes, however we note that the range of Mineral Resource 
multiples implied by our range of assessed enterprise values for Teranga lies within the range of 
equivalent observed listed company Resource multiples. 
In considering these outcomes we note that many of the comments in the valuation of Gryphon in 
Section 12 in relation to the multiples implied by listed company Resource multiples are equally relevant 
here.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
70
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Further details of our analysis is set out in Appendix 5 to this report. 
Comparison to listed gold equivalent Reserve multiples implied by recent gold corporate transactions 
Summarised in the figure below is a comparison of the gold equivalent Reserves multiples implied by the 
range of enterprise values for Teranga with the implied value per gold equivalent Reserve ounce for a 
selection of recent corporate transactions involving companies with gold operations in West Africa.  
Figure 17: Reserve multiples per ounce of contained gold equivalent implied by selected corporate 
transactions
250x
200x
150x
100x
50x
0
High (112x)
Low (84x)
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis, Capital IQ, respective company announcements and Annual Reports 
This analysis indicates a wide range of outcomes, however we note that the range of the Mineral Reserve 
multiples implied by our range of assessed enterprise values for Teranga lies within the observed range in 
recent takeovers.   
We note that the comments made in Section 12 in respect of this high level cross-check have equal 
application here.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
71
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Comparison to listed gold equivalent Resource multiples implied by recent gold corporate transactions 
Summarised in the figure below is a comparison of the gold equivalent Mineral Resources multiples 
implied by the range of values for the enterprise values for Teranga with the implied value per gold 
equivalent Resource ounce for a selection of recent corporate transactions largely involving companies 
with gold operations in West Africa. 
Figure 18: Resource multiples per ounce of contained gold equivalent implied by selected corporate 
transactions
101x
126x
High (54x)
Low (41x)
70x
60x
50x
40x
30x
20x
10x
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis, Capital IQ, respective company announcements and Annual Reports 
This analysis indicates a wide range of outcomes, however we note that the range of the Resource 
multiples implied by our range of assessed enterprise values for Teranga lies within the observed range in 
recent takeovers.  
Further details of our analysis is set out in Appendix 6 to this report. 
Having regard to the above mentioned analysis we do not consider our range of values ascribed to the 
Sabodala Project to be unreasonable.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
72
14
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Assessment of the Scheme Consideration 
Valuation methodology 
Consistent with the valuation methodology adopted in respect of the net assets of Gryphon and Teranga 
as standalone entities, we have calculated the theoretical value of a share in the Expanded Teranga on the 
basis of the value of the sum of the parts of its underlying net assets. Our assessed values for the net 
assets of Gryphon and Teranga form the basis for our assessed range of values for the Expanded Teranga 
and by extension the Scheme Consideration, the details of which are set out below. 
In summary, we have assessed the value of the Scheme Consideration to lie in the range of $0.12 to $0.16 
per Gryphon share. 
Set out below is a summary of our assessed values of the Scheme Consideration. 
Table 36: Summary of assessed market values of the Scheme Consideration
Market value of Teranga's net assets 
Market value of Gryphon's net assets 
Cash proceeds from the Tablo Placement 
Notional aggregated net assets of the Expanded Teranga - $ 
Number of existing Teranga shares - (millions) 
Number of shares issued to vested “in the money” options 
Number of new shares issued to Scheme Participants 
Number of new shares issued under the Tablo Placement 
Notional fully diluted shares in the Expanded Teranga 
Value per share, inclusive of a premium for control $ 
Minority interest discount 
Value per share, minority interest basis $ 
Exchange Ratio 
The Scheme Consideration $ (minority) – per Gryphon share 
Notes:  
1.  Figures may not add exactly due to rounding. 
2.  Converted at the spot exchange rate of 0.75 AUD:USD as at 20 July 2016.
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance analysis and the Specialist Report 
The market value of the Scheme Consideration was determined by: 
•  aggregating the market value of each of Gryphon’s and Teranga’s diluted net assets
Assessed Values 
Low  
$m 
347.8 
46.9 
13.0 
407.6 
392.1 
1.1 
 70.6  
 10.5  
 474.4  
0.86 
20% 
0.69 
0.169 
0.12
High  
$m 
445.1 
79.8 
13.0 
537.9 
392.1 
1.1 
 70.6  
 10.5  
 474.4  
1.13 
15% 
0.96 
0.169 
0.16
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
73
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
•  adjusting the Expanded Teranga’s cash balance to include the cash proceeds from the Tablo
Placement of US$9.7 million10 and the corresponding increase in the Expanded Teranga’s issued 
capital by 10.5 million new common Teranga shares
•  adjusting the Expanded Teranga’s issued capital to reflect the new Teranga Shares to be issued to the
Scheme Participants
•  adjusting the value notional value of the diluted equity in the Expanded Teranga for a minority
interest discount.  
The value of the Expanded Teranga has been determined using the sum of the parts method and is 
reflective of a controlling interest however no allowance for the benefit of synergies available to a 
purchaser of either Teranga in its current form or the Expanded Teranga has been made. In the event 
the Scheme is implemented, Scheme Participants will hold minority rather than controlling interests 
in the Expanded Teranga. In order to reflect this (and the requirements under RG 111), we have 
adjusted our sum of the parts value to reflect a minority interest. As noted previously, control 
premiums in successful takeovers in Australia are often observed to be in the range of 25% to 40%, 
implying an appropriate discount for minority interest in the range of approximately 20% to 29%. 
However, in instances where synergies available to a purchaser are not expected to be material (or the 
benefit of which have not been allowed for) it is reasonable to expect that an appropriate minority 
interest discount would be at or below the bottom end of this range. Accordingly we have applied a 
minority interest discount in the range of 15% to 20%.
10 Equivalent to $13.0 million using a spot exchange rate of 0.75 AUD:USD as at 20 July 2016
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
74
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Appendix 1 – KPMG Corporate Finance disclosures
Qualifications 
The individuals responsible for preparing this report on behalf of KPMG Corporate Finance are Jason 
Hughes, Bill Allen and Ben Della-Bosca. Each has a significant number of years of experience in the 
provision of corporate financial advice, including specific advice on valuations, mergers and acquisitions, 
as well as preparation of expert reports.  
Jason Hughes is an Authorised Representative of KPMG Corporate Finance and a Partner in the KPMG 
Partnership. Jason is a Fellow of Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand, a Senior Fellow of 
the Financial Services Institute of Australasia, a member of the Australia Institute of Company Directors 
and holds a Bachelor of Commerce and a Graduate Diploma in Applied Finance. Jason has extensive 
experience in the preparation of independent expert reports and corporate valuations.  
Bill Allen is an Authorised Representative of KPMG Corporate Finance and a Partner in the KPMG 
Partnership. Bill is an Associate of Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand and holds a 
Bachelor of Commerce degree and a Graduate Diploma in Applied Finance. Bill has significant 
experience in the provision of corporate financial advice, including specific advice on valuations and the 
preparation of expert reports. 
Ben Della-Bosca is an Authorised Representative of KPMG Corporate Finance. Ben is an Associate of 
the Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand, a Fellow of the Financial Services Institute of 
Australasia and holds a Masters of Applied Finance, a Bachelor of Commerce and a Graduate Diploma in 
Applied Finance. Ben has significant experience in the provision of corporate financial advice, including 
specific advice on valuations and the preparation of expert reports.
Disclaimers 
It is not intended that this report should be used or relied upon for any purpose other than KPMG 
Corporate Finance’s opinion as to whether the Scheme is in the best interests of Scheme Participants. 
KPMG Corporate Finance expressly disclaims any liability to any Scheme Participant who relies or 
purports to rely on the report for any other purpose and to any other party who relies or purports to rely on 
the report for any purpose whatsoever. 
Other than this report, neither KPMG Corporate Finance nor the KPMG Partnership has been involved in 
the preparation of the Scheme Booklet or any other document prepared in respect of the Scheme. 
Accordingly, we take no responsibility for the content of the Scheme Booklet as a whole or other 
documents prepared in respect of the Scheme.  
We note that the forward-looking financial information prepared by Gryphon and Teranga does not 
include estimates as to the potential impact of any future changes in taxation legislation in Australia, 
Canada or any other jurisdiction. Future taxation changes are unable to be reliably determined at this 
time. 
Our report makes reference to “KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis”. This indicates only that we have 
(where specified) undertaken certain analytical activities on the underlying data to arrive at the 
information presented.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
75
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Independence 
KPMG Corporate Finance and the individuals responsible for preparing this report have acted 
independently. 
In addition to the disclosures in our Financial Services Guide, it is relevant to a consideration of our 
independence that, during the course of this engagement, KPMG Corporate Finance provided draft copies 
of this report to management of Gryphon for comment as to factual accuracy, as opposed to opinions 
which are the responsibility of KPMG Corporate Finance alone. Changes made to this report as a result of 
those reviews have not altered the opinions of KPMG Corporate Finance as stated in this report.
Consent 
KPMG Corporate Finance consents to the inclusion of this report in the form and context in which it is 
included with the Scheme Booklet to be issued to Scheme Participants. Neither the whole nor the any part 
of this report nor any reference thereto may be included in any other document without the prior written 
consent of KPMG Corporate Finance as to the form and context in which it appears.
Professional standards 
Our report has been prepared in accordance with professional standard APES 225 "Valuation Services" 
issued by the Accounting Professional & Ethical Standards Board. KPMG Corporate Finance and the 
individuals responsible for preparing this report have acted independently.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
76
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Appendix 2 – Sources of information 
In preparing this report we have been provided with and considered the following sources of information:
Publicly available information: 
  various ASX company announcements including, inter alia, annual and half year financial statements
and quarterly reports
  various broker and analyst reports 
  various press and media articles 
  various reports published by IBISWorld Pty Ltd, World Gold Council, the Economic Intelligence
Unit Limited, Oxford Economics, Department of Industry and Science and Bureau of Resources and 
Energy Economics
  various company websites and investor presentations 
 

the SIA released to the ASX on 20 June 2016 
financial information from S&P Capital IQ, Bloomberg, Thompson One, Consensus Economics and  
Connect 4.
the Scheme Booklet (including earlier drafts)
Non-public information 
• 
•  unaudited management accounts as at 31 March 2016 in respect of Gryphon and Teranga 
•
life of mine forecast production and costings prepared by Snowden in respect of the Banfora Project 
and Sabodala Project
•  Snowden’s independent technical specialist report 
•  Gryphon’s top 10 shareholders as at 20 July 2016 
•  Teranga’s top 20 holders of Teranga CDIs on the ASX and Teranga’s Shares on the TSX as at
6 July 2016
•  details of Teranga’s option holders as at 30 June 2016 
In addition, we have held discussions with, and obtained information from, the senior management of 
each of Gryphon and Teranga and their advisers.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
77
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Appendix 3 – Overview of the gold industry 
To provide a context for assessing the future prospects of each of Gryphon and Teranga, we have set out 
below an overview of the recent and expected trends in the international gold market. 
Overview 
Gold is an internationally traded commodity and therefore its price fluctuates on a daily basis in the 
commodity market, as determined by worldwide demand and supply factors.  
Gold demand 
The demand for gold is driven from investments (bars and coins), gold fabrication and decisions on 
hedging. The breakdown of total gold demand (1,289.8 tonnes) by category for the three months ended 
31 March 2016 is set out in the figure below.
Figure A3- 1: Global gold demand for the three months ended 31 March 2016
Central banks and other
institutions
9%
Technology
6%
Investment
48%
Jewellery
37%
Source: World Gold Council 
Investments 
The Department of Industry and Science (DIS) has stated that total investment in bar and coin increased 
at an average rate of 9% per annum (in tonnes) over the five-year period to 2014. However, in 2014 total 
investment dropped 41% to 1,004 tonnes. The Economist and Intelligence Unit Limited (EIU) suggests 
that the decrease in 2014 was a result of growing expectations of rising global interest rates in addition to 
a lack of confidence about the direction of gold prices.  
According to the World Gold Council, total demand for gold bar and coin investment increased to a 
seven-year high of 617.6 tonnes for the three months ended 31 March 2016, a 122% increase from 
277.9 tonnes for the three months ended 31 March 2015. The key driver of this growth was investment in 
gold exchange-traded-funds (ETFs), with inflows into the gold ETF sector surging to 363.7 tonnes, 
following a three-year period of largely uninterrupted outflows. Historically low global interest rates, 
stock market volatility and general scepticism regarding global economic growth all contributed to the 
increase in demand for gold ETFs.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
78
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Fabrication 
Gold fabrication consists of gold manufactured for use in jewellery, electronics, dental applications, 
medals and other industrial applications. 
According to the World Gold Council, global jewellery demand fell to 481.9 tonnes for the three months 
ended 31 March 2016, a 19% decrease from 596.9 tonnes for the three months ended 31 March 2015. The 
World Gold Council states the decline was a result of a sharp fall in demand from the two largest 
jewellery markets, China and India.  
Notwithstanding the short-term fluctuations in jewellery demand, according to the Resources and Energy 
Quarterly March 2016 report released by The Bureau of Resources and Energy Economics (BREE), 
increased fabricated consumption in the medium term will be underpinned by forecast rising incomes in 
key consuming countries such as China and India, particularly from the middle class. Set out in Figure 
A3-2 below is historical and forecast global gold fabrication consumption, showing global gold 
fabrication consumption is expected to increase from 2016 to 2021 at a compound annual growth rate of 
2.6%.
Figure A3- 2: Global historical and forecast fabrication consumption
s
e
n
n
o
T
3,300
3,200
3,100
3,000
2,900
2,800
2,700
2,600
2,500
2015A
2016F
2017F
2018F
2019F
2020F
2021F
Source: BREE March 2016 Resources and Energy Quarterly Report  
Official sector demand 
According to the British Geological Survey World Mineral Production report published in January 2011, 
central banks have traditionally been sellers of gold. However, there is evidence that central banks are 
building up their gold reserves, currently viewed as a strategic asset due to global economic uncertainty.  
According to the World Gold Council, central banks purchased (on a net basis) 109.4 tonnes for the three 
months ended 31 March 2016, slightly lower than the 112.3 tonnes for the three months ended
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
79
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
31 March 2015. The purchase of gold by central banks represents the 21st consecutive quarter of net 
purchases, dating back to 2011. The trend of purchasing gold by the official sector is a result of gold 
purchasing programmes, implemented as a means of preserving national wealth and promoting greater 
financial stability. For the three months ended 31 March 2016, the World Gold Council states the demand 
for gold by central banks was principally driven by heightened level of uncertainty amid growing investor 
concern about the effectiveness of negative interest rate policies, particularly rife in Europe and Japan. 
Gold supply 
The supply of gold is driven largely by mine production and recovery from gold scrap, with a very small 
amount attributable to producer hedging. Figure A-3 below illustrates the contributing proportions mine 
production and gold scrap make to total global historical and global gold production.
Figure A3- 3: Global historical and forecast gold supply composition
s
e
n
n
o
t
5,000
4,500
4,000
3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
2013A
2014A
2015A
2016F
2017F
Mine production
Old gold scrap
Net producer hedging
Source: EIU – World Commodity Forecast – Gold June 2016 
Mine production 
According to the EIU, total gold supply decreased 4.8% in 2015 relative to 2014, with mine production 
falling by 1.2%, largely due subdued gold prices. The EIU notes that China, the world’s largest gold 
producer, exhibited a decrease in mine production of 0.4% in 2015, ending a 13-year steady increase in 
mine output, whilst Australia, the world’s second-largest gold producer, increased its gold production by 
1.5% in 2015.
Set out in the figure below is the breakdown of mine production by country in 2015.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
80
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Figure A3- 4: Mine production by country in 2015
Other 30%
Argentina 2%
Ghana 3%
Indonesia 3%
Uzbekistan 4%
Mexico 4%
South Africa 5%
China 15%
Australia 9%
Russia 8%
United States 7%
Canada 5%
Peru 5%
Source: EIU – World Commodity Forecast – Gold June 2016
According to the EIU, total gold supply is forecast to increase by 1.4% in 2016 relative to 2015, as 
continued strength in the short term gold price will likely support a recovery in gold mining, which, 
coupled with better prospects for recycling, will raise overall gold supply in 2016.
Gold scrap 
According to the EIU, recycling activity dropped to its lowest level in eight years in 2015, with scrap gold 
contributing 1,127 tonnes of supply, a reduction of 6.2% from 2014. The key drivers of this trend 
included depressed gold prices in 2015, reduced need for distressed selling and the depletion of readily 
available gold stock for recycling.
The EIU forecast recycling activity to pick up in 2016 as short term gold prices rise, before retreating 
slightly in 2017.
Pricing
The gold price is particularly responsive to global conditions, such as general economic conditions, 
political stability, the oil price and the USD exchange rates. As gold is regarded as a store of value, its 
price is often negatively correlated with other economic indicators.
Set out in Figure A3-5 below is the daily closing USD denominated gold price per ounce over the period 
30 June 2006 to 30 June 2016. Over this period, USD denominated gold prices have fluctuated but overall 
trended upward, with a low of US$585/oz on 22 June 2006 and a peak of US$1,829/oz on 30 September 
2011.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
81
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Figure A3- 5: Historical trend in gold prices
z
o
/
$
S
U
2,000
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
6
0
-
n
u
J
7
0
-
n
u
J
8
0
-
n
u
J
9
0
-
n
u
J
0
1
-
n
u
J
1
1
-
n
u
J
2
1
-
n
u
J
3
1
-
n
u
J
4
1
-
n
u
J
5
1
-
n
u
J
6
1
-
n
u
J
Source: Capital IQ 
 
According to BREE, increased demand for gold as an investment asset was the principal factor driving 
the rise in the gold price in 2016. The increase in demand for gold as a safe haven asset is largely a result 
of the uncertainty surrounding the outlook for economic growth, particularly in China and the threat of 
Britain leaving the European Union.
Mining in Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso is a French-speaking, landlocked country located in West Africa with a land area of circa 
274,000 km2 and is surrounded by six countries, namely Mali, Niger, Benin, Togo, Ghana and the Ivory 
Coast. It has a population of approximately 17.9 million and gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of 
approximately US$690 according 2014 World Bank data. The Burkina Faso economy is heavily reliant 
on agricultural production, with close to 80% of the active population employed in the sector.
Burkina Faso’s former president was ousted as a result of a presidential coup in October 2014, creating 
significant political and sovereign uncertainty in the country. A new government was elected in 
November 2015. The EIU forecasts political stability to gradually improve in 2016 and 2017 under the 
new democratically elected government.
Burkina Faso is located between Ghana and Mali, the second and third largest gold producing countries in 
Africa. The economy is highly dependent on the performance of the gold sector and has commissioned 
seven new gold mines since 2007, producing approximately one million ounces per annum, ranking it as 
the fifth largest gold producing country in Africa in 2014.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
82
ABCD
Mining in Senegal
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Senegal is a former French colony located on the westernmost point of Africa with a land area of circa 
196,722 km2 and shares borders with Mauritania, Mali, The Gambia and Guinea-Bissau. It has a 
population of approximately 15.1 million and GDP per capita of approximately US$1,035 according 2014 
World Bank data. In 2015, Senegal’s achieved a GDP growth rate of 6.5%, making it the second fastest 
growing economy in West Africa, behind Côte d’Ivoire (the “Ivory Coast”), with the agricultural sector 
accounting for almost 34% of GDP growth due to heavy rainfall and favourable government programs.
According to the EIU, Senegal’s current president, is implementing a reformist policy agenda, aiming to 
restore fiscal responsibility and pursuing former ministers accused of graft. The EIU forecasts real GDP 
growth to increase over the five year period to 2020 as a result of rising agricultural output and improving 
power supply.
Senegal’s mining history dates back to the 1940s and 1950s when it opened two large phosphate mines 
and is currently regarded as one of the world’s leading phosphate producers. Commercial gold mining 
commenced in Senegal in 2009.
Approximately US$5.0 billion has been invested in Senegal’s mining sector from 2000 to 2013, with one 
gold mine (the Sabodala Project) currently in operation and an additional four projects commencing 
exploitation in 2017. In addition, Senegal became a producer of zircon and ilmenite, with the world’s 
third largest zircon deposit entering into exploitation in April 2014.
The mining industry in Senegal is regulated by the Ministry of Mines pursuant to the 2003 Mining Code 
however we note, a new draft Mining Code (issued in 2015) is currently being considered, but is not yet 
legislated. The Mining Code’s are designed to attract and foster mineral resource development in the 
country.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
83
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Appendix 4 – Calculation of discount rates 
We have assessed an appropriate discount rate applicable to the Banfora Project and the Sabodala Project. 
Our assessed nominal, post-tax weighted average cost of capital (WACC) are in the order of:  
•  12.9% to 15.2% per annum for the Banfora Project Ore Reserves 
•  10.1% to 11.6% per annum for the Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves 
These are USD denominated discount rates, reflecting that the projected cash flow models for each 
project are denominated in USD. 
Selection of the appropriate rate to apply to the forecast cash flows of any asset or business operation is 
fundamentally a matter of judgement. Whilst there is a body of theory that may provide a framework for 
the derivation on an appropriate discount rate, it is important to recognise that given the level of 
subjectivity involved in selecting various inputs to the theoretical framework there is no absolute 
“correct” discount rate. 
We consider the rates adopted to be reasonable discount rates that purchasers would use in the current 
market in assessing each project and are reflective of the commercial, operational and technical risks of 
the projects. 
WACC  
The WACC of a project is the expected cost of the various classes of capital (i.e. its equity and debt) 
employed in the project, weighted by the proportion of each class of capital to the total capital employed 
and is represented by the following formula, which calculates an after tax nominal rate:
Where the key inputs are defined as follows:
WACC=K(cid:2914)×(1−t(cid:2913))×(cid:3436) DD+E(cid:3440)+ K(cid:2915) ×(cid:3436) ED+E(cid:3440) 
K(cid:2915) 
K(cid:2914) 
t(cid:2913)
the after-tax cost of equity, which is the rate of return required by the providers of equity 
capital 
 
the pre-tax cost of debt, which is the expected long-term average future borrowing cost of 
the relevant project and/or business 
 
the applicable corporate tax rate 
 
the market value of debt 
 
the market value of equity
D 
 
E 
The WACC is an opportunity cost of capital in the sense that it reflects the returns that would have been 
earned in the market with the relevant capital if it was employed in the next best investment of equivalent 
risk profile. It represents the minimum weighted average rate of return which is required or expected by
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
84
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
the providers of capital as compensation for bearing the risks associated with the relevant investment or 
business operation. 
Each of the components of the WACC formula is discussed further below:
Cost of equity ((cid:1785)(cid:1805))
The WACC approach represents a merger of the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) with capital 
structure theory. In the WACC formula discussed earlier, the CAPM provides the means for estimating 
the cost of equity. 
The CAPM provides a theoretical basis for determining a discount rate that reflects the risk of a particular 
investment or business operation. In simple terms, the CAPM states that the returns expected by an equity 
investor reflect the risk of the underlying equity investment. The risk can be determined by the risk-free 
rate of return plus a risk premium which reflects the relative risk (as measured by the “beta” factor) and 
any company/project specific risk (as measured by the “alpha” factor) required to be borne by the 
investor. Therefore, the required rate of return for equity securities is determined as set out below.
A large degree of subjectivity is involved in estimating the inputs to the formula. These limitations mean 
that any estimate of the cost of equity must necessarily be regarded as indicative rather than as a firm and 
precise measure. Furthermore, because the cost of equity is a market-determined measure, changes in 
market conditions over time will affect its calculation.
The relevant risk-free rate of return is the return on a risk-free security, typically for a long-term period. 
In practice, long dated government bonds are generally accepted as a benchmark for a risk-free security. 
The spot yields to maturity of US Treasury Bonds have traditionally been accepted as proxies for the risk-
free rates in determining a cost of equity under the CAPM.  
In determining an appropriate risk-free rate we have had regard to the expected 10 year mine life for the 
Banfora Project and the expected 14 year mine life for the Sabodala Project. 
Accordingly in determining an appropriate risk-free rate we have had regard to the:
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
85
Where the key inputs are defined as follows:
risk free rate of return  
 
beta factor of the investment or business operation 
 
equity market risk premium 
 
company/project specific risk factor
(cid:1837)(cid:3032)= (cid:1844)(cid:3033)+ ((cid:2010) ×(cid:1839)(cid:1844)(cid:1842))+(cid:2009) 
 R(cid:2916) 
β 
α 
Risk free rate ((cid:2174)(cid:2188))
MRP
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
•  current yield to maturity on a 10 year US Government bond yield, as a proxy for the risk-free rate,
which is currently in the order of 1.6% per annum, applicable to the Banfora Project
•  current yield to maturity on the 10 year US Government yield and current yield to maturity on the 
20 year US Government yield as a proxy for the risk-free rate, which are currently in the order of 
1.6% per annum and 2.0% per annum respectively. As such, we have adopted 1.8% as a proxy risk-
free rate applicable to the Sabodala Project, having regard to the 14 year mine life.
Further, the market in Treasury Bonds is liquid such that, in our view, the current yield on US Treasury 
bonds represents an appropriate indicator of the risk-free opportunity cost for the forthcoming period at 
any particular point in time.  
MRP  
The MRP represents the additional return that investors expect in return for holding risk in the form of a 
well-diversified portfolio of risky assets (such as a market index) over risk-free assets such as 
Government bonds. Given that expectations are not observable, an historical premium is generally used to 
proxy for the expected risk premium. 
KPMG Corporate Finance has adopted a MRP of 6.0% per annum. This figure is within the range of 
generally accepted market risk premia in United States.
Beta factor ((cid:2236))
The beta factor is a measure of the risk of an investment or business operation, relative to a well-
diversified portfolio of investments. In theory, the only risks that are captured by beta are those risks that 
cannot be eliminated by the investor through diversification. Such risks are referred to as systematic, 
undiversifiable or market risk. The concept of beta is central to the CAPM given that beta risk is the only 
risk that is priced into investor required rates of return. 
The beta for equity securities can be statistically measured by regressing the returns on an equity market 
index against the share price returns of the relevant stock. By definition, the market portfolio has an 
equity beta of 1.0. A beta greater than 1.0 implies that the returns on a stock are, on average, more 
volatile, and hence the stock is more risky than the market, whilst a beta of less than 1.0 implies the 
reverse. 
The beta of a stock can be presented as either an adjusted beta or as an historical beta. The historical beta 
is obtained from the linear regression of a stock’s historical data and is based on the observed relationship 
between the security’s return and the returns on an index. Conversely, the adjusted beta is an estimate of a 
security’s future beta. It is initially derived from the historical beta, but modified by the assumption that a 
security’s true beta will move towards the market average of one, over time. Generally, an adjusted beta 
is used because of its greater predictive features.  
Betas derived from stock market observations represent equity betas, which reflect the degree of financial 
gearing of the company. Consequently, it is not possible to compare the equity betas of different 
companies without having regard to their gearing levels. In theory, a more valid analysis of betas can be 
obtained by “ungearing” the equity beta, by applying the following formula:
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
86
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
(cid:2010)(cid:3032)
(cid:2010)(cid:3028)= 
1+[(cid:1830)(cid:1831) ×(1−(cid:1872))] 
obtain ungeared beta (denoted byβ(cid:2911)).
where “D/E” is the debt and equity market values of the relevant equity security and “t” is the corporate 
tax rate. The adjustment involves stripping out the impact of financial gearing from the equity beta to
Set out below are the overall betas of various industries listed on the ASX which provides an indication of 
the relative volatility between industries.  
Figure A4.1: Betas by industry - ASX
1.60
1.40
1.20
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
t
a
e
B
i
i
g
n
n
m
&
 
s
a
l
t
e
m
s
k
n
a
b
y
g
r
e
n
e
l
l
e
r
a
p
p
a
&
 
s
e
b
a
r
u
d
 
r
e
m
u
s
n
o
c
t
i
n
e
m
p
u
q
e
&
e
r
a
w
d
r
a
h
 
y
g
o
o
n
h
c
e
l
t
s
d
o
o
g
l
a
t
i
p
a
c
g
n
i
l
i
t
a
e
r
i
s
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
r
e
m
u
s
n
o
c
e
c
n
a
r
u
s
n
i
l
i
s
a
c
n
a
n
i
f
d
e
i
f
i
s
r
e
v
d
i
)
s
t
s
u
r
t
 
t
n
e
m
t
s
e
v
n
i
 
l
c
x
e
(
 
e
a
t
t
s
e
l
a
e
r
s
e
i
l
p
p
u
s
 
&
 
s
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
l
i
i
a
c
r
e
m
m
o
c
l
s
a
i
r
t
s
u
d
n
i
 
l
l
a
i
s
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
&
e
r
a
w
t
f
o
s
s
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c
 
&
e
l
i
b
o
m
o
u
a
t
i
i
)
g
n
n
m
&
 
s
a
e
m
t
l
l
c
x
e
(
 
s
a
i
r
e
l
t
a
m
l
d
o
h
e
s
u
o
h
+
g
n
i
l
i
l
t
a
e
r
 
s
e
p
a
t
s
 
&
d
o
o
f
s
t
c
u
d
o
r
p
l
a
n
o
s
r
e
p
&
l
&
 
y
g
o
o
n
h
c
e
t
s
e
c
n
e
c
s
i
e
f
i
l
i
o
b
&
 
s
a
c
i
t
l
u
e
c
a
m
r
a
h
p
i
a
d
e
m
n
o
i
t
a
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
i
s
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
n
o
i
t
i
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
c
e
e
l
t
d
e
n
i
f
e
d
t
o
n
S
C
G
I
o
c
c
a
b
o
t
&
e
g
a
r
e
v
e
b
d
o
o
f
s
t
s
u
r
t
 
t
n
e
m
t
s
e
v
n
i
t
e
a
t
s
e
l
a
e
r
s
e
i
t
i
l
i
t
u
i
s
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
&
t
i
n
e
m
p
u
q
e
e
r
a
c
 
h
t
l
a
e
h
Source: Securities Industry Research Centre of Asia-Pacific (SIRCA) Limited  
In considering the above outcomes in the context of Banfora Project Ore Reserves and Sabodala Project 
Mineral Reserves we note that mining companies usually have significant capital investment 
requirements (with limited ability to quickly scale up or down operations) and are driven by global 
commodity prices with substantial lag between movements in volatile commodity prices and cost pricing 
for key mining and related operations. Accordingly there is substantial risk as mining operations are 
leveraged to commodity price movements. The metals and mining sector as a whole has an observed beta 
of approximately 1.4. However, this sector comprises companies at various stages of development (from 
early stage exploration companies, with relatively higher risk, to companies with stable producing assets, 
with relatively lower risk) and exposed to various commodities with differing commodity price drivers / 
volatility and mining processing / operations. 
The following table sets out closing market capitalisation as at 24 June 2016, the two year and five year 
historical average financial gearing and the adjusted ungeared two year weekly and five year monthly
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
87
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
beta estimates for a selection of listed production/pre-production gold companies with projects located in 
West Africa. 
The beta factors have been calculated relative to the Morgan Stanley Capital Index – All Countries 
(MSCI), an international equities market index that is widely used as a proxy for the global stock market 
as a whole. The MSCI is often used as a benchmark in respect of assets likely to be attractive to 
international buyers, which we believe is likely to be the case in relation to the Banfora and Sabodala 
projects.  
Table A4-1: Selected listed companies – financial gearing and ungeared beta 
Two year 
weekly
Five year 
monthly
Gearing %2,3
Company
Mkt 
Cap 
$m1
West African Producers 
IAMGOLD Corp. 
SEMAFO Inc. 
Endeavour Mining  
Asanko Gold  
Resolute Mining  
Perseus Mining  
Teranga Gold  
Golden Star Resources 
Robex Resources  
Aureus Mining  
Avocet Mining  
West African Developers 
Roxgold Inc. 
Hummingbird Resources P 
Orezone Gold Corporation 
West African Resources 
Gryphon Minerals Ltd. 
Bassari Resources Limited 
Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. 
Azumah Resources Ltd 
African Gold Group Inc. 
Oklo Resources Limited 
Sarama Resources Limited 
Savary Gold Corp. 
Golden Rim Resources Ltd. 
Mean  
Median 
Mean (excl. outliers)
2,336 
2,151 
1,887 
1,136 
888 
423 
459 
237 
66 
42 
32 
 
532 
137 
145 
86 
74 
36 
24 
23 
21 
22 
18 
17 
6
2 year 
 
10% 
0% 
23% 
0% 
15% 
0% 
0% 
50% 
35% 
33% 
112% 
 
0% 
13% 
0% 
3% 
0% 
2% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
12%
0%
8%
5 year
0% 
0% 
15% 
0% 
9% 
0% 
0% 
21% 
24% 
8% 
10% 
 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
n/a 
n/a 
0% 
0% 
4%
0%
1%
ungeared beta 
 
   MSCI 
 
0.09 
-0.17 
0.28 
0.21 
0.75 
0.48 
0.28 
0.18 
1.13 
0.99 
0.04 
 
0.36 
0.61 
0.40 
0.97 
-0.11 
0.55 
-0.24 
-0.14 
0.44 
1.23 
0.19 
1.75 
0.55 
0.45 
0.38 
1.44
ungeared beta 
MSCI 
 
0.23 
0.15 
0.27 
0.81 
0.28 
0.62 
0.58 
0.54 
1.22 
1.23 
0.39 
 
0.63 
0.49 
0.93 
1.86 
1.06 
0.57 
0.80 
0.82 
0.85 
n/a 
n/a 
0.14 
2.05 
0.75
0.63
1.54
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
88
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Median (excl. outliers) 
Notes 
1.  Market capitalisation as at 24 June 2016 converted to AUD as at the same date based on prevailing spot price
1.44
0%
0%
1.54
(where relevant).
2.  Where a company does not have any interest bearing debt or the resultant net debt figure is negative, i.e. where
cash exceeds debt, the ratio of net debt to equity has been recorded as 0%.
3.  Gearing ratio calculated as average Net debt / (Net debt + equity) at each annual reporting date for the five-
year period prior to 24 June 2016.
4.  Outliers have been identified based on the level of statistical confidence in the beta observations and have been
shaded and excluded from the mean and median 
n/a denotes insufficient observations.
5. 
Source: Capital IQ, latest available financial statements of the relevant companies and KPMG Corporate Finance 
Analysis 
The above analysis indicates that in the vast majority of cases, the observed beta observations exhibit a 
low level of statistical confidence, such that only limited reliance can be given to these directly observed 
beta factors. 
In selecting an appropriate beta for Banfora Project Ore Reserves and Sabodala Project Mineral Reserves 
we have also considered that: 
•  gold mining companies, whilst subject to similar exploration, development and production risks as
other commodity mining companies, often experience value cycles counter to other commodity 
miners. This is driven by counter-cyclical movements in gold prices as gold is perceived as a safe 
haven asset for investment purposes. Given the use of gold as a countercyclical investment asset, 
there are proposed theories that gold related investments (including investments in gold companies) 
could have a negative beta (i.e. generate returns in opposing direction to the overall market). Whilst 
we do not consider a negative beta to be appropriate (as this is not supported by historical beta 
observations for gold companies that pass statistical significance tests), we do consider the resulting 
risk of cash flows from gold mining operations to have lower risk relative to cash flows for mining of 
other commodities, all other things being equal. 
the cash flow forecast being valued are underpinned by Reserves over relatively short mine lives and 
therefore are considered to incorporate less risk than exploration / early stage assets and also cash 
flows which incorporate value beyond Proved and Probable Reserves.
•
•  only minimal financial leverage has been assumed. 
Having regard to the analysis set out above we consider a range of ungeared betas for gold production 
forecasts, such as for the Banfora Project and the Sabodala Project, are each in the order of 0.9 to 1.0. We 
have considered the stage of development of each project, and other specific risk factors that may be 
appropriate, in the following sections. 
Having determined an appropriate ungeared beta, it is necessary to “regear” the beta to a specified level 
of financial gearing to determine the equivalent beta.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
89
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Debt/equity mix 
The selection of an appropriate capital structure is a subjective exercise. The tax deductibility of the cost 
of debt means that the higher the proportion of debt, the lower the WACC for a given cost of equity. 
However, at significantly higher levels of debt, the marginal cost of borrowing would increase due to the 
greater risk which debt holders are exposed to. In addition, the cost of equity would also be likely to 
increase due to equity investors requiring a higher return given the higher degree of financial risk that 
they have to bear. 
Ultimately for each company there is likely to be a level of debt/equity that represents the optimal capital 
structure for that company. In estimating the WACC, the debt/equity level assumption should reflect what 
would be the optimal or target capital structure for the relevant asset. Optimal (as opposed to actual) 
capital structures are not readily observable. Accordingly, any estimate of optimal capital structure is 
necessarily subjective. In practice, the existing capital structures of comparable businesses can be used as 
a guide to the likely capital structure for a firm/project, taking into consideration the specific financial 
circumstances of that firm/project. In drawing any conclusions from the comparable company 
information, it is important to note that the observed gearing levels usually represent current gearing 
levels, which may or may not be representative of optimal, long term gearing levels. Furthermore, the 
gearing level of a company at a given point in time can reflect recent new issues of debt or equity. 
In selecting an appropriate capital structure we have had regard to the gearing level of the set of comparable 
companies set out in Table A4-1 and have also had regard to the fact that recent gearing levels likely reflect 
the  impact  of  global  macroeconomic  uncertainty  and,  in  particular,  general  global  restrictions  on  the 
availability of debt funding. We consider there to be reasonable prospects to adopt a higher gearing level 
than those shown in Table 4-1, particularly for production companies over the medium to longer term. On 
this basis, we consider an appropriate long term gearing level for the Banfora and Sabodala projects as at 
the 24 June 2016 to be in the order of 15% to 20% debt and 85% to 80% equity. 
On this basis, the regeared beta range of the the Banfora and Sabodala projects are each in the order of 
1.0 to 1.2. 
Company/project specific risk factor  
Under CAPM theory, it is assumed that diversified investors require no additional returns to compensate 
for specific risks because the net effect of specific risks across a diversified portfolio will, on average, be 
zero i.e. portfolio investors can diversify away all specific risk.  In reality many investors will include an 
additional risk premium to reflect such factors as project location and stage of development. Certainly, it 
is common for companies to set “hurdle rates” for investments above their own estimates of the cost of 
capital, to deal with these issues. 
It can be argued that the approach of a valuer to this issue should reflect the approach most likely to be 
adopted by actual or potential purchasers of similar assets. Accordingly, we have considered the 
estimated base costs of equity by including: 
•  a risk premium to reflect sovereign and development risk associated with the cash flows emerging
from Gryphon’s Banfora Project located in Burkina Faso
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
90
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
•  a risk premium to reflect sovereign risk associated with the cash flows emerging from Teranga’s
Sabodala Project located in Senegal
The Banfora Project 
Sovereign risk – Burkina Faso 
Country or sovereign risk is diverse in nature, incorporating aspects of the investment environment 
including, but not limited to, the economic outlook, Government monetary and fiscal responsibility, 
political stability and legal and regulatory frameworks.
In determining whether a country risk premium (CRP) should apply to the USD WACC calculated for 
Gryphon’s Banfora Project in Burkina Faso, we have considered the following: 
•
the EIU’s country risk ratings based on factors including, among others, security risk and political 
stability. The risk ratings assigned to Burkina Faso, along with the corresponding rankings for the 
United States for comparative purposes, are summarised in the table below: 
Table A4-3: Summary of EIU country risk ratings
Overall
assessment
Security  Political 
stability
Government 
effectiveness
Legal & 
regulatory
Macroeconomic  Foreign 
trade
Tax 
policy
Labour 
market
Infrastructure
Burkina 
Faso
United 
States
C
A
C
A
D
A
D
B
D
A
A
B
C
B
C
A
C
B
D
A
Note: 
1.  Ranking of E represents the highest risk category
•
Source: EIU 
the World Bank ranks Burkina Faso 153 out of 189 countries globally in its 2016 Ease of Doing 
Business survey. To put Burkina Faso’s ranking in perspective, the United States is ranked 7th in the 
world. The survey considers variables such as dealing with construction permits, protecting investors, 
trading across borders and enforcing contracts. Results of the survey for Burkina Faso, along with the 
corresponding rankings for the United States are illustrated in the table below.
Table A4-4: Summary of the “Ease of Doing Business Index” rankings
Burkina 
Faso
United 
States
Ease of 
doing 
business
rank
Starting a 
business
Dealing
with 
permits
153
7
78
49
76
33
Getting 
electricity
Registering 
property
Getting 
credit
Protecting 
investors
Paying 
taxes
Trading 
across 
boarders
Enforcing 
contracts
Closing a 
business
183
149
133
144
153
103
163
112
44
34
2
35
53
34
21
5
Source: The World Bank Ease of Doing Business survey
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
91
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
•
•
the latest equity market CRP estimate based on Moody’s country rating of “B3” for Burkina Faso 
published by Professor Aswath Damodaran of 10.02% per annum 
the government of Burkina Faso has a financial incentive to support the Banfora Project as a result of 
its free carry interest of 10% in the project, which will generate income for the government in the 
form of taxes and royalties. Further, seven new gold mines have been successfully commissioned in 
Burkina Faso since 2008, demonstrating the government’s intention to support local mining projects.  
Having regard to our analysis, we consider that, on balance, it is reasonable to conclude that the sovereign 
risk for a foreign company doing business in Burkina Faso is significantly more than it would be if the 
project was located in the United States.  
Based on the above, we consider a CRP in the range of 5.0% to 6.0% per annum in respect of Gryphon’s 
Banfora Project located in Burkina Faso to be appropriate. 
Project development risk – Burkina Faso
Construction activities at the Banfora Project have not yet commenced. As such, there is a degree of inherent 
risk in the development, construction and commissioning of any new operation which can be considered to 
add  to  the  risk  of  the  underlying  cash  flows  emerging  as  projected  in  comparison  to  an  established 
production project with known operating parameters.  
Accordingly, we have applied an alpha factor for development risk in the range of 1.0% to 2.0% per annum. 
The Sabodala Project 
Sovereign risk - Senegal
In determining whether a CRP should apply to the USD WACC calculated for Teranga’s Sabodala 
Project in Senegal, we have considered the following sources: 
•
the 5.7% interest rate differential on 5 year US Treasury Bonds and 5 year Senegalese Government 
Bonds issued in USD as at 24 June 2016 
the EIU risk ratings assigned to Senegal, along with the corresponding rankings for the United States, 
are presented in the table below:
•
Table A4-5: Summary of EIU country risk ratings
Senegal
United 
States
Overall
assessment
Security  Political 
stability
Government 
effectiveness
Legal & 
regulatory
Macroeconomic  Foreign 
trade
Tax 
policy
Labour 
market
Infrastructure
C
A
B
A
B
A
D
B
D
A
A
B
B
B
C
A
C
B
D
A
Note: 
1.  Ranking of E represents the highest risk category
Source: EIU
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
92
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
•
•
•
the World Bank ranks Senegal 143 out of 189 countries globally in its 2016 Ease of Doing Business 
survey. We note, the Wold Bank has not published ranks for individual categories for Senegal in its 
2016 survey 
the latest equity market CRP estimate based on Moody’s country rating of “B1” for Senegal 
published by Professor Aswath Damodaran of 6.94% per annum 
the government of Senegal has a financial incentive to support the Sabodala Project as a result of its 
free carry interest of 10% in the project, which will generate income for the government in the form 
of taxes and royalties.
Having regard to our analysis, we consider that, on balance, it is reasonable to conclude that the sovereign 
risk for a foreign company doing business in Senegal is significantly more than it would be if the project 
was located in the United States, albeit, slightly lower risk than Burkina Faso.  
Based on the above, we consider that, on balance, a CRP in the range of 3.0% to 4.0% per annum in 
respect of Teranga’s Sabodala Project located in Senegal to be appropriate. 
Project development risk – Senegal
Given the Sabodala Project has a long standing history of production, we consider no alpha factor for 
development risk to be necessary.
The following table sets out our cost of equity estimate based on the assumptions and inputs discussed 
above:
Table A4-6: USD nominal cost of equity – Gryphon’s Banfora Project  
Input
Low
1.6% 
0.90 
1.03 
6.0% 
6.0% 
13.8%
Low
1.8% 
0.90 
1.02 
6.0% 
3.0% 
10.9%
High 
1.6% 
1.00 
1.21 
6.0% 
8.0% 
16.8%
High 
1.8% 
1.00 
1.19 
6.0% 
4.0% 
12.9%
Cost of equity calculation ((cid:1785)(cid:1805)) 
R(cid:2916) 
β(cid:2961) 
β(cid:2915) 
(cid:1785)(cid:1805) 
R(cid:2916) 
β(cid:2961) 
β(cid:2915) 
(cid:1785)(cid:1805)
MRP 
α
MRP 
α
Definition 
Risk free rate of return 
Asset beta (ungeared beta estimate) 
Equity beta (regeared beta estimate) 
Equity market risk premium 
Project specific risk factor 
Cost of equity (post-tax)
Definition 
Risk free rate of return 
Asset beta (ungeared beta estimate) 
Equity beta (regeared beta estimate) 
Equity market risk premium 
Project specific risk factor 
Cost of equity (post-tax)
Note: May not calculate exactly due to rounding
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis 
Table A4-7: USD nominal cost of equity – Teranga’s Sabodala Project 
Input
Note: May not calculate exactly due to rounding
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
93
ABCD
Cost of debt calculation ((cid:1785)(cid:1804))
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
In considering the cost of debt appropriate for the Banfora and Sabodala projects we have considered: 
•  current yields of BBB rated United States corporate bonds of maturities commensurate with our risk
free rate assumptions
•  our aforementioned analysis of country risk associated with operations in Burkina Faso and Senegal
and which providers of debt capital are likely to require a premium for.
Based on the above considerations, we consider the following nominal, pre-tax costs of debt to be 
appropriate: 
•  Banfora Project – 9.4% to 10.4% per annum 
•  Sabodala Project – 7.5% to 8.5% per annum
Corporate tax rate ((cid:1820)(cid:1803))
The Burkina Faso corporate tax rate for mining companies of 17.5% has been applied to calculate the 
post-tax, nominal discount rates for the Banfora Project. 
A corporate tax rate of 25.0% has been applied to calculate the post-tax, nominal discount rates for the 
Sabodala Project. 
Calculation of the WACC  
The following table summarises the implied base calculation of a nominal post-tax WACC for application 
in our valuation assessment based on the assumptions/inputs discussed above. 
Table A4-8: Summary of the WACC - Gryphon’s Banfora Project
Input 
Kd 
Ke 
tc 
D/(D+E) 
E/(D+E) 
WACC 
Note: May not calculate exactly due to rounding
Definition 
Cost of debt (pre-tax) 
Cost of equity (post-tax) 
Corporate tax rate 
Proportion of debt in the capital mix 
Proportion of equity in the capital mix 
Weighted average cost of capital (nominal, post-tax)
Low 
9.4% 
13.8% 
17.5% 
15.0% 
85.0% 
12.9%
High 
10.4% 
16.8% 
17.5% 
20.0% 
80.0% 
15.2%
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance analysis
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
94
ABCD
Table A4-9: Summary of the WACC - Teranga’s Sabodala Project
Input 
Kd 
Ke 
tc 
D/(D+E) 
E/(D+E) 
WACC 
Note: May not calculate exactly due to rounding
Definition 
Cost of debt (pre-tax) 
Cost of equity (post-tax) 
Corporate tax rate 
Proportion of debt in the capital mix 
Proportion of equity in the capital mix 
Weighted average cost of capital (nominal, post-tax)
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Low 
7.5% 
10.9% 
25.0% 
15.0% 
85.0% 
10.1%
High 
8.5% 
12.9% 
25.0% 
20.0% 
80.0% 
11.6%
Source: KPMG Corporate Finance analysis 
Having regard to the above variables, we consider a discount rate in the order of: 
•  12.9% to 15.2% per annum for Gryphon’s Banfora Project 
•  10.1% to 11.6% per annum for Teranga’s Sabodala Project 
to be reasonable.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
95
7
.
6
.
5
.
4
.
3
.
2
.
N
o
t
e
s
:
s
e
l
e
c
t
e
d
 
c
o
m
p
a
n
y
 
r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d
 
p
r
i
o
r
 
t
o
 
2
0
 
J
u
l
y
 
2
0
1
6
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
q
u
o
t
e
d
 
i
n
c
l
u
s
i
v
e
 
o
f
 
r
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
.
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
 
i
n
c
l
u
d
e
 
P
r
o
v
e
n
 
a
n
d
 
P
r
o
b
a
b
l
e
 
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
.
8
.
 
"
n
/
a
"
 
i
n
d
i
c
a
t
e
s
 
t
h
e
 
i
n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n
 
i
s
 
n
o
t
 
a
v
a
i
l
a
b
l
e
.
C
a
l
c
u
l
a
t
e
d
 
a
s
 
e
n
t
e
r
p
r
i
s
e
 
v
a
l
u
e
 
d
i
v
i
d
e
d
 
b
y
 
t
o
t
a
l
 
r
e
s
e
r
v
e
.
C
a
l
c
u
l
a
t
e
d
 
a
s
 
e
n
t
e
r
p
r
i
s
e
 
v
a
l
u
e
 
d
i
v
i
d
e
d
 
b
y
 
t
o
t
a
l
 
r
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
.
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
i
n
c
l
u
d
e
 
M
e
a
s
u
r
e
d
,
 
I
n
d
i
c
a
t
e
d
 
a
n
d
 
I
n
f
e
r
r
e
d
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
.
M
e
d
i
a
n
 
(
A
v
e
r
a
g
e
 
(
M
e
d
i
a
n
 
(
A
v
e
r
a
g
e
 
(
G
o
l
d
 
E
x
p
l
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
G
o
l
d
 
E
x
p
l
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
G
o
l
d
 
E
x
p
l
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
G
o
l
d
 
E
x
p
l
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
/
/
/
/
t
)
t
)
t
)
 
(
e
x
c
l
t
)
 
(
e
x
c
l
u
d
i
n
g
 
o
u
t
l
i
e
r
s
)
u
d
i
n
g
 
o
u
t
l
i
e
r
s
)
I
n
t
e
r
n
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
"
)
,
 
a
 
S
w
s
s
 
e
n
t
i
t
y
.
i
A
l
l
 
r
i
g
h
t
s
 
r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.
 
T
h
e
 
K
P
M
G
 
n
a
m
e
,
 
l
o
g
o
 
a
n
d
 
"
c
u
t
t
i
n
g
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
 
c
o
m
p
e
x
i
t
y
"
 
a
r
e
l
i
r
e
g
s
t
e
r
e
d
 
t
r
a
d
e
m
a
r
k
s
 
o
r
 
t
r
a
d
e
m
a
r
k
s
o
f
 
K
P
M
G
I
n
t
e
r
n
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
.
9
6
©
 
2
0
1
6
 
K
P
M
G
 
F
n
a
n
c
a
l
i
i
i
A
d
v
s
o
r
y
 
S
e
r
v
c
e
s
 
(
i
A
u
s
t
r
a
l
i
a
)
P
t
y
 
L
t
d
,
 
a
n
 
a
f
f
i
l
i
a
t
e
 
o
f
 
K
P
M
G
.
K
P
M
G
i
s
 
a
n
 
A
u
s
t
r
a
l
i
a
n
p
a
r
t
n
e
r
s
h
p
i
a
n
d
a
 
m
e
m
b
e
r
 
f
i
r
m
o
f
 
t
h
e
K
P
M
G
n
e
t
w
o
r
k
o
f
 
i
n
d
e
p
e
n
d
e
n
t
m
e
m
b
e
r
 
f
i
r
m
s
 
a
f
f
i
l
i
a
t
e
d
w
i
t
h
K
P
M
G
I
n
t
e
r
n
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
C
o
o
p
e
r
a
t
i
v
e
 
(
"
K
P
M
G
C
o
r
p
o
r
a
t
e
 
F
i
n
a
n
c
e
 
A
n
a
l
y
s
i
s
9
.
O
u
t
l
i
e
r
s
 
h
a
v
e
 
b
e
e
n
 
i
d
e
n
t
i
f
i
e
d
 
b
a
s
e
d
 
o
n
 
a
n
 
8
0
 
p
e
r
c
e
n
t
 
c
o
n
f
i
d
e
n
c
e
 
l
e
v
e
l
 
a
n
d
 
h
a
v
e
 
b
e
e
n
s
h
a
d
e
d
a
n
d
e
x
c
l
u
d
e
d
f
r
o
m
t
h
e
 
c
a
l
c
u
l
a
t
i
o
n
o
f
 
a
v
e
r
a
g
e
a
n
d
m
e
d
i
a
n
(
w
h
e
r
e
 
s
p
e
c
i
f
i
e
d
)
.
S
o
u
r
c
e
:
C
a
p
i
t
a
l
 
I
Q
,
 
c
o
m
p
a
n
y
 
f
i
n
a
n
c
i
a
l
 
s
t
a
t
e
m
e
n
t
s
a
n
d
r
e
p
o
r
t
s
,
p
u
b
l
i
c
l
y
a
v
a
i
l
a
b
l
e
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
/
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
 
i
n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n
o
f
 
r
e
l
e
v
a
n
t
 
c
o
m
p
a
n
i
e
s
a
n
d
K
P
M
G
W
h
e
r
e
 
t
h
e
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
/
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
n
o
t
 
1
0
0
 
p
e
r
c
e
n
t
 
o
w
n
e
d
,
 
t
h
e
 
c
a
l
c
u
l
a
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
m
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
 
i
s
 
b
a
s
e
d
o
n
t
h
e
 
c
o
m
p
a
n
y
'
s
 
r
e
l
e
v
a
n
t
 
i
n
t
e
r
e
s
t
.
1
.
E
n
t
e
r
p
r
i
s
e
 
V
a
l
u
e
 
h
a
s
 
b
e
e
n
 
c
a
l
c
u
l
a
t
e
d
 
a
s
M
a
r
k
e
t
C
a
p
i
t
a
l
i
s
a
t
i
o
n
 
a
s
 
a
t
 
2
0
 
J
u
l
y
 
2
0
1
6
 
c
o
n
v
e
r
t
e
d
t
o
A
U
D
a
s
 
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
s
a
m
e
 
d
a
t
e
 
b
a
s
e
d
o
n
p
r
e
v
a
i
l
i
n
g
s
p
o
t
p
r
i
c
e
 
(
w
h
e
r
e
 
r
e
l
e
v
a
n
t
)
a
n
d
t
h
e
 
l
a
t
e
s
t
n
e
t
d
e
b
t
/
c
a
s
h
o
f
 
t
h
e
R
o
x
g
o
l
d
 
I
n
c
.
S
a
v
a
r
y
 
G
o
l
d
 
C
o
r
p
.
A
f
r
i
c
a
n
 
G
o
l
d
 
G
r
o
u
p
 
I
n
c
.
O
k
l
o
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
L
m
A
z
u
m
a
h
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
i
i
t
e
d
L
t
d
S
a
r
a
m
a
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
i
G
o
l
d
e
n
 
R
m
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
L
t
d
.
X
t
r
a
-
G
o
l
d
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
C
o
r
p
.
B
a
s
s
a
r
i
W
e
s
t
A
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
f
r
i
c
a
n
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
,
H
u
m
m
i
n
g
b
i
r
d
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
O
r
e
z
o
n
e
 
G
o
l
d
 
C
o
r
p
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
L
t
d
.
P
L
C
M
e
d
i
a
n
 
(
A
v
e
r
a
g
e
 
(
M
e
d
i
a
n
 
(
A
v
e
r
a
g
e
 
(
A
v
o
c
e
t
A
u
r
e
u
s
M
i
n
i
n
g
 
p
l
c
M
i
n
i
n
g
 
I
n
c
.
A
s
a
n
k
o
 
G
o
l
d
 
I
n
c
.
R
o
b
e
x
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
I
n
c
.
G
o
l
d
e
n
 
S
P
e
r
s
e
u
s
R
e
s
o
l
u
t
e
t
a
r
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
,
M
i
n
i
n
g
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
M
i
n
i
n
g
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
L
t
d
.
G
o
l
d
 
P
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
)
G
o
l
d
 
P
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
)
E
n
d
e
a
v
o
u
r
M
i
n
i
n
g
 
C
o
r
p
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
S
E
M
A
F
O
I
n
c
.
I
G
o
l
d
P
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
A
M
G
O
L
D
C
o
r
p
.
i
n
W
e
s
t
A
f
r
i
c
a
C
o
m
p
a
n
y
 
N
a
m
e
G
o
l
d
E
x
p
l
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
D
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t
 
i
/
n
W
e
s
t
A
f
r
i
c
a
G
o
l
d
 
P
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
)
 
(
e
x
c
l
G
o
l
d
 
P
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
)
 
(
e
x
c
l
u
d
i
n
g
 
o
u
t
l
i
e
r
s
)
u
d
i
n
g
 
o
u
t
l
i
e
r
s
)
1
1
.
8
1
2
.
0
1
7
.
1
1
7
.
3
1
8
.
2
2
0
.
3
1
5
.
8
2
7
.
0
6
8
.
9
1
0
7
.
7
1
1
5
.
7
4
2
4
.
7
2
7
.
5
3
3
.
2
4
8
.
9
2
7
1
.
1
4
3
9
.
6
7
2
3
.
8
7
3
3
.
0
1
,
5
1
5
.
4
1
,
4
7
7
.
7
1
,
8
0
6
.
1
1
0
.
9
1
5
.
9
1
6
.
9
1
6
.
2
2
0
.
6
1
4
.
0
2
7
.
3
7
2
.
1
8
.
4
1
1
5
.
5
1
1
1
.
9
4
3
8
.
5
1
3
7
.
8
5
8
.
2
2
1
9
.
1
3
7
7
.
4
7
2
2
.
6
7
6
5
.
3
5
6
.
4
1
,
6
7
7
.
9
1
,
4
2
9
.
8
1
,
9
9
6
.
4
C
a
p
i
t
a
l
i
s
a
t
i
o
n
M
a
r
k
e
t
U
S
$
m
E
n
t
e
r
p
r
i
s
e
V
a
l
u
e
U
S
$
m
1
.
0
4
.
2
1
.
2
1
.
1
8
.
0
4
.
0
7
.
1
8
.
5
8
.
4
7
.
1
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
.
0
5
.
0
6
.
0
1
.
0
4
.
0
6
.
1
3
.
0
7
.
6
9
.
2
5
.
1
4
.
7
1
.
7
9
.
8
2
.
9
4
.
9
6
.
4
6
3
0
3
.
.
0
7
.
0
8
.
0
4
.
1
9
.
2
4
.
5
1
.
4
7
.
4
5
.
2
9
.
7
6
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
2
,
3
,
5
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
2
,
4
M
o
z
M
o
z
2
3
2
3
2
5
5
8
.
.
.
.
6
7
3
5
n
/
a
2
7
0
.
.
7
7
.
8
2
n
/
a
1
1
5
.
3
6
6
.
3
9
3
.
3
9
4
.
2
0
0
.
2
3
6
.
3
7
2
0
.
1
3
3
1
2
9
1
8
2
2
0
3
.
.
.
.
6
9
3
0
n
/
a
n
/
a
n
/
a
3
6
9
.
n
/
a
3
6
7
.
n
/
a
2
4
7
5
.
1
8
2
3
.
1
9
1
3
.
6
4
1
7
.
8
4
9
.
2
9
2
9
3
2
7
3
.
.
.
.
7
8
1
0
n
/
a
3
4
5
.
.
9
8
1
0
2
.
n
/
a
1
4
3
.
4
6
9
.
4
9
0
.
4
8
8
.
2
4
7
.
2
9
7
.
4
6
2
1
.
1
6
6
1
6
1
2
2
5
2
5
2
.
.
.
.
3
5
8
3
n
/
a
n
/
a
n
/
a
4
6
3
.
n
/
a
4
5
7
.
n
/
a
3
0
8
7
.
2
2
5
8
.
2
3
5
9
.
1
0
6
8
.
7
9
7
1
.
3
3
3
3
3
6
8
1
.
.
.
.
4
4
2
7
n
/
a
3
9
0
.
1
1
0
.
1
1
5
.
n
/
a
1
6
0
.
5
3
1
.
5
4
9
.
5
4
5
.
2
7
5
.
3
3
4
.
5
1
6
1
.
1
8
6
1
8
0
2
5
1
2
8
1
.
.
.
.
0
5
9
9
n
/
a
n
/
a
n
/
a
5
1
9
.
n
/
a
5
1
1
.
n
/
a
3
4
5
4
.
2
5
1
9
.
2
6
2
6
.
1
2
0
0
.
8
9
0
4
.
5
4
6
6
6
0
9
0
.
.
.
.
2
0
0
6
5
4
2
.
4
1
7
.
3
1
0
.
4
8
1
.
8
8
2
.
8
1
5
.
.
8
2
1
7
4
9
.
3
1
2
6
.
6
5
8
.
1
6
2
1
7
9
1
6
3
2
1
0
.
.
.
.
3
8
2
5
1
6
4
8
.
1
6
4
0
.
1
1
3
6
.
1
5
8
0
.
1
4
1
1
.
1
6
2
3
.
3
6
8
9
.
4
8
6
4
.
2
6
3
9
.
8
1
6
.
1
1
2
6
2
8
0
7
1
.
.
.
.
1
7
4
0
5
7
5
.
5
0
4
.
4
0
6
.
6
2
1
.
.
9
2
1
1
0
3
.
1
0
1
0
.
2
1
4
4
.
3
9
3
3
.
8
0
7
.
1
9
8
2
1
9
1
9
9
2
5
8
.
.
.
.
5
0
8
3
1
7
4
7
.
1
9
8
5
.
1
4
8
8
.
2
0
4
0
.
1
7
6
4
.
2
0
1
2
.
4
5
2
2
.
6
1
2
0
.
3
2
3
6
.
9
1
5
.
1
2
4
7
0
8
9
8
0
.
.
.
.
4
5
0
8
5
9
5
.
5
5
7
.
4
6
4
.
7
0
4
.
.
9
8
1
2
3
5
.
1
1
2
8
.
2
3
8
1
.
4
4
1
8
.
8
9
6
.
2
1
9
2
4
2
2
2
1
2
8
7
.
.
.
.
2
5
8
0
1
8
0
7
.
2
1
9
2
.
1
6
9
8
.
2
3
1
6
.
1
9
7
6
.
2
2
4
5
.
5
0
2
2
.
6
8
7
4
.
3
5
9
4
.
9
7
5
.
N
o
 
c
o
n
t
r
o
l
p
r
e
m
u
m
i
M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
U
S
$
/
M
o
z
6
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
U
S
$
/
M
o
z
7
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
2
5
%
c
o
n
t
r
o
l
p
r
e
m
u
m
i
U
S
$
/
M
o
z
U
S
$
/
M
o
z
M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
4
0
%
c
o
n
t
r
o
l
 
p
r
e
m
i
u
m
U
S
$
/
M
o
z
M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
U
S
$
/
M
o
z
M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
A
B
C
D
A
p
p
e
n
d
i
x
5
–
S
e
l
e
c
t
e
d
l
i
s
t
e
d
 
c
o
m
p
a
n
i
e
s
I
n
d
e
p
e
n
d
e
n
t
E
x
p
e
r
t
R
e
p
o
r
t
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
M
i
n
e
r
a
l
s
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
2
5
J
u
l
y
2
0
1
6
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Description
Company 
Gold production in West Africa 
IAMGOLD 
Corp.
SEMAFO Inc.  SEMAFO Inc. engages in the exploration, development, and operation of gold
IAMGOLD Corporation explores for, develops, and operates mining properties in 
North and South America, and West Africa. The company explores for gold, copper, 
zinc, and silver. The company owns interest in the Rosebel gold mine located in 
Suriname, South America; Essakane gold mine in Burkina Faso, West Africa; 
Westwood gold mine located in Québec, Canada; and Côté gold development project 
located in Gogama, Ontario. It also holds interests in various exploration projects, 
including Boto gold project in Senegal and Pitangui project located in Brazil. 
IAMGOLD Corporation was incorporated in 1990 and is headquartered in Toronto, 
Canada.
properties in West Africa. It operates the Mana Mine in Burkina Faso, which includes 
the satellite deposits of Siou and Fofina; and is developing the gold deposit of 
Natougou. SEMAFO Inc. was founded in 1994 and is headquartered in Saint-Laurent, 
Canada. 
 
Endeavour Mining Corporation operates as an intermediate gold producer in West 
Africa. It owns interests in five gold mines located in Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, Ghana, and 
Burkina Faso. It also has interest in the Houndé Project located in Burkina Faso. 
Endeavour Mining Corporation was incorporated in 2002 and is based in Paris, 
France. 
 
Asanko Gold Inc. engages in the exploration, development, and production of gold in 
Ghana. Its flagship property is Asanko Gold Mine located in Ghana, West Africa. 
Asanko Gold Inc. was incorporated in 1999 and is headquartered in Vancouver, 
Canada. 
 
Resolute Mining Limited produces gold, and prospects and explores for minerals. It 
operates two gold mines in Africa and Australia. The company primarily holds 80% 
interest in the Syama Gold Project located in the south of Mali, West Africa. The 
company also produces silver and is based in Perth, Australia. 
 
Perseus Mining Limited engages in the exploration, evaluation, development, and 
mining of gold properties in West Africa. The company operates through Australia, 
Ghana, and Côte d’Ivoire segments. Its principal project is the Edikan Gold Mine in 
Ghana. The company was incorporated in 2003 and is based in Perth, Australia.
Endeavour 
Mining 
Corporation
Asanko Gold 
Inc.
Resolute 
Mining 
Limited
Perseus 
Mining 
Limited
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
97
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
ABCD
Company 
Golden Star 
Resources, 
Ltd.
Robex 
Resources 
Inc.
Aureus 
Mining Inc.
Avocet 
Mining plc
Orezone Gold 
Corporation
Hummingbird 
Resources 
PLC
Description 
Golden Star Resources Ltd. operates as a gold mining and exploration company. The 
company owns and operates the Wassa open-pit gold mine, the Wassa underground 
development project, and a carbon-in-leach processing plant in Ghana; and Bogoso 
gold mining and processing operation in Ghana. It also has a 90% interest in the 
Prestea Underground mine in Ghana; and holds interests in various gold exploration 
projects in Ghana and other parts of West Africa and in South America, as well as 
holds and manages exploration properties in Brazil. The company was founded in 
1984 and is headquartered in Toronto, Canada. 
 
Robex Resources Inc. engages in the acquisition, exploration, and production of gold. 
It holds five exploration licenses in Mali, West Africa. The company focuses on the 
exploration of Mininko and Diangounté permits, as well as Nampala deposit. Robex 
Resources Inc. was founded in 1985 and is headquartered in Quebec, Canada. 
 
Aureus Mining Inc. engages in the exploration, development, and operation of gold 
assets in West Africa. It principally owns interest in the New Liberty Gold project 
located in Liberia. The company was incorporated in 2011 and is based in Toronto, 
Canada. 
 
Avocet Mining PLC operates as a gold mining and exploration company in West 
Africa. The company operates through three segments: UK, Burkina Faso, and 
Guinea. The company owns a 90% interest in the Inata gold project located in 
Burkina Faso; and a 100% interest in the Tri-K project located in Guinea. It also has a 
pipeline of exploration projects in Burkina Faso and Guinea. Avocet Mining PLC 
was incorporated in 1996 and is based in London, the United Kingdom.
Roxgold Inc. acquires, explores, evaluates, and develops mineral properties. Its 
principal asset is the Yaramoko gold project located in Burkina Faso, West Africa. 
The company is headquartered in Toronto, Canada. 
 
Orezone Gold Corporation engages in the investigation, acquisition, exploration, 
development, and operation of gold projects in Burkina Faso, West Africa. It 
primarily owns a 100% interest in the Bomboré gold project in the Ganzourgou 
province. Orezone Gold Corporation was incorporated in 2008 and is headquartered 
in Ottawa, Canada. 
 
Hummingbird Resources PLC engages in the exploration, evaluation, and 
development of mineral exploration properties in West Africa. It primarily explores 
for gold metals. The company primarily holds interests in the Dugbe 1 project located 
in the Liberia. The company was founded in 2005 and is based in London, the United 
Kingdom.
Gold exploration/development in West Africa  
Roxgold Inc.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
98
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Company 
West African 
Resources, 
Ltd.
Bassari 
Resources 
Limited
Xtra-Gold 
Resources 
Corp.
Azumah 
Resources Ltd
Oklo 
Resources 
Limited
African Gold 
Group Inc.
Sarama 
Resources 
Limited
Description 
West African Resources Limited engages in the identification, acquisition, 
exploration, assessment, and development of mineral resource projects in West 
Africa. The company explores for gold and copper deposits. It primarily holds 
interest in the Boulsa gold project in Burkina Faso, West Africa. The company was 
incorporated in 2006 and is based in Perth, Australia. 
 
Bassari Resources Limited engages in the exploration, development, and production 
of gold resources in Senegal, West Africa. The company owns interests in three 
contiguous permits comprising Moura, Sambarabougou, and Bounsankoba, which are 
located on the Birimian gold belt. It also focuses on Makabingui Gold Project located 
within the Sambarabougou permit. Bassari Resources Limited is headquartered in 
Melbourne, Australia. 
 
Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. engages in the exploration and development of gold 
properties in the Republic of Ghana, West Africa. It primarily holds five mining 
leases located in the Kibi Gold Belt. Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. was incorporated in 
1998 and is based in Toronto, Canada. 
 
Azumah Resources Limited engages in the exploration and development of mineral 
properties. It primarily explores for gold deposits. The company primarily owns a 
100% interest in the Wa Gold Project that is located in the northwest Ghana, West 
Africa. The company is based in Perth, Australia. 
 
Oklo Resources Limited engages in the exploration and development of gold 
properties in South and West Mali, West Africa. The company primarily holds 
interest in the Dandoko located in Mali. The company is based in Sydney, Australia. 
 
African Gold Group, Inc. engages in the acquisition, exploration, and development of 
precious and base metal mineral resources properties in West Africa. The company 
primarily focuses on the Kobada gold project located in Mali. It also has interest in 
the Nyankumasi and Asankrangwa exploration tenements located in Ghana. The 
company was founded in 1988 and is headquartered in Toronto, Canada. 
 
Sarama Resources Ltd engages in the sourcing, exploration, and development of 
mineral properties in West Africa. The company explores for gold deposits. Its 
principal property is the South Houndé project located in south-west Burkina Faso. 
The company was founded in 2010 and is headquartered in Perth, Australia.
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
99
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Description 
Savary Gold Corp. engages in the exploration and evaluation of gold properties in 
West Africa. It focuses on the Hounde South property that consists of two exploration 
licenses, Diosso and Mandiasso, and two exploration concession applications located 
in Burkina Faso. Savary Gold Corp. was incorporated in 2008 and is headquartered in 
Toronto, Canada. 
 
Golden Rim Resources Ltd. engages in the exploration and development of mineral 
resource properties in Australia, Europe, and Africa. The company primarily explores 
for gold resources. It holds interests in the Babonga project in Burkina Fas, the 
Balogo project in Burkina Faso and the Korongou project in Ouagadougou. The 
company also holds interests in the Sebba project in Ouagadougou, and the Yako 
project in Burkina Faso. Golden Rim Resources Ltd. is headquartered in Sydney, 
Australia.
ABCD
Company 
Savary Gold 
Corp.
Golden Rim 
Resources 
Ltd.
Source: Capital IQ, company websites, KPMG Corporate Finance Analysis
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
100
6
5
4
3
2
1
.
.
N
o
t
e
s
:
M
e
d
i
a
n
A
v
e
r
a
g
e
.
.
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
b
a
s
e
d
W
h
e
r
e
 
t
h
e
 
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
i
o
n
O
r
b
i
s
 
G
o
l
d
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
V
i
l
l
a
g
e
M
a
i
n
R
e
e
f
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
8
P
a
p
i
l
l
o
n
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
P
t
y
.
L
t
d
.
V
o
l
t
a
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
I
n
c
.
P
M
I
G
o
l
d
C
o
r
p
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
A
m
p
e
l
l
a
M
i
n
i
n
g
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
B
l
y
v
o
o
r
u
i
t
z
i
c
h
t
G
o
l
d
M
i
n
i
n
g
L
t
d
.
E
v
a
n
d
e
r
G
o
l
d
M
i
n
e
s
 
(
P
t
y
)
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
B
l
a
n
k
e
t
M
i
n
e
 
(
1
9
8
3
)
 
(
P
r
i
v
a
t
e
)
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
S
o
u
r
c
e
:
S
&
P
C
a
p
i
t
a
l
 
I
Q
,
M
e
r
g
e
r
M
a
r
k
e
t
,
 
c
o
m
p
a
n
y
 
w
e
b
s
i
t
e
s
a
n
d
a
n
n
o
u
n
c
e
m
e
n
t
s
I
n
t
e
r
n
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
"
)
,
 
a
 
S
w
s
s
 
e
n
t
i
t
y
.
i
A
l
l
 
r
i
g
h
t
s
 
r
e
s
e
r
v
e
d
.
 
T
h
e
 
K
P
M
G
 
n
a
m
e
,
 
l
o
g
o
 
a
n
d
 
"
c
u
t
t
i
n
g
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
 
c
o
m
p
e
x
i
t
y
"
 
a
r
e
l
i
r
e
g
s
t
e
r
e
d
 
t
r
a
d
e
m
a
r
k
s
 
o
r
 
t
r
a
d
e
m
a
r
k
s
o
f
 
K
P
M
G
I
n
t
e
r
n
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
.
1
0
1
©
 
2
0
1
6
 
K
P
M
G
 
F
n
a
n
c
a
l
i
i
i
A
d
v
s
o
r
y
 
S
e
r
v
c
e
s
 
(
i
A
u
s
t
r
a
l
i
a
)
P
t
y
 
L
t
d
,
 
a
n
 
a
f
f
i
l
i
a
t
e
 
o
f
 
K
P
M
G
.
K
P
M
G
i
s
 
a
n
 
A
u
s
t
r
a
l
i
a
n
p
a
r
t
n
e
r
s
h
p
i
a
n
d
a
 
m
e
m
b
e
r
 
f
i
r
m
o
f
 
t
h
e
K
P
M
G
n
e
t
w
o
r
k
o
f
 
i
n
d
e
p
e
n
d
e
n
t
m
e
m
b
e
r
 
f
i
r
m
s
 
a
f
f
i
l
i
a
t
e
d
w
i
t
h
K
P
M
G
I
n
t
e
r
n
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
C
o
o
p
e
r
a
t
i
v
e
 
(
"
K
P
M
G
L
i
m
i
t
e
d
'
s
 
1
0
0
%
i
n
t
e
r
e
s
t
 
i
n
t
h
e
 
B
u
f
f
e
l
s
 
U
r
a
n
i
u
m
p
r
o
j
e
c
t
.
T
h
e
 
u
r
a
n
i
u
m
 
s
p
o
t
 
p
r
i
c
e
 
u
s
e
d
 
a
s
 
a
t
 
4
 
F
e
b
r
u
a
r
y
 
2
0
1
5
 
i
s
 
U
S
$
3
8
/
l
b
.
8
.
A
t
o
t
a
l
 
c
o
n
t
a
i
n
e
d
A
u
e
q
u
i
v
a
l
e
n
t
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
 
o
r
 
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
 
h
a
s
 
b
e
e
n
c
a
l
c
u
l
a
t
e
d
 
(
b
a
s
e
d
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
s
p
o
t
 
u
r
a
n
i
u
m
 
p
r
i
c
e
 
a
s
 
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
a
n
n
o
u
n
c
e
m
e
n
t
 
d
a
t
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
i
o
n
)
 
t
o
t
a
k
e
 
i
n
t
o
a
c
c
o
u
n
t
V
i
l
l
a
g
e
 
M
a
i
n
R
e
e
f
e
n
t
e
r
p
r
i
s
e
 
v
a
l
u
e
 
.
7
.
 
I
n
r
e
l
a
t
i
o
n
t
o
t
h
e
 
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
 
a
n
d
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
 
m
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
s
,
 
"
n
/
a
"
 
i
n
d
i
c
a
t
e
s
 
t
h
a
t
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
 
o
r
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
 
f
i
g
u
r
e
s
 
w
e
r
e
 
n
o
t
 
a
v
a
i
l
a
b
l
e
 
t
o
 
c
a
l
c
u
l
a
t
e
 
t
h
e
 
m
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
 
o
r
 
t
h
e
 
m
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
 
w
a
s
 
n
o
t
m
e
a
n
i
n
g
f
u
l
g
i
v
e
n
t
h
e
 
n
e
g
a
t
i
v
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
p
r
i
o
r
 
t
o
t
h
e
 
a
n
n
o
u
n
c
e
m
e
n
t
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
i
o
n
.
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
b
a
s
e
d
o
n
p
r
o
v
e
n
a
n
d
p
r
o
b
a
b
l
e
 
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
 
a
n
d
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
 
m
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
c
a
l
c
u
l
a
t
e
d
u
s
i
n
g
t
h
e
 
E
n
t
e
r
p
r
i
s
e
 
V
a
l
u
e
 
i
m
p
l
i
e
d
 
b
y
 
t
h
e
 
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
i
o
n
 
a
n
d
 
r
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
a
n
d
 
r
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
 
s
o
u
r
c
e
d
 
f
r
o
m
l
a
t
e
s
t
 
r
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
 
a
n
d
r
e
s
e
r
v
e
 
s
t
a
t
e
m
e
n
t
a
n
n
o
u
n
c
e
d
b
y
 
t
h
e
o
n
M
e
a
s
u
r
e
d
,
 
I
n
d
i
c
a
t
e
d
a
n
d
I
n
f
e
r
r
e
d
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
.
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
q
u
o
t
e
d
 
i
n
c
l
u
s
i
v
e
 
o
f
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
.
.
 
I
m
p
l
i
e
d
e
n
t
e
r
p
r
i
s
e
 
v
a
l
u
e
 
c
a
l
c
u
l
a
t
e
d
u
s
i
n
g
t
h
e
 
c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
a
t
i
o
n
o
f
f
e
r
e
d
 
b
y
 
t
h
e
 
a
c
q
u
i
r
e
r
 
a
n
d
 
t
h
e
 
t
a
r
g
e
t
'
s
 
n
e
t
 
d
e
b
t
/
c
a
s
h
 
p
o
s
i
t
i
o
n
 
r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d
 
p
r
i
o
r
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
a
n
n
o
u
n
c
e
m
e
n
t
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
i
o
n
.
i
n
v
o
l
v
e
d
a
c
o
m
p
a
n
y
 
a
c
q
u
i
r
i
n
g
a
n
i
n
t
e
r
e
s
t
 
o
f
 
b
e
l
o
w
 
1
0
0
 
p
e
r
c
e
n
t
,
 
t
h
e
 
c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
h
a
s
 
b
e
e
n
 
g
r
o
s
s
e
d
 
u
p
 
t
o
 
r
e
f
l
e
c
t
 
a
n
 
i
m
p
l
i
e
d
a
c
q
u
i
s
i
t
i
o
n
o
f
 
1
0
0
p
e
r
c
e
n
t
.
.
 
I
f
 
t
h
e
 
r
e
l
e
v
a
n
t
 
r
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
 
s
t
a
t
e
m
e
n
t
d
o
e
s
 
n
o
t
d
i
s
c
l
o
s
e
 
w
h
e
t
h
e
r
 
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
i
n
c
l
u
s
i
v
e
/
e
x
c
l
u
s
i
v
e
 
o
f
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
,
w
e
 
h
a
v
e
 
a
s
s
u
m
e
d
 
t
h
a
t
 
r
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
d
i
s
c
l
o
s
e
d
a
s
 
b
e
i
n
g
i
n
c
l
u
s
i
v
e
 
o
f
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
.
A
n
g
l
o
G
o
l
d
A
s
h
a
n
t
i
N
a
m
i
b
i
a
 
(
P
r
o
p
r
i
e
t
a
r
y
)
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
Q
K
R
C
o
r
p
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
M
a
n
a
g
e
m
e
n
t
 
(
U
K
)
 
L
t
d
.
B
2
G
o
l
d
C
o
r
p
C
e
n
t
a
m
i
n
P
l
c
A
s
a
n
k
o
G
o
l
d
.
I
n
c
.
B
2
G
o
l
d
C
o
r
p
.
S
E
M
A
F
O
I
n
c
.
R
e
p
u
b
l
i
c
 
o
f
 
Z
m
b
a
b
w
e
i
V
i
l
l
a
g
e
M
a
i
n
R
e
e
f
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
P
a
n
A
f
r
i
c
a
n
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
P
L
C
7
4
.
0
%
5
1
.
0
%
1
0
0
.
0
%
1
0
0
.
0
%
1
0
0
.
0
%
1
0
0
.
0
%
1
0
0
.
0
%
1
0
0
.
0
%
1
0
0
.
0
%
1
3
-
F
e
b
-
1
2
2
0
-
F
e
b
-
1
2
3
0
-
M
a
y
-
1
2
2
8
-
O
c
t
-
1
3
1
0
-
D
e
c
-
1
3
1
7
-
D
e
c
-
1
3
1
0
-
F
e
b
-
1
4
1
3
-
O
c
t
-
1
4
3
-
J
u
n
-
1
4
2
6
.
2
5
9
.
0
1
8
0
.
4
6
2
.
3
2
5
.
4
7
0
.
7
1
1
0
.
0
5
0
4
.
0
1
5
1
.
1
1
0
4
.
.
5
7
9
5
.
3
0
3
7
.
0
4
7
.
3
2
5
2
.
4
7
7
.
2
9
1
.
4
3
7
.
3
9
1
.
4
9
9
.
2
3
0
0
1
.
.
6
8
5
7
.
0
8
9
.
0
4
7
.
7
6
1
.
0
0
0
.
0
0
0
.
2
4
3
.
1
9
2
.
0
0
0
.
0
0
0
2
2
3
7
.
.
1
5
3
4
.
0
8
6
1
2
5
5
2
.
.
1
3
0
6
.
5
5
5
.
1
6
1
7
.
2
8
1
3
.
8
7
3
1
0
1
0
4
.
.
6
5
7
0
4
3
7
9
.
.
2
9
4
0
.
2
9
3
4
1
2
6
4
3
.
.
2
3
7
2
n
/
a
n
/
a
.
2
9
1
1
.
5
7
2
3
n
/
a
n
/
a
A
B
C
D
A
p
p
e
n
d
i
x
6
–
S
e
l
e
c
t
e
d
 
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
i
o
n
s
T
a
r
g
e
t
A
c
q
u
i
r
e
r
T
r
u
e
 
G
o
l
d
M
i
n
i
n
g
I
n
c
.
B
u
r
k
i
n
a
M
i
n
i
n
g
C
o
m
p
a
n
y
E
n
d
e
a
v
o
u
r
M
i
n
i
n
g
C
o
r
p
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
L
a
M
a
n
c
h
a
 
H
o
l
d
i
n
g
 
S
A
R
L
E
n
d
e
a
v
o
u
r
M
i
n
i
n
g
 
C
o
r
p
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
M
N
G
O
R
K
O
M
A
D
E
N
C
I
L
I
K
A
N
O
N
M
S
I
R
K
E
T
I
I
3
0
.
0
%
9
0
.
0
%
1
0
0
.
0
%
2
1
-
S
e
p
-
1
5
2
9
-
F
e
b
-
1
6
4
-
M
a
r
-
1
6
P
e
r
c
e
n
t
a
g
e
A
c
q
u
i
r
e
d
A
n
n
o
u
n
c
e
d
D
a
t
e
4
7
6
.
3
2
8
.
1
1
6
2
.
7
V
a
l
u
e
1
,
2
U
S
$
m
E
n
t
e
r
p
r
i
s
e
I
m
p
l
i
e
d
I
n
d
e
p
e
n
d
e
n
t
E
x
p
e
r
t
R
e
p
o
r
t
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
M
i
n
e
r
a
l
s
 
L
m
i
i
t
e
d
2
5
J
u
l
y
2
0
1
6
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
3
,
4
.
9
0
6
.
0
9
5
.
4
4
9
M
o
z
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
s
5
.
3
9
5
.
0
1
3
.
0
8
6
M
o
z
M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
6
,
7
U
S
$
/
M
o
z
.
5
2
5
8
.
2
9
4
8
.
3
6
2
7
M
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
6
,
7
U
S
$
/
M
o
z
1
2
0
5
4
.
2
1
9
9
6
.
1
9
0
2
1
.
G
o
l
d
E
q
u
i
v
a
l
e
n
t
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
H
e
a
v
e
n
-
S
e
n
t
C
a
p
i
t
a
l
M
a
n
a
g
e
m
e
n
t
G
r
o
u
p
 
C
o
.
,
L
t
d
.
1
0
0
.
0
%
4
-
F
e
b
-
1
5
4
2
.
0
.
3
4
8
0
.
1
4
5
.
1
2
1
.
2
8
9
0
ABCD
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Independent Expert Report
25 July 2016
Appendix 7 – Snowden – Independent Technical Specialist Report
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
102
R
Final
Gryphon Minerals Limited
KPMG Gryphon review
Project Number AU9763
July 2016
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
OFFICE LOCATIONS
Perth
Level 6, 130 Stirling Street 
Perth WA 6000 
AUSTRALIA
Tel:  +61 8 9213 9213 
ABN:  99 085 319 562 
perth@snowdengroup.com
Brisbane
104 Melbourne Street 
South Brisbane QLD 4101  
AUSTRALIA
Tel:   +61 7 3026 6666 
Fax:  +61 7 3026 6060 
ABN: 99 085 319 562 
brisbane@snowdengroup.com
Johannesburg
Technology House, Greenacres Office 
Park, Cnr. Victory and Rustenburg 
Roads, Victory Park  
Johannesburg 2195  
SOUTH AFRICA
PO Box 2613, Parklands 2121 
SOUTH AFRICA
Tel:  +27 11 782 2379 
Fax:  +27 11 782 2396 
Reg. No. 1998/023556/07 
johannesburg@snowdengroup.com
Belo Horizonte
Afonso Pena 2770, CJ 201 A 205  
Funcionários, 30.130-007 
Belo Horizonte MG BRASIL
Tel:  +55 (31) 3222-6286 
Fax:  +55 (31) 3222-6286 
belohorizonte@snowdengroup.com
Website
www.snowdengroup.com
This report has been prepared by Snowden Mining Industry 
Consultants Pty Ltd (Snowden) for exclusive use by Gryphon 
Minerals Limited (Gryphon) and KPMG Financial Advisory 
Services (Australia) Pty Ltd (of which KPMG Corporate 
Finance is a division) (KPMG Corporate Finance) pursuant to 
the Scope of Services contemplated and agreed between 
Snowden and Gryphon. Snowden makes no representation or 
warranty as to the suitability of the contents of this report for 
any third party use or reliance and Snowden denies any 
liability for any such third party reliance (whether in whole or 
in part) on the contents of this report.
 2016R
All rights are reserved. No part of this document may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of 
Snowden.
Prepared by:
Jeremy Peters
BSc, BEng, FAusIMM CP
Principal Consultant
Reviewed by:
John Hearne
B.Eng(Min), MBA, FAusIMM CP(Eng)
Chief Executive Officer
Issued by:
Perth Office
Doc ref:
160725 Final Report AU9763 KPMG Gryphon 
Review_1.docx
Last edited:
25 July 2016
Number of copies
Snowden:  
Gryphon Minerals Limited:
2 
2
Final
July 2016
Page 2 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................... 6
1.1
1.2
Report scope and basis ....................................................................................... 6
Summary of Mineral Assets ................................................................................. 6
 
Gryphon ................................................................................................. 6
 
Teranga .................................................................................................. 6
 
Summary of Mineral Resources .............................................................. 7
 
Summary of Ore Reserves and Mineral Reserves ................................... 9
 
Technical and operating assumptions ..................................................... 9
Summary of Mineral Asset valuation not contemplated by financial 
 
models ................................................................................................. 10
1.2.1
 
1.2.2
 
1.2.3
 
1.2.4
 
1.2.5
 
1.2.6
2
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................... 11
2.1
2.2
Scope of report...................................................................................................11
Contributors ........................................................................................................11
Data sources ........................................................................................ 11
 
Site visits .............................................................................................. 12
2.2.1
 
2.2.2
3
GRYPHON’S PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................ 13
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
Location and description ....................................................................................13
Mineral Resource review ...................................................................................14
Samavogo ............................................................................................ 14
 
Stinger .................................................................................................. 15
 
Fourkoura ............................................................................................. 17
 
Nogbele Central.................................................................................... 18
 
Nogbele North ...................................................................................... 20
 
Nogbele South ...................................................................................... 21
3.2.1
 
3.2.2
 
3.2.3
 
3.2.4
 
3.2.5
 
3.2.6
Mining studies ....................................................................................................22
2013 CIL Ore Reserves ........................................................................ 22
 
2014 Heap Leach study inventory ......................................................... 23
3.3.1
 
3.3.2
Options studies ..................................................................................................24
2.0 Mt/a CIL mining and processing operation....................................... 24
 
2.0 Mt/a heap leach mining and processing operations ......................... 25
3.4.1
 
3.4.2
Operating and capital costs ...............................................................................25
2.0 Mt/a CIL operation .......................................................................... 25
 
2.0 Mt/a heap leach operation ............................................................... 29
 
Mineral processing and metallurgical testing ......................................... 30
 
HL production and cost schedules ........................................................ 30
3.5.1
 
3.5.2
 
3.5.3
 
3.5.4
4
TERANGA PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................... 32
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
Location and description ....................................................................................32
Mineral Reserve .................................................................................................34
Mining .................................................................................................................36
Mineral processing and metallurgical testing.....................................................36
Final
July 2016
Page 3 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
4.5
Capital and operating costs ...............................................................................37
Capital costs ......................................................................................... 37
 
Operating costs .................................................................................... 38
 
Production and cost schedules ............................................................. 38
4.5.1
 
4.5.2
 
4.5.3
5
MINERAL ASSET VALUATION OPINION .............................................................. 40
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
Valuation Date....................................................................................................40
Currency .............................................................................................................40
Snowden ............................................................................................................40
Disclaimer ..........................................................................................................40
Independence ....................................................................................................41
Fees, commissions and other benefits that Snowden may receive ..................41
Responsibility .....................................................................................................42
Valuation opinion methodology ..........................................................................42
Valuation opinion considerations ........................................................... 42
 
Technical value of mineral assets ......................................................... 42
 
Valuation of mineral assets with Ore Reserves ..................................... 43
 
Valuation of mineral assets with Mineral Resources .............................. 43
 
Valuation of mineral assets in the exploration stage .............................. 44
 
Snowden’s valuation methodology ........................................................ 45
 
Gold price ............................................................................................. 47
5.8.1
 
5.8.2
 
5.8.3
 
5.8.4
 
5.8.5
 
5.8.6
 
5.8.7
Valuation Opinion ...............................................................................................48
Gryphon valuation opinion .................................................................... 48
 
Teranga valuation opinion ..................................................................... 53
 
Comparable transactions ...................................................................... 55
5.9.1
 
5.9.2
 
5.9.3
REFERENCES ....................................................................................................... 57
6
Figures
Figure 3.1 
Figure 3.2 
Figure 3.3 
Figure 3.4 
Figure 3.5 
Figure 3.6 
Figure 4.1 
Figure 4.2 
Figure 4.3 
Figure 5.1 
Figure 5.2 
Figure 5.3 
Figure 5.4 
Figure 5.5
Banfora Gold Project location ............................................................... 13 
Benchmark capital costs for CIL projects in Burkina Faso ..................... 26 
CIL annual production and processing schedule ................................... 29 
CIL schedule of annual operating and capital costs ............................... 29 
HL annual production and processing schedule .................................... 31 
HL schedule of annual operating and capital costs ................................ 31 
Sabodala Project location map.............................................................. 33 
Teranga LOM mining and processing schedule ..................................... 39 
Teranga operating and capital cost schedule ........................................ 39 
Gold price (last five years) .................................................................... 47 
Gryphon tenements .............................................................................. 50 
Banfora statutory minimum expenditure ................................................ 50 
Gryphon exploration targets and geology .............................................. 51 
Teranga proposed relinquishment (pink) ............................................... 55
Final
July 2016
Page 4 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Tables
Table 1.1 
Table 1.2 
Table 1.3 
Table 1.4 
Table 1.5 
Table 2.1 
Table 3.1 
Table 3.2 
Table 3.3 
Table 3.4 
Table 3.5 
Table 3.6  
Table 3.7 
Table 3.8 
Table 3.9 
Table 3.10 
Table 3.11 
Table 4.1 
Table 4.2
Table 4.3 
Table 4.4 
Table 5.1 
Table 5.2 
Table 5.3 
Table 5.4 
Table 5.5 
Table 5.6 
Table 5.7 
Table 5.8 
Table 5.9 
Table 5.10
Gryphon published Mineral Resources, global and by deposit ................. 8 
Gryphon’s CIL Ore Reserve estimate, December 2012 ........................... 9 
Gryphon’s HL Ore Reserve estimate (2014) ............................................ 9 
Teranga’s Mineral Reserves as at 31 December 2015 ............................ 9 
Exploration valuation opinion summary ................................................. 10 
Report contributors ............................................................................... 11 
Samavogo model and drilling statistics for gold ..................................... 15 
Stinger model and drilling statistics for gold ........................................... 16 
Fourkoura model and drilling statistics for gold ...................................... 18 
Nogbele Central model and drilling statistics for gold............................. 19 
Nogbele South model and drilling statistics for gold ............................... 21 
Banfora CIL Ore Reserve estimate, December 2012 (2 Mt/a CIL) ......... 23 
Gryphon’s HL Ore Reserve estimate (2014) .......................................... 23 
2012 CIL FS Project capital costs ......................................................... 25 
2013 CIL FS mining operating cost adjustment ..................................... 27 
Processing cost by ore type (2013 CIL FS) ........................................... 27 
Average recovery factors by rock type .................................................. 28 
Teranga’s Mineral Reserve as at 31 December 2015 ............................ 34 
Comparison of Whittle results for the main deposits at 
US$1,100/oz and US$1,300/oz ............................................................. 35 
Sabodala mining fleet ........................................................................... 36 
2016 Project and sustaining capital costs .............................................. 37 
Comparable transaction statistics ......................................................... 46 
Gryphon exploration inventory valuation opinion ................................... 46 
Teranga exploration inventory valuation opinion .................................... 47 
Exploration valuation opinion summary ................................................. 48 
Gryphon Resource valuation opinion .................................................... 49 
Gryphon exploration valuation opinion .................................................. 52 
Teranga incremental mineral inventory valuation opinion ...................... 53 
Granted gold exploration permits and applications ................................ 54 
Revised Teranga commitments............................................................. 54 
Teranga exploration assets valuation opinion ........................................ 56
Appendices
Appendix A
Data supplied by Gryphon
Final
July 2016
Page 5 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.1
Report scope and basis
Snowden Mining Industry Consultants (Snowden) has been engaged to act as 
independent specialist for an opinion of the mineral assets of Gryphon Minerals Limited 
(Gryphon) and Teranga Gold Corporation (Teranga), consisting of:
  An opinion of the validity of the parameters that inform the discounted cash flow
model
  A Technical Valuation opinion of the assets not included in the above cash flow
model.
Snowden undertook a high-level review of the geological block models, Mineral 
Resource, the Ore Reserve, mine planning and processing parameters.
1.2
Summary of Mineral Assets
1.2.1  Gryphon
The Banfora gold project (Banfora or “the Project”), located in Burkina Faso in West 
Africa, is wholly owned by Gryphon. It is a greenfield site and comprises a series of 32 
proposed open pits located within a radius of between 6.5 kilometres (km) and 25 km of 
the Nogbele deposit, where the plant and infrastructure are planned to be located.
The proposed open pits are divided into four geographic areas:
  The Central area includes the four Nogbele open pits
  Fourkoura (about 6.5 km from Nogbele)
  Samavogo (about 25 km from Nogbele)
  Stinger satellite (about 12 km from Nogbele).
Gryphon has reported the results of the following studies:



In 2013, a 2.0 million tonnes per annum (Mt/a) carbon-in-leach (CIL) feasibility study 
(FS) with Ore Reserves reported in accordance with JORC (2012)
In 2014, a 2.0 Mt/a heap leach (HL) feasibility study
In 2015, various combinations of a 2.0 Mt/a HL and a deferred 1.0 Mt/a CIL operation 
at a scoping study level.
1.2.2  Teranga
Teranga is a Canadian based gold company created to acquire the Sabodala gold mine 
and a large regional exploration package in Senegal. Teranga’s interests in Senegal are 
represented by two Senegalese subsidiary companies; Sabodala Gold Operations 
(SGO) and the Sabodala Mining Company (SMC). The Sabodala open pit mine 
(Sabodala) is 90% owned by SGO with the Government of Senegal retaining a 10% 
free-carried interest. SMC is 100% owned by Teranga and is the company engaged in 
exploring the 967 km2 regional exploration permits.
Final
July 2016
Page 6 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The Sabodala mine is located in south-eastern Senegal, approximately 650 km east- 
southeast of the capital Dakar. The Sabodala open pit has been in operation since 2009 
and has produced an average of 180 kilo ounces (Koz) Au/year from multiple open pit 
mines. Milling at Sabodala is through a conventional CIL plant, located central to the 
Sabodala pit area. The Sabodala processing plant was expanded in late 2012 to a 
design capacity of approximately 3.5 Mt/a (fresh ore) and 4.0 Mt/a with a mix of fresh 
and oxidised ore. With the commissioning of an additional primary crusher in Q3 2016, 
this capacity is expected to increase by 10% with the increasing proportions of fresh ore 
delivered to the run of mine (ROM) pad.
1.2.3  Summary of Mineral Resources
Snowden reviewed the Mineral Resources by carrying out a review of the estimation 
processes, independent validation of the estimated grades and independent reporting of 
the Mineral Resource to ensure the reported numbers can be reproduced.
The Samavogo and Stinger Mineral Resources were estimated by CSA Global Pty Ltd 
(CSA) in 2013. The Fourkoura and Nogbele (Central, North and South) deposits were 
estimated by Gryphon in 2015 (Table 1.1).
Snowden notes that the previous CSA models for Fourkoura and Nogbele were used for 
some studies. While Snowden has not reviewed these models, they are likely to have 
the same issues as the other CSA models discussed here.
Samavogo and Stinger
Overall, the estimation is acceptable. While Snowden has concerns about the block size 
and estimation parameters, the estimate validates well and hence any risk in this area is 
not material.
Snowden cannot fully reproduce the Mineral Resource reported by CSA, however the 
differences are not material.
Snowden’s main concern is the method of reporting which uses a proportional method. 
The resource blocks are small (10 m x 10 m x 5 m parent cell), and no minimum mining 
width, typically 2 m, or minimum proportion is applied to the reporting meaning the 
reported numbers are likely highly and unrealistically selective. Because of this, it is 
Snowden’s opinion that tonnages may be under-estimated and grades over-estimated.
While this is not considered good practice as some of the blocks are potentially not 
economic, it may not be material to the Ore Reserve and mine plan as long as sufficient 
dilution is accounted for during these processes.
Fourkoura, Nogbele Central, Nogbele North and Nogbele South
Overall, the estimation is acceptable. While Snowden has some concerns about the 
estimation parameters, the estimates validate reasonably well (and are conservative if 
anything) and hence any risk in this area is not material.
Snowden reported the models and was able to reproduce the tonnes and grades 
reported by Gryphon with only minor differences.
Final
July 2016
Page 7 of 57
i
F
n
a
l
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
l
G
o
b
a
l
S
t
i
n
g
e
r
S
a
m
a
v
o
g
o
F
o
u
r
k
o
u
r
a
N
o
g
b
e
e
l
T
a
b
l
e
 
1
.
1
l
J
u
y
 
2
0
1
6
P
a
g
e
8
o
f
5
7
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
p
u
b
l
i
s
h
e
d
M
n
e
r
a
l
i
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
,
l
g
o
b
a
l
a
n
d
b
y
d
e
p
o
s
i
t
1
.
5
1
0
.
7
0
.
5
1
.
5
1
0
.
7
0
.
5
1
.
5
1
0
.
7
0
.
5
1
.
5
1
0
.
7
0
.
5
1
.
5
1
0
.
7
0
.
5
1
.
9
8
3
.
1
6
4
.
7
1
6
.
6
3
2
.
9
6
2
.
3
1
1
.
8
2
1
.
4
7
0
.
1
9
0
.
2
3
0
.
2
8
0
.
3
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
.
9
8
3
.
1
6
4
.
7
1
6
.
6
3
2
.
9
6
2
.
3
1
1
.
8
2
1
.
4
7
0
.
1
9
0
.
2
3
0
.
2
8
0
.
3
1
1
6
.
0
9
2
8
.
7
7
4
4
.
6
5
6
0
.
4
2
4
.
0
9
7
.
3
4
1
1
.
0
8
1
4
.
2
6
5
.
2
1
7
.
8
9
1
0
.
5
2
1
2
.
5
1
.
5
4
3
.
0
4
5
.
1
6
7
.
2
6
5
.
2
6
1
0
.
5
1
7
.
9
2
6
.
4
1
2
.
8
2
.
1
1
.
6
5
1
.
3
8
2
.
6
3
2
.
0
1
1
.
6
1
1
.
3
9
2
.
9
6
2
.
3
7
1
.
9
9
1
.
7
7
2
.
4
3
1
.
8
3
1
.
4
2
1
.
1
8
2
.
8
9
2
.
0
5
1
.
5
4
1
.
2
4
1
.
4
5
1
.
9
4
2
.
3
7
2
.
6
7
0
.
3
5
0
.
4
7
0
.
5
7
0
.
6
4
0
.
5
0
.
6
0
.
6
7
0
.
7
1
0
.
1
2
0
.
1
8
0
.
2
4
0
.
2
8
0
.
4
9
0
.
6
9
0
.
8
9
1
.
0
5
C
u
t
-
o
f
f
M
t
A
u
 
(
g
/
t
)
O
z
 
(
M
)
M
t
A
u
 
(
g
/
t
)
O
z
 
(
M
)
3
.
8
3
7
.
8
3
1
2
.
2
1
5
.
8
8
1
.
2
2
2
.
4
9
3
.
8
1
5
.
2
6
2
.
2
3
4
.
5
6
7
.
0
3
8
.
5
2
0
.
2
2
0
.
4
2
0
.
7
5
1
.
1
3
0
.
1
6
0
.
3
5
0
.
6
0
.
9
7
M
t
2
.
5
6
1
.
8
7
1
.
5
1
1
.
3
2
.
7
3
1
.
9
6
1
.
5
7
1
.
3
1
2
.
4
6
1
.
8
3
1
.
4
8
1
.
3
3
2
.
4
6
1
.
8
7
1
.
4
1
1
.
1
4
2
.
8
1
.
9
2
1
.
4
5
1
.
1
3
0
.
3
2
0
.
4
7
0
.
5
9
0
.
6
6
0
.
1
1
0
.
1
6
0
.
1
9
0
.
2
2
0
.
1
8
0
.
2
7
0
.
3
4
0
.
3
6
0
.
0
2
0
.
0
3
0
.
0
3
0
.
0
4
0
.
0
1
0
.
0
2
0
.
0
3
0
.
0
4
A
u
 
(
g
/
t
)
O
z
 
(
M
)
2
1
.
9
1
3
9
.
7
6
6
1
.
5
6
8
2
.
9
3
5
.
3
1
9
.
8
3
1
4
.
8
9
1
9
.
5
2
7
.
4
4
1
2
.
4
6
1
7
.
5
5
2
1
.
0
2
1
.
7
6
3
.
4
7
5
.
9
2
8
.
3
9
7
.
4
1
1
4
2
3
.
2
1
3
4
M
t
2
.
7
7
2
.
0
7
1
.
6
4
1
.
3
7
2
.
6
5
1
.
9
9
1
.
6
1
.
3
7
2
.
8
1
2
.
1
7
1
.
7
9
1
.
5
9
2
.
4
3
1
.
8
3
1
.
4
2
1
.
1
8
2
.
9
2
.
1
1
.
6
1
.
2
8
1
.
9
5
2
.
6
5
3
.
2
4
3
.
6
5
0
.
4
5
0
.
6
3
0
.
7
7
0
.
8
6
0
.
6
7
0
.
8
7
1
.
0
1
1
.
0
7
0
.
1
4
0
.
2
0
.
2
7
0
.
3
2
0
.
6
9
0
.
9
5
1
.
1
9
1
.
4
A
u
 
(
g
/
t
)
O
z
 
(
M
)
M
e
a
s
u
r
e
d
I
n
d
i
c
a
t
e
d
I
n
f
e
r
r
e
d
T
o
t
a
l
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
M
n
e
r
a
s
 
L
m
i
l
i
i
t
e
d
:
K
P
M
G
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
 
r
e
v
e
w
i
i
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
M
n
e
r
a
s
 
r
e
v
e
w
l
i
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
1.2.4  Summary of Ore Reserves and Mineral Reserves
Gryphon has reported an Ore Reserve of 16.7 Mt at 1.9 g/t for its 100%-owned Banfora 
Project. The Ore Reserve was estimated by Cube Consulting for a 2.0 Mt/a open pit 
operation and CIL processing plant based on Mineral Resource estimates prepared by 
CSA.
A number of 2.0 Mt/a HL options have also been assessed and Gryphon has published 
an Ore Reserve for its CIL option (Table 1.2) and its HL option (Table 1.3).
Table 1.2
Gryphon’s CIL Ore Reserve estimate, December 2012
Proved
Probable
Tonnes
(Mt)
2.7
Au 
(g/t)
1.8
Au
(Koz)
156
Tonnes
(Mt)
14.0
Au 
(g/t)
Au
(Koz)
2.0
892
Tonnes
(Mt)
16.7
Table 1.3
Gryphon’s HL Ore Reserve estimate (2014)
Proved
Probable
Tonnes
(Mt)
4.0
Au  
(g/t)
1.4
Au
(Koz)
176
Tonnes
(Mt)
13.4
Au  
(g/t)
1.5
Au
(Koz)
650
Tonnes
(Mt)
17.4
Total
Au  
(g/t)
1.9
Total
Au  
(g/t)
1.4
Au
(Koz)
1,048
Au
(Koz)
826
Teranga’s Mineral Reserve is summarised in Table 1.4. Teranga’s Mineral Reserves 
comprise current open pit operations and planned open pit and underground operations 
at its Sabodala mine in Senegal.
Table 1.4
Teranga’s Mineral Reserves as at 31 December 2015
Proven
Probable
Proven and Probable
Tonnes
(Mt)
21.23
Grade 
(g/t Au)
0.99
Tonnes
(Mt)
38.11
Grade 
(g/t Au)
1.6
Tonnes
(Mt)
59.34
Grade 
(g/t Au)
1.38
1.2.5  Technical and operating assumptions
Gryphon
For this report, Snowden has selected the 2.0 Mt/a standalone CIL and the 2.0 Mt/a 
standalone HL as the likely preferred options. Some mining costs have been adjusted to 
reflect increased competition in contract mining rates and lower diesel, cyanide and 
cement costs since the studies were completed.
For the projects, no unreasonable technical or operating assumptions were noted for the 
cash flow model.
Normal sensitivities of -15% to +15% would apply. However, the ore grades used for the 
Gryphon 2.0 Mt/a CIL operation may be overstated. We would recommend a sensitivity 
range of -15% to 0% be applied for this case.
Teranga
For the projects, no unreasonable technical or operating assumptions were noted for the 
cash flow model.
Normal sensitivities of -15% to +15% would apply.
Final
July 2016
Page 9 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
1.2.6  Summary of Mineral Asset valuation not contemplated by financial
models
Snowden’s opinion of the value of Gryphon’s Mineral Resources not contemplated by 
financial models at between $10.45 million and $28.20 million, with a preferred value of 
$15.41 million.
Snowden’s opinion of the value of Teranga’s Mineral Resources, exploration potential 
and mineral inventory outside Mineral Reserves is between $38.57 million and 
$96.49 million, with a preferred value of $51.10 million (Table 1.5).
Table 1.5
Exploration valuation opinion summary
Entity
Component
Low ($ M)
High ($ M)
Preferred ($ M)
Gryphon
Teranga
Resources
Exploration
Boss JV
Total
Resources
Exploration
Total
6.07
3.55
0.82
10.45
15.86
22.71
38.57
17.83
9.56
0.82
28.20
27.77
68.72
96.49
8.03
6.56
0.82
15.41
21.81
29.28
51.10
Final
July 2016
Page 10 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
2
INTRODUCTION
2.1
Scope of report
Snowden was engaged to act as independent specialist for an opinion of the Technical 
Value of the mineral assets of Gryphon and Teranga, consisting of an opinion of the 
validity of the parameters that inform the cash flow model.
  An opinion of the validity of the parameters that inform the discounted cash flow
model
  A Technical Valuation opinion of the assets not included in the above cash flow
model.
Snowden undertook a high-level review of the geological block models, Mineral 
Resource, the Ore Reserve, mine planning and processing parameters.
All financial figures are reported in United States dollars (US$) unless otherwise stated.
2.2
Contributors
Contributors to this report are listed in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1
Report contributors
Name
Contribution
Employed by   Position
Allan Earl
Mining, Ore Reserve, 
capital and operating 
costs
Snowden
Principal 
Consultant
Professional 
qualifications
FAusIMM, AWASM
Lindsay Farley  Mineral Resource
Snowden
Senior 
Consultant
BSc (Geol), MAusIMM 
CP
Lucette Hugo
Mining, Ore Reserve, 
capital and operating 
costs
Snowden
Principal 
Consultant
BSc (MinEx and 
MinGeol), MAusIMM 
CP
Kath McGuckin  Report compilation
Snowden
Principal 
Consultant
BSc (Hons), BEc, 
MAusIMM
Lynn Olssen
and project 
management
Mineral Resource 
review
Snowden
General 
Manager 
Geosciences
BSc (Geol), Grad.Cert 
Geostatistics, 
MAusIMM CP, GAICD
Jeremy Peters
Valuation and project 
management
Snowden
Principal 
Consultant
BSc, BEng, FAusIMM 
CP
Russell Heins
Mineral processing, 
capital and operating 
costs
The Mineral 
Corporation
Metallurgical 
Consultant
John Hearne
Overall review
Snowden
CEO
BSc (Hons) Minerals 
Eng, CEng MIOMMM 
FSAIMM
B.Eng(Min), MBA, 
FAusIMM CP
2.2.1  Data sources
Data has been supplied by Gryphon and Teranga.
Final
July 2016
Page 11 of 57
2.2.2  Site visits
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Ms Lucette Hugo, Principal Consultant from Snowden (Johannesburg), undertook a site 
visit to Teranga’s Sabodala mine in Senegal between 10 July 2016 and 14 July 2016. 
Snowden was able to engage with site personnel in the disciplines of mining, 
exploration, geology, finance and community.
Snowden observed the site to be well managed by suitably qualified and experienced 
personnel. The mining fleet is adequate and appropriate for the style of mining and 
maintained in accordance with requirements. Other site assets and infrastructure are 
suitable for their purpose and maintained appropriately.
Snowden did not visit the Banfora project area in Burkina Faso. In its opinion, travel to 
site would not provide any material information in addition to that could be accessed 
remotely from site.
Final
July 2016
Page 12 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
3
GRYPHON’S PROJECT DESCRIPTION
3.1
Location and description
Gryphon plans to develop the 100% owned Banfora Gold Project in Burkina Faso, West 
Africa. The Project site is located approximately 540 km by road southwest of the capital 
Ouagadougou and is close to the borders of Côte d’Ivoire and Mali.
Figure 3.1
Banfora Gold Project location
Source: Gryphon, 2016
Gryphon holds six exploration permits which cover a combined area of 1,093 km2. All six of 
these permits are 100% held by Gryphon. The Project contemplates open pit mining from 
four major gold deposits within the lease areas; the Nogbele, Fourkoura and Stinger deposits 
fall in the Mining Exploitation Licence Wahgnion, issued by Burkina Faso government in 
2014 to Societe Miniere Gryphon SA, under Decree No. 2014-675.
Mineralisation is structurally controlled and is widely associated with hematite, iron 
carbonate, sericite, pyrite and locally, with albitic alteration. Higher gold grades are 
commonly associated with stylolitic laminated quartz veins or pyrite veinlets. 
Mineralisation is predominantly of a lode-style gold type, associated with discrete 
structures. Au is hosted both within granodioirite/gabbroic plutons and dykes and the 
surrounding mafic volcanic packages.
A significant amount of drilling has been completed at the four main prospects that form 
the basis for the resource estimate. All drilling, sampling and assaying have been 
completed conforming with industry standards of best practice and have been 
independently verified by CSA, including review of quality assurance/quality control 
(QAQC) analysis and sample recovery. Drilling has been completed on a sufficient 
density using inclined diamond and reverse circulation (RC) to allow the estimation of 
resources. A total of 421,838 m of RC and diamond drilling has been completed across 
the four deposits.
Final
July 2016
Page 13 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
3.2  Mineral Resource review
Snowden reviewed the Mineral Resources by:
  Carrying out a review of the estimation processes


Independent validation of the estimated grades
Independent reporting of the Mineral Resource to ensure the reported numbers can 
be reproduced.
Snowden has based its review on the data supplied by Gryphon.
3.2.1  Samavogo
Samavogo estimation review
The Samavogo deposit was estimated by CSA in January 2013. CSA elected to 
estimate the Samavogo deposit using ordinary kriging (OK) with a top cut which 
Snowden considers appropriate.
A composite length of 1 m was used by CSA since the majority of samples are 1 m in 
length. Snowden agrees with 1 m compositing.
The block sized used for estimation is 10 mN x 10 mE x 5 mRL, which Snowden 
considers too small given the majority of drilling is on a grid of approximately 40 m x 
40 m. Industry standard is to use a block size of half the drill grid spacing (i.e. 20 mN x 
20 mE x 5 mRL) at the smallest. The likely impact of the small block size is over-
smoothing in the estimated grades; however, Snowden notes that the model validation 
indicates an acceptable level of smoothing and hence this is not a material risk.
The number of samples used for estimation is a minimum of three and maximum for 12 
for the first and second pass, and a minimum of one and maximum of 12 for subsequent 
passes. This is a low number of samples which has the effect of keeping the 
interpolation local, which can result in an overly selective estimate; however, the 
estimate has produced a model that has validated satisfactorily likely as a result of 
additional smoothing due to the block size, as discussed above.
A dynamic search has been used for interpolation with the first pass being two-thirds of 
the range, the second pass equal to the range and the third pass two times the range. 
Snowden agrees with the implementation of a dynamic search and the ranges used.
For interpolation CSA used a discretisation of 2 x 2 x 2 (eight points), which Snowden 
considers inappropriate. Snowden recommends that discretisation be set to at least 
30 points with the number per direction aligned with the anisotropy of the parent block 
(e.g. 10 x 10 x 5 m parent block, 4 x 4 x 2 discretisation).
Samavogo model validation
Snowden was not able to validate domains on an individual basis as the data supplied 
did not contain information differentiating individual domains; as such, validation was 
completed on a global basis for all domains.
Samavogo statistical validation
The summary statistics for gold are presented in Table 3.1; estimates and declustered 
top cut composite statistics are provided. The results show that the block model 
underestimates grade by approximately 5%, which Snowden considers to be 
satisfactory.
Final
July 2016
Page 14 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Table 3.1
Samavogo model and drilling statistics for gold
Domain
All
Estimate(g/t)
Drilling (g/t)
Difference (%)
Min.
0.01
Max.
Mean
15.38
1.26
Min.
0.01
Max.
Mean
27.00
1.32
Mean
-5.0
Samavogo grade trend plots
The grade trend plots are satisfactory and show that the block model grades follow the 
local trend of the composite grades.
Samavogo theoretical change of support
Snowden carried out a theoretical global change of support to validate the level of 
smoothing in the estimate. The results show a reasonable correlation between the 
estimated model and the theoretical change of support indicating an appropriate level of 
smoothing has been incorporated into the estimate.
Samavogo reporting
CSA reported its model using a field that was generated during estimation. The 
interpreted orebodies at Samavogo are generally narrow, less than 1 m in some places, 
and the field appears to represent the proportion of the block that is within the 
mineralised wireframe. Snowden has some concerns about this as there is no minimum 
criteria applied to reporting, therefore blocks with very small proportions have been 
included which are potentially not mineable.
Snowden examined the model supplied by Gryphon at the multiple cut-offs as per the 
CSA reporting. Snowden reported tonnes and grades using the ore field to replicate the 
reporting done by CSA. The tonnes and grades reported by Snowden using this field 
differ somewhat to those reported by CSA, however the differences are not material.
Samavogo summary
The Samavogo deposit was estimated by CSA in January 2013. Overall, the estimation 
is acceptable. While Snowden has concerns about the block size and estimation 
parameters, the estimate validates well and hence any risk in this area is not material.
Snowden cannot fully reproduce the Mineral Resource reported by CSA, however the 
differences are not material.
Snowden’s main concern is the method of reporting which uses a proportional reporting 
method. The resource blocks are small (10 m x 10 m x 5 m parent cell), and no 
minimum mining width, typically 2 m, or minimum proportion is applied to the reporting 
meaning the reported numbers are likely highly and unrealistically selective. Because of 
this, it is Snowden’s opinion that tonnages may be under-estimated and grades over-
estimated. While this is not considered good practice as some of the blocks are 
potentially not economic, it may not be material to the Ore Reserve and mine plan as 
long as sufficient dilution is accounted for during these processes.
3.2.2  Stinger
Stinger estimation review
The Stinger deposit was estimated by CSA in January 2013. CSA elected to estimate 
the Stinger deposit using OK with a top cut, which Snowden considers appropriate.
A composite length of 1 m was used by CSA since the majority of samples are 1 m in 
length. Snowden agrees with 1 m compositing.
Final
July 2016
Page 15 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The block sized used for estimation 10 mN x 10 mE x 5 mRL is too small considering 
the majority of drilling is on a grid of approximately 40 m x 40 m. Snowden recommends 
using an industry standard approach of a block size of half the drill grid spacing 
(i.e. 20 mN x 20 mE x 5 mRL) at the smallest.
The number of samples used for estimation is a minimum of three and maximum for 12 
for the first and second pass, and a minimum of one and maximum of 12 for subsequent 
passes. Having a low number of samples has the effect of keeping the interpolation local 
which can result in an overly selective estimate; however, as with Samavogo, the 
estimate has produced a model that has validated satisfactorily likely as a result of 
additional smoothing due to the block size, as discussed above.
A dynamic search has been used for interpolation with the first pass being two-thirds of 
the range, the second pass equal to the range and the third pass two times the range. 
Snowden agrees with the implementation of a dynamic search and the ranges used.
For interpolation CSA used a discretisation of 2 x 2 x 2 (eight points), which Snowden 
considers inappropriate. Snowden recommends that discretisation be set to at least 
30 points with the number per direction aligned with the anisotropy of the parent block 
(e.g. 10 x 10 x 5 m parent block, 4 x 4 x 2 discretisation).
Stinger model validation
Snowden was not able to validate domains on an individual basis as the data supplied 
did not contain information differentiating individual domains; as such, validation was 
completed on a global basis for all domains.
Stinger statistical validation
The summary statistics for gold are presented in Table 3.2; estimates and declustered 
top cut composite statistics are provided. The results show that the block model results 
are very similar to the input data.
Table 3.2
Stinger model and drilling statistics for gold
Domain
All
Estimate (g/t)
Drilling (g/t)
Difference (%)
Min.
0.00
Max.
Mean
16.50
1.23
Min.
0.00
Max.
Mean
20.00
1.20
Mean
2.3
Stinger grade trend plots
Grade trend plots were created for the declustered top cut composites and block grades 
(plots generated on 10 m easting slices, 10 m northing slices and 5 m elevation slices). 
The grade trend plots are satisfactory and show that the block model grades follow the 
local trend of the composite grades.
Stinger theoretical change of support
Snowden carried out a theoretical global change of support to validate the level of 
smoothing in the estimate. The results show a reasonable correlation between the 
estimated model and the theoretical change of support indicating an appropriate level of 
smoothing has been incorporated into the estimate.
Stinger reporting
CSA reported its model using an “ore_part” field as with Samavogo.
Final
July 2016
Page 16 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Snowden reported the model supplied by Gryphon at the multiple cut-offs as per the 
CSA reporting. Snowden reported tonnes and grades using the “ore_part” field to 
replicate the reporting done by CSA. As with Samavogo the tonnes and grades reported 
by Snowden using the “ore_part” field differ slightly to those reported by CSA, however 
the differences are not material.
Stinger summary
The Stinger deposit was estimated by CSA in January 2013. As with Samavogo, while 
Snowden has concerns about the block size and estimation parameters, the estimate 
validates well and hence any risk in this area is not material.
Snowden cannot fully reproduce the Mineral Resource reported by CSA, however the 
differences are not material.
As with Samavogo, Snowden’s main concern is the method of reporting which uses a 
proportional reporting method. While this is not considered good practice as some of the 
blocks are potentially not economic, it may not be material to the Ore Reserve and mine 
plan as long as sufficient dilution is accounted for during these processes.
3.2.3  Fourkoura
Fourkoura estimation review
The Fourkoura deposit was estimated by Gryphon in April 2015.
The distribution of gold data for the Fourkoura deposit domains is highly skewed. 
Gryphon elected to estimate using multiple indicator kriging (MIK), which Snowden 
considers appropriate in this highly skewed dataset.
A composite length of 3 m was used by Gryphon. Snowden recommends that a 
composite length of 1 m is used since approximately 98% of the samples are at one 
metre intervals. The use of the longer composite length limits the selectivity which can 
be estimated and results in a smaller dataset for analysis.
The block sized used for estimation is 25 mN x 25 mE x 10 mRL, which Snowden 
considers appropriate since the majority of drilling is on a grid of approximately 50 mN x 
25 mE with some closer spaced drilling in some areas.
The number of samples used for estimation is a minimum of 24 and maximum for 36 for 
the first and second pass, and a minimum of 12 and maximum of 36 for the third pass. 
Snowden considers that the minimum number may be too high, however this is not 
material. A dynamic search has been used for interpolation which Snowden agrees with. 
The ranges used for the searches look reasonable.
Fourkoura model validation
Snowden validated domains on an individual basis with the data supplied by Gryphon.
Fourkoura statistical validation
The results of statistical validation for gold show that the block model underestimates 
grade by approximately 26% in domain 8001 which is conservative. For domain 8002 
the difference is negligible.
Final
July 2016
Page 17 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Table 3.3
Fourkoura model and drilling statistics for gold
Domain
8001
8002
Estimate (g/t)
Drilling (g/t)
Difference (%)
Min.
0.05
0.10
Max.
Mean
12.95
3.95
0.50
0.55
Min.
0.00
0.00
Max.
Mean
Mean
295.29
0.0.67
28.36
0.54
-26
2
Fourkoura grade trend plots
The trend plots are satisfactory and show that the block model grades follow the local 
trend of the composite grades.
Fourkoura theoretical change of support
Snowden carried out a theoretical global change of support for the main domains, to 
validate the level of smoothing in the estimate. The results show a reasonable 
correlation between the estimated model and the theoretical change of support 
indicating an appropriate level of smoothing has been incorporated into the estimate.
Fourkoura reporting
Snowden reported the model supplied by Gryphon at the multiple cut-offs as per the 
Gryphon reporting. Snowden was able to reproduce the tonnes and grades reported by 
Gryphon with only minor differences.
Fourkoura summary
The Fourkoura deposit was estimated by Gryphon in April 2015. Overall, the estimation 
is acceptable. While Snowden has concerns about the estimation parameters, the 
estimate validates reasonably well (and is conservative if anything) and hence any risk 
in this area is not material.
Snowden reported the model and was able to reproduce the tonnes and grades reported 
by Gryphon with only minor differences.
Snowden notes that the previous CSA model was used for some studies. While 
Snowden has not reviewed this model, it is likely to be similar to the other CSA models 
discussed previously.
3.2.4  Nogbele Central
Nogbele Central estimation review
The Nogbele Central deposit was estimated by Gryphon in April 2015.
The distribution of gold data for the Nogbele Central deposit domains is highly skewed 
with CVs of 2.06, 1.01 and 2.11 respectively for domains 5001, 5007 and 5008. Gryphon 
elected to estimate using MIK which Snowden considers appropriate in this highly 
skewed dataset.
As with Fourkoura, a composite length of 3 m was used by Gryphon. Snowden 
recommends that a composite length of 1 m is used since approximately 98% of the 
samples are at 1 m intervals.
As with Fourkoura, Gryphon used top cut composites to create indicator variograms 
which Snowden considers unnecessary.
The block sized used for estimation 25 mN x 25 mE x 10 mRL which Snowden 
considers appropriate since the majority of drilling is on a grid of approximately 25 mN x 
25 mE with some closer spaced and wider spaced drilling in some areas.
Final
July 2016
Page 18 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The number of samples used for estimation is a minimum varies from 12 to 24, 
depending on the pass number and domain. A maximum of 36 is used for all pass 
numbers and domains. Snowden considers that the minimum number may be too high 
and the optimal number of samples should be checked by completing a kriging 
neighbourhood analysis (KNA).
A dynamic search has been used for interpolation which Snowden agrees with. The 
ranges used for the searches look reasonable.
Nogbele Central model validation
Snowden validated the main domains with the data supplied by Gryphon.
Nogbele Central statistical validation
The summary statistics for gold are presented in Table 3.4; estimates and naïve top cut 
composite are provided, clustering does not result in a bias in these domains and hence 
declustered statistics are not presented.
The results show that the block model under-estimates grade by approximately 35% in 
domain 5007, which Snowden considers to be very conservative. Snowden notes that 
there is some data lying outside of the modelled area which may impact this 
comparison.
The remainder of the domains are within around 10% which Snowden considers 
satisfactory.
Table 3.4
Nogbele Central model and drilling statistics for gold
Domain
Estimate (g/t)
Drilling (g/t)
Difference (%)
Min.
Max.
Mean
Min.
Max.
Mean
Mean
5001 (MIK)
0.16
16.68
5007 (MIK)
0.05
5008 (MIK)
0.06
5002 (OK)
5003 (OK)
0.20
0.14
3.07
4.87
5.19
6.63
1.01
0.38
0.46
0.95
1.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
20.00
3.58
18.00
21.10
17.48
1.01
0.58
0.52
0.95
1.11
0.0
-34
-12
0.3
-8
Nogbele Central grade trend plots
The grade trend plots for domain 5007 highlight the under-estimation evident in the 
global statistical comparison. Grade trend plots for the other domains are satisfactory.
Nogbele Central theoretical change of support
Snowden carried out a theoretical global change of support for domains 5001 and 5008 
to validate the level of smoothing in the estimate. Snowden did not complete a change 
of support on domain 5007 because as a variogram could not be modelled for this 
domain. Variography for domains 7002 and 7004 was not easily defined and the change 
of support shows that too much smoothing has been incorporated into the estimate. 
Snowden recommends that the variography for these domains is reviewed.
Nogbele Central reporting
Snowden reported the model supplied by Gryphon at the multiple cut-offs as per the 
Gryphon reporting. Snowden was able to reproduce the tonnes and grades reported by 
Gryphon with only minor differences.
Final
July 2016
Page 19 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Nogbele Central summary
The Nogbele Central deposit was estimated by Gryphon in April 2015. Snowden 
considers the estimation method appropriate; however, some of the parameters are not 
optimal. The composite length is 3 m which Snowden considers inappropriate; 1 m 
would be more sensible. In addition, the maximum number of samples used is very high. 
These two factors combined are likely to result in over-smoothing of the estimated 
grades.
The model validation shows that domains 5001 and 5008 validate reasonably well; 
however, domain 5007 validates very poorly with a significant under estimation and 
over-smoothing of gold grades (35% under-estimation). This model may be conservative 
as a result. Additional work is required to find the source of this under-estimation.
Snowden reported the model and was able to reproduce the tonnes and grades reported 
by Gryphon with only minor differences.
Snowden notes that the previous CSA model was used for some studies. While 
Snowden has not reviewed this model, it is likely to have the same issues as the other 
CSA models discussed previously, the main concern being the selectivity of the 
reporting.
3.2.5  Nogbele North
Nogbele North estimation review
The Nogbele North deposit was estimated by Gryphon in April 2015.
Snowden was unable to review the appropriateness of the estimation method and 
parameters as no composite file was supplied. However, documentation indicates that 
the methodology and parameters are similar to those used for Nogbele Central and as 
such, Snowden’s comments on that deposit are likely also relevant to Nogbele North.
Nogbele North model validation
Snowden was unable to complete a model validation as no composite file was supplied.
Nogbele North reporting
Snowden reported the model supplied by Gryphon at the multiple cut-offs as per the 
Gryphon reporting. Snowden was able to reproduce the tonnes and grades reported by 
Gryphon with only minor differences.
Nogbele North summary
The Nogbele North deposit was estimated by Gryphon in April 2015. Snowden was 
unable to review the appropriateness of the estimation method and parameters as no 
composite file was supplied. However, documentation indicates that the methodology 
and parameters are similar to those used for Nogbele Central and as such, Snowden’s 
comments on that deposit are likely also relevant to Nogbele North.
Snowden reported the model and was able to reproduce the tonnes and grades reported 
by Gryphon with only minor differences.
Snowden notes that the previous CSA model was used for some studies. While 
Snowden has not reviewed this model, it is likely to have the same issues as the other 
CSA models discussed previously, the main concern being the selectivity of the 
reporting.
Final
July 2016
Page 20 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
3.2.6  Nogbele South
Nogbele South estimation review
The distribution of gold data for the Nogbele South deposit domains is highly skewed. 
Gryphon elected to estimate using MIK which Snowden considers appropriate in this 
highly skewed dataset.
As with Fourkoura and Nogbele Central, a composite length of 3 m was used by 
Gryphon. Snowden recommends that a composite length of 1 m is used since 
approximately 98% of the samples are at 1 m intervals.
The block sized used for estimation 25 mN x 25 mE x 10 mRL, which Snowden 
considers appropriate since the majority of drilling is on a grid of approximately 25 mN x 
25 mE with some closer spaced and wider spaced drilling in some areas.
The number of samples used for estimation is a minimum varies from six to 24 and a 
maximum of 24 to 36, depending on the pass number and domain. Snowden considers 
that the minimum number may be too high, however this is not material. A dynamic 
search has been used for interpolation, which Snowden agrees with. The ranges used 
for the searches look reasonable.
Nogbele South model validation
Snowden validated the main domains with the data supplied by Gryphon.
Nogbele South statistical validation
The summary statistics for gold are presented in Table 3.5; estimates and declustered 
top cut composites are provided.
The results show that the differences are within 10%, which Snowden considers 
satisfactory.
Table 3.5
Nogbele South model and drilling statistics for gold
Domain
7002
7003
7004
Estimate (g/t)
Drilling (g/t)
Difference (%)
Min.
Max.
Mean
0.11
0.16
0.23
9.21
5.17
4.06
0.65
0.84
1.14
Min.
0.00
0.00
0.00
Max.
Mean
20.00
13.01
9.50
0.72
0.84
1.05
Mean
-10
0
8
Nogbele South grade trend plots
Grade trend plots were created for the composites and block for the main domains (plots 
generated on 5 m easting slices, 5 m northing slices and 2.5 m elevation slices). The 
grade trend plots for all domains show that the block model grades follow the trend of 
the sample composite grades, which Snowden considers satisfactory.
Nogbele South theoretical change of support
Snowden carried out a theoretical global change of support for the main domains to 
validate the level of smoothing in the estimate.
Domains where variography was clear show a good correlation between the estimated 
model and the theoretical change of support indicating an appropriate level of smoothing 
has been incorporated into the estimate.
Final
July 2016
Page 21 of 57
Nogbele South reporting
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Snowden reported the model supplied by Gryphon at the multiple cut-offs as per the 
Gryphon reporting. Snowden was able to reproduce the tonnes and grades reported by 
Gryphon with only minor differences.
Nogbele South summary
The Nogbele South deposit was estimated by Gryphon in April 2015. Overall, the 
estimation is acceptable. While Snowden has concerns about the estimation 
parameters, the estimate validates reasonably well and hence any risk in this area is not 
material.
Snowden reported the model and was able to reproduce the tonnes and grades reported 
by Gryphon with only minor differences.
Snowden notes that the previous CSA model was used for some studies. While 
Snowden has not reviewed this model, it is likely to be similar to the other CSA model 
discussed previously.
3.3  Mining studies
Gryphon has carried out a number of development studies to identify the preferred 
mining and processing method for the Project, including:
  A 2.0 Mt/a CIL FS with Ore Reserves reported in accordance with JORC 2012 (“the
2013 CIL”). The study used CSA’s Mineral Resource block models for the four 
deposits.

In 2014, a 2.0 Mt/a HL FS, with Ore Reserves reported in accordance with JORC 
2012 (“the 2014 HL”). In 2015, Gryphon updated the 2014 HL FS to include updated 
block models for Nogbele and Fourkoura, lower mining costs and revised capital 
costs (“the 2015 updated HL study”).

In July 2015, Gryphon reported the results of scoping studies for a 2.0 Mt/a HL and a 
deferred 1.0 Mt/a CIL operations (“the 2015 scoping studies”).
3.3.1  2013 CIL Ore Reserves
In early 2013, Gryphon reported the results of the 2013 CIL FS, which was prepared by 
Lycopodium Minerals Pty Ltd (Lycopodium) on the basis of a conventional CIL plant 
processing about 2.0 Mt/a from 16.7 Mt of ore from over an eight-year period to produce 
an average 120,000 ounces (oz) of gold (Au) doré annually. The study used a base 
case gold price of US$1,300/oz and used the Measured and Indicated Resources only. 
The Ore Reserves for the 2013 CIL estimate were reported by Gryphon in accordance 
with the “Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and 
Ore Reserves” (JORC, 2012).
The tabulation of Ore Reserves (Table 3.6) is reported by cut-off grades. The Ore 
Reserves are estimated based on the Measured and Indicated proportion of CSA’s 
Mineral Resources after application of the modifying factors within designed open pits 
and taking into consideration accessibility and geotechnical recommendations. Gryphon 
applied the following dilution and mining recovery factors:
  Where the percentage of ore in the resource model block was 80% to 95% a 5%
reduction of grade was applied (equivalent to 5% ore loss and a 5% dilution at zero 
gold grade)
  Where the percentage of ore was less than 80% a 15% reduction of grade was
applied (equivalent to 15% ore loss and a 15% dilution at zero gold grade)
Final
July 2016
Page 22 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
  For the flat lying mineralisation in the western part of the main Nogbele North pit the
resource model was regularised to a block size of 5 m x 5 m x 2.5 m.
Overall, at a 0.5 g/t Au cut-off, the dilution modelled by Gryphon results in the Ore 
Reserve having slightly less tonnes and 10% to 15% less metal compared with the 
Mineral Resource.
In Snowden’s opinion, the dilution modifying factors applied to the Mineral Resource 
block models are unlikely to adequately reflect the amount of dilution that will actually be 
achieved. In Snowden’s experience, narrow 1 m to 2 m wide mineralisation can incur 
dilution in excess of 15% in oxide and transitional rock and over 30% in fresh rock. In 
Snowden’s opinion, the grades shown in the CIL studies (which used the four CSA block 
models) may be overstated.
In Snowden’s opinion, the pit designs are appropriate.
Table 3.6
Banfora CIL Ore Reserve estimate, December 2012 (2 Mt/a CIL)
Proved
Probable
Total
Mine area
Tonnes
(Mt)
Au 
(g/t)
Au
(Koz)
Tonnes
(Mt)
Au 
(g/t)
Au
(Koz)
Tonnes
(Mt)
Au 
(g/t)
Au
(Koz)
Nogbele
2.7
1.8
156
6.5
1.4
3.3
2.7
2.1
1.9
2.1
1.7
2.0
436
86
218
151
892
9.2
1.4
3.3
2.7
16.7
2.0
1.9
2.1
1.7
1.9
592
86
218
151
1,048
Fourkoura
Samavogo
Stinger
Total
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2.7
1.8
156
14.0
The 2013 CIL FS was evaluated at a US$1,300/oz gold price. At this gold price, the 
study generated a pre-tax cash flow of US$256.3 million and a net present value (NPV) 
(5% discount rate) of US$120.8 million.
At a gold price of US$1,600/oz Au, the study generated a pre-tax cash flow of 
US$515.5 million and a NPV (5% discount rate) of US$328.1 million.
3.3.2  2014 Heap Leach study inventory
In 2014, Gryphon engaged Lycopodium to prepare the 2014 HL FS. The 2014 HL FS 
was evaluated at a US$1,250/oz gold price. At this gold price, the study generated a 
pre-tax cash flow of US$131.5 million and a NPV (5% discount rate) of US$78.1 million. 
At a gold price of US$1,385/oz, the study generated a pre-tax cash flow of 
US$205.6 million and a NPV (5% discount rate) of US$134.1 million.
Gryphon’s HL Ore Reserve for the HL option is summarised in Table 3.7
Table 3.7
Gryphon’s HL Ore Reserve estimate (2014)
Proved
Probable
Tonnes
(Mt)
4.0
Au  
(g/t)
1.4
Au
(Koz)
176
Tonnes
(Mt)
13.4
Au  
(g/t)
1.5
Au
(Koz)
650
Tonnes
(Mt)
17.4
Total
Au  
(g/t)
1.4
Au
(Koz)
826
Gryphon updated this study in 2015. The 2015 HL update study mined 18.1 Mt at 1.3 g/t 
Au. Similar dilution and ore loss modifying factors to the 2013 CIL FS were applied. The 
2015 updated HL study used the Mineral Resource block models for Samavogo and 
Stinger (by CSA), and the Mineral Resource block models for Fourkoura and Nogbele, 
prepared by Gryphon. The tonnages and grades scheduled in the HL studies are, in 
Snowden’s opinion, reasonable.
Final
July 2016
Page 23 of 57
3.4
Options studies
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The Project is at an advanced study stage and two viable options (CIL and HL) have 
been identified.
In 2015, Gryphon carried out a number of Option Studies, which assessed the potential 
for various combinations of a 1.0 Mt/a CIL plant and a 2.0 Mt/a HL. The results were 
encouraging but cannot be directly compared with the two feasibility study results as the 
Options Studies were done at a scoping study level and Inferred Resources were also 
included. As the studies completed were only at scoping level, Snowden did not 
consider them appropriate for discounted cash flow (DCF) valuation.
For this report, Snowden has selected the 2.0 Mt/a standalone CIL and the 2.0 Mt/a 
standalone HL as the likely preferred options. Some mining costs have been adjusted to 
reflect increased competition in contract mining rates and lower diesel, cyanide and 
cement costs since the studies were completed.
3.4.1  2.0 Mt/a CIL mining and processing operation
The 2013 CIL FS proposed a conventional open pit mining method using a contract 
mining fleet. Gryphon’s FS included pit optimisation studies using optimisation 
parameters which targeted a 2.0 Mt/a production rate at a US$1,250/oz gold price and a 
government royalty. Mining costs were based on 2012 mining contract rates.
Gryphon developed pit designs and mine schedules using Measured and Indicated 
Mineral Resources from the CSA 2012 Mineral Resource models, geotechnical 
parameters provided by an independent geotechnical engineer and pit design standards 
applicable for an operation of this size.
Ore from Nogbele Central will be hauled to a ROM pad adjacent to the processing plant. 
Ore from the satellite pits will be stockpiled at the individual pits then hauled to the ROM 
pad as required. Waste rock will be hauled to waste dumps located adjacent to each 
open pit.
A Project LOM (CIL) schedule, prepared by Gryphon using the Ore Reserves only for 
each pit, shows a mine life of about eight years. The plant has a notional capacity of 
2.0 Mt/a of fresh rock but can process over 2.3 Mt/a of oxide rock. The LOM schedule 
has been designed and scheduled to “front-end” high grade material from the various 
open pits in order to maximise cash flow. About 16% of the ore tonnes scheduled for 
mining and processing are classified as Proved Ore Reserve and the remaining 84% is 
classified as Probable Ore Reserve.
Gryphon applied a maximum vertical mining rate of advance of 60 m per year. Snowden 
has verified this based on the bench schedule provided and observed a maximum of 
19 benches per period (47.5 vertical metres per year), which is an appropriate and 
reasonable constraint.
Snowden has reviewed Gryphon’s 2012 CIL FS schedule and has applied the following 
changes:
  All studies and project finance will be completed at 30 June 2016
  Project construction commencing in January 2017
  First gold production will occur in 2018.
Snowden’s schedule is summarised in Table 3.8 and shows a mine plan of 16.7 Mt of 
ore being mined and processed at 1.95 g/t Au over an eight-year period following two 
years of construction and commissioning.
Final
July 2016
Page 24 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
3.4.2  2.0 Mt/a heap leach mining and processing operations
The 2015 updated HL study uses conventional open pit mining method using a contract 
mining fleet. Mining costs were based on 2015 contract mining rates.
Pit designs and mine schedules used Measured and Indicated Mineral Resources from 
the Gryphon Mineral Resource block models (Nogbele and Fourkoura) and CSA’s 
Mineral Resource models (Samavogo and Stinger) and geotechnical parameters and pit 
design standards used for earlier studies.
Ore from Nogbele Central will be hauled to a leach pads adjacent to the processing 
plant. Ore from the satellite pits hauled to the leach pads as required. Waste rock will be 
hauled to waste dumps located adjacent to each open pit.
The HL has a notional dumping capacity of 2.0 Mt/a and the Project LOM (HL) schedule, 
prepared by Gryphon using the inventory within the pits, shows a mine life of about 
8.5 years.
Gryphon applied similar vertical mining rates as used in the 2012 CIL FS. Snowden has 
reviewed Gryphon’s 2012 CIL FS schedule and has applied the following changes:
  All studies and project finance will be completed at 30 June 2016
  Project construction commencing in January 2017
  First gold production will occur in 2018.
3.5
Operating and capital costs
3.5.1  2.0 Mt/a CIL operation
Capital costs
Lycopodium, with assistance from Gryphon and Knight Piesold, developed a capital cost 
estimate and operating cost estimate for the 2013 CIL FS with an accuracy level of 
+/-15%. Pre-production capital costs were forecast to be US$229.4 million, as 
summarised in Table 3.8. The contingency item covers anticipated variances between 
specific items allowed in the estimate and the final total installed cost.
Table 3.8
2012 CIL FS Project capital costs
Cost centre
Estimate (US$ M)
Construction indirect costs
Treatment plant costs
Reagents and plant services
Infrastructure
Management costs
Owner and project costs
Capitalised operating cots
Total direct costs
Contingency
Total capex
24.8
48.7
15.5
53.0
23.4
38.8
4.2
208.4
21.0
229.4
Final
July 2016
Page 25 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The total capital estimate for the 2.0 Mt/a CIL option includes the tailings dam, roads, a 
permanent camp, contingency, indirect and EPCM costs. The estimate excludes an 
airstrip, government import charges, exchange rate variations and any sunk costs. The 
Project capital cost was compared with other recent CIL post-production capital costs 
include allowance for land clearing and haul road construction.
A further US$1.5 million has been allowed in 2016 for Gryphon’s holding costs and 
ongoing drilling program.
Snowden presents benchmark FS capital costs for Burkina Faso CIL projects for 
comparison (benchmarking purposes in Figure 3.2). A linear relationship exists between 
capital cost and tonnage throughput, as evidenced by the correlation coefficient (R2) 
value of 0.97. Snowden notes that the capital costs for two projects targeting a 
throughput of 2.0 Mt/a (Banfora and Natougou) are coincident at around US$230 million 
and lie on the best-fit line.
In Snowden’s opinion, the 2.0 Mt/a CIL capital costs for Banfora appear reasonable for 
2016.
A number of opportunities have subsequently been identified by Gryphon to reduce the 
capital costs, including increased competition in the market, lower construction costs for 
the village and exchange rate fluctuation. However, the magnitude of these savings has 
not been quantified and is not factored into the cash flow model.
Figure 3.2
Benchmark capital costs for CIL projects in Burkina Faso
Operating costs
Mining
Mine operating costs were sourced from mining contractors with experience operating in 
West Africa. Mining costs used to derive the Ore Reserve and LOM schedules for the 
2013 CIL FS are shown in Table 3.9. In 2015, Gryphon, received updated mining costs 
which take into account the availability of a mining fleet with written-down capital cost 
which reduced the ownership component of the costs and a shallower starter pit.
The Government of Burkina Faso sets the fuel price. Both mining costs were quoted at 
US$1.20/L for diesel. The current fuel price is about US$1.00/L. Fuel typically forms 
30% to 40% of the total mining costs and this may present an opportunity to reduce the 
2015 mining costs.
Final
July 2016
Page 26 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The mining costs derived for the 2015 Ore Reserve have been applied by Gryphon in a 
manner consistent with usual practice for mine scheduling and reporting. Based on 
benchmarking data and contractor quotations, the costs are within reasonable limits for 
an operation of this size in this region.
Snowden undertook a benchmarking exercise for Banfora which showed costs were 
above the average for other operations in this region. A portion of this premium is due to 
contract mining and the haulage distances to Nogbele. Snowden believes that the costs 
fairly represent mining activities in Burkina Faso.
Snowden has adjusted the 2015 mining costs by applying a lower management fee 
($0.54/t), and adjusted for a fuel price of US$1.00/L. On average, 2016 contract mining 
costs are about 4% lower than used in the 2013 CIL FS as shown in Table 3.9.
Table 3.9
2013 CIL FS mining operating cost adjustment
Pit
Fourkoura
Nogbele
Samavogo
Stinger
2013 CIL FS mining costs
Adjusted 2015 mining costs
Waste cost (US$/t)  Ore cost (US$/t)  Waste cost (US$/t)
Ore cost (US$/t)
3.45
3.38
3.26
3.57
3.65
3.86
3.50
3.80
3.21
3.24
3.28
3.23
3.44 
3.75 
3.51 
3.52
LOM operating costs include provision for:
  Drill and blast
  Load and haul
  Ore haulage
  Crusher feed.
Total mining costs are forecast to be US$397 million, equivalent to unit cost of 
US$3.69/t of rock.
Snowden considers that the adjusted 2015 cost estimates are reasonable and fall within 
the standard +/- 15% estimate range of Snowden’s expectations.
Processing costs
The operating costs for the 2 Mt/a CIL option were estimated by Lycopodium using the 
LOM blend of 10 different ore types, as summarised in Table 3.10.
Table 3.10
Processing cost by ore type (2013 CIL FS)
Ore source
Lithology
LOM blend
Total process cost (US$/t)
Nogbele/Fourkoura
Oxide
Transition
Primary Granitoid
Primary Mafic
Oxide
Samavogo
Transition
Stinger
Primary
Oxide
Primary Granitoid
31%
6%
17%
19%
5%
2%
12%
6%
1%
15.03
16.07
17.47
16.71
15.79
16.34
16.31
13.95
17.98
Final
July 2016
Page 27 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Primary Granitoid/Mafic
7%
17.14
Operating costs are based on the metallurgical testwork performed on the individual 
samples provided to the laboratories over the course of the 2012 study. The operating 
costs stated comprise fixed and variable elements of operating consumables, 
maintenance, labour, power, laboratory costs, and general and administration (G&A) 
costs.
Consumables and power accounted for 55% of the total LOM process costs, which in 
turn account for approximately 36% of the total on mine cash costs.
Based on the complexities and variety of different ores and lithologies which are planned 
to be treated in the CIL plant, Snowden concludes that the total cash costs and 
processing operating costs are reasonable for 2016. This opinion is corroborated by 
benchmarking against other projects and operations within Burkina Faso.
Other operating costs
Other operating costs include:
  G&A costs of US$2.8 million per year incurred by Gryphon
  A management fee of US$6.95 million per year
  Rehabilitation at the end of the mine’s life (US$17.2 million)
  Royalties, equivalent to 5% of the gold sales.
Snowden was instructed by KPMG Corporate Finance to exclude land taxes and 
royalties from their assessment of the Project. No value was assigned to the plant and 
infrastructure at the end of the mine life.
Mineral processing and metallurgical testing
There are 10 different types of material with different metallurgical recoveries which will 
be processed over the LOM. The estimation of metallurgical recovery is complex, 
resulting from the differential recoveries of the different materials. This situation is further 
compounded in that the shortfall against nominal plant capacity of 2.0 Mt/a is made up 
from Year 4 onwards by stockpiled material. A breakdown of the LOM processing 
schedule tonnes by lithology is presented in Table 3.11.
Table 3.11
Average recovery factors by rock type
Area
Rock type
2 Mt/a CIL FS (2013)
Ore mix
Au recovery
Nogbele/Fourkoura
Oxide
Transition
Primary granitoid
Primary mafic
Oxide
Samavogo
Transition
Primary
Oxide
Stinger
Primary granitoid
Primary granitoid/mafic
LOM weighted average
31%
6%
11%
19%
5%
2%
12%
6%
1%
7%
91.2%
98.1%
87.8%
88.7%
95.2%
95.7%
92.7%
96.5%
91.5%
84.8%
91.1%
Final
July 2016
Page 28 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Production and cost schedules
Figure 3.3 summarises, by calendar year, the mine production and processing 
production for the 2.0 Mt/a CIL operations. Figure 3.4 summarises, by calendar year, the 
operating and capital costs for the 2.0 Mt/a CIL operation.
Figure 3.3
CIL annual production and processing schedule
Figure 3.4
CIL schedule of annual operating and capital costs
3.5.2  2.0 Mt/a heap leach operation
Capital costs
For the 2013 CIL FS, Lycopodium (with assistance from Gryphon and Knight Piesold) 
developed a capital cost estimate and operating cost estimate with an accuracy level of 
+/-15%. Capital costs were revised during the HL update study. Pre-production capital 
costs were forecast to be $85.5 million and deferred capital $37.2 million, including a 
contingency item for anticipated variances between specific items allowed for in the 
estimate and the final total installed cost.
Final
July 2016
Page 29 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The total capital estimate for the 2.0 Mt/a HL option includes the HL facilities, roads, a 
permanent camp, contingency, indirect and EPCM costs and village relocation. The 
estimate excludes an airstrip, government import charges, exchange rate variations and 
any sunk costs. A further US$1.5 million has been allowed in 2016 for Gryphon’s holding 
costs and ongoing drilling program.
Snowden considers that the capital cost estimates are reasonable and fall within the 
standard +/- 15% estimate range of Snowden’s expectations.
Operating costs
Mining
The mining costs derived for the 2015 Ore Reserve have been applied by Gryphon in a 
manner consistent with usual practice for mine scheduling and reporting.
Based on benchmarking data and contractor quotations, the costs are within reasonable 
limits for an operation of this size in this region.
Processing costs
The operating cost estimate for the various ore types and lithologies is based on 
crushing to a nominal 12.5 mm, with a leaching time of 150 days for the oxide material, 
increasing to 220 days for the primary material. Testwork has indicated low to moderate 
reagent consumptions when compared with industry standards.
The processing operating cost of US$133 million per year has been built up from a 
schedule of ore types treated at different throughputs and rates dependent on the ore 
source and lithology, which will require separation of the materials for individual 
processing and stacking.
Snowden considers the operating cost estimate for the HL option to be reasonable.
Other operating costs
Other operating costs include:
  G&A costs of US$2.8 million per year incurred by Gryphon
  An annual management fee
  Rehabilitation at the end of the mine’s life.
Snowden was instructed by KPMG Corporate Finance to exclude land taxes and 
royalties from their assessment of the Project. No value was assigned to the plant and 
infrastructure at the end of the mine life.
3.5.3  Mineral processing and metallurgical testing
Gold recoveries from the HL vary by year as a result of the different ore types being 
processed. The LOM recovery projected for the HL operation is 78.3%, which compares 
with the Lycopodium BFS Reserve recovery for the project LOM of 78.6%.
The increase in recovery to 95.2% in the final year is due to the delayed recovery of gold 
from the HL. In Snowden’s opinion, the HL recovery projections are in line with the 
metallurgical testing and recovery results obtained in the various studies.
3.5.4  HL production and cost schedules
Figure 3.5 summarises, by calendar year, the mine production and processing 
production for the 2.0 Mt/a CIL operations. Figure 3.6 summarises, by calendar year, the 
operating and capital costs for the 2.0 Mt/a CIL operation.
Final
July 2016
Page 30 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Figure 3.5
HL annual production and processing schedule
Figure 3.6
HL schedule of annual operating and capital costs
Final
July 2016
Page 31 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
4
TERANGA PROJECT DESCRIPTION
4.1
Location and description
Senegal (officially the Republic of Senegal) is located at the western most point of the 
African continent and has a land area of 196,722 km2 and a population of about 
13 million. Senegal’s geographic centre is located at 14 00 North and 14 00 West.
Senegal is bordered by the North African country of Mauritania in the north, Mali to the 
east, Guinea to the southeast, and Guinea-Bissau to the southwest. Senegal further 
borders the country of The Gambia, a sovereign enclave occupying a narrow sliver of 
land along the banks of the Gambia River, which separates Senegal’s southern region 
of Casamance from the rest of the country. Senegal also shares a maritime border with 
the country of Cape Verde1.
Teranga is a Canadian based gold company created to acquire the Sabodala gold mine 
and a large regional exploration package in Senegal. Teranga’s interests in Senegal are 
represented by two Senegalese subsidiary companies; Sabodala Gold Operations 
(SGO) and the Sabodala Mining Company (SMC). The Sabodala open pit mine 
(Sabodala) is 90% owned by SGO with the Government of Senegal retaining a 10% 
free-carried interest. SMC is 100% owned by Teranga and is the company engaged in 
exploring the 967 km2 regional exploration permits.
The Sabodala Project is located in southeast Senegal, approximately 650 km east-
southeast of the capital city, Dakar, and 96 km north of the town of Kedougou 
(Figure 4.1).
The Sabodala project site is accessed via a sealed road from Dakar, Highway N1, to the 
regional centre of Tambacounda then via sealed road, Highway N7, 230 km southeast 
to Kedougou, connecting with 96 km of partially sealed road which connects with 
Faloumbo and Sabodala. Access by air for light aircraft is via a 1,250 m sealed 
government airstrip, adjacent to the property.
In the project area, the main activities are gold mining, agriculture, livestock and forestry; 
gold mining and agriculture are the main sources of income for the local population for 
the two adjacent villages, Sabodala and Faloumbo.
1 https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/sg.html
Final
July 2016
Page 32 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Figure 4.1
Sabodala Project location map
The Sabodala open pit has been in operation since 2009 and has produced an average 
of 180 Koz Au/year from multiple open pit mines. Milling at Sabodala is through a 
conventional CIL plant, located central to the Sabodala pit area. The Sabodala 
processing plant was expanded in late 2012 to a design capacity of approximately 
3.5 Mt/a (fresh ore) and 4.0 Mt/a with a mix of fresh and oxidised ore. With the 
commissioning of an additional primary crusher in Q3 2016, this capacity is expected to 
increase by 10% with the increasing proportions of fresh ore delivered to the ROM pad.
Gold ore, with minor silver credits, was produced from the Sabodala open pit and is now 
being sourced from a number of satellite pit operations. The mining method is 
conventional truck and shovel open pit mining. The Sabodala open pit is currently under 
care and maintenance, and a final phase is planned to be mined in 2017. The Masato 
and Gora open pit are currently being mined. The Kerekounda pit commenced recently 
and the Niakafiri pit will commence in 2019.
Sabodala practises an active stockpiling strategy, having historically mined ore at a 
higher rate than required for processing, resulting in low grade, strategic stockpiled ore. 
This material is currently used as buffer feed to the mill when producing open pits are 
not capable of fulfilling the required capacity.
The mining at Niakafiri will occur in two phases, with the first phase starting in 2019. 
This phase includes Niakafiri SE and Niakafiri SW. These two deposits are located 
outside of the village relocation zone and, as a result, mining can occur prior to the 
relocation of Sabodala village. The second phase of mining at Niakafiri starts in 2023 
and is made up entirely of the Niakafiri Main deposit. The relocation of Sabodala village 
will start in 2021, in order to prepare for the mining operation.
The open pit mining ends in 2024 and the remaining LOM comprises mining from the 
underground operations. The proposed underground mining method is proposed to be 
cut and fill.
Final
July 2016
Page 33 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Construction of the underground commences in 2020, with ore production commencing 
in 2021. Two underground deposits will be mined concurrently in order to meet the 
current mine life schedule. Kerekounda and Golouma South will be first to be mined, 
starting in 2021. Once they are completed, the Golouma West underground deposits will 
be mined.
4.2  Mineral Reserve
Teranga’s total Mineral Reserve2 at 31 December 2015 was reported as 59.3 Mt at 
1.38 g/t Au, as reported in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1
Teranga’s Mineral Reserve as at 31 December 2015
Proven
Probable
Proven and Probable
Deposits
Tonnes
(Mt)
1.57
0.31
4.06
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Grade 
(g/t Au)
1.57
4.94
1.23
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Tonnes
(Mt)
2.33
1.15
3.41
21.41
3.23
1.27
0.79
0.9
1.12
0.37
0.62
0.45
0.47
0.61
0
38.11
Grade 
(g/t Au)
1.36
4.74
0.94
1.06
1.96
3.09
3.44
1.17
1.09
0.92
6.07
4.39
4.28
4.95
0
1.6
Tonnes
(Mt)
3.9
1.46
7.47
21.41
3.23
1.27
0.79
0.9
1.12
0.37
0.62
0.45
0.47
0.61
15.27
59.34
Grade 
(g/t Au)
1.44
4.78
1.1
1.06
1.96
3.09
3.44
1.17
1.09
0.92
6.07
4.39
4.28
4.95
0.79
1.38
Sabodala
Gora
Niakafiri Main
Masato
Golouma West
Golouma South
Kerekounda
Maki Medina
Niakafiri SE
Niakafiri SW
Golouma West 1
Golouma West 2
Golouma South
Kerekounda
Stockpiles
Total
15.27
21.23
0.79
0.99
Teranga provided the following guidance notes:
  CIM definitions were followed for Mineral Reserves
  Mineral Reserve cut-off grades range from are 0.35 g/t Au to 0.63 g/t Au for oxide
and 0.42 g/t Au to 0.73 g/t Au for fresh, based on a US$1,100/oz gold price
  Mineral Reserve cut-off grades for Sabodala are 0.45 g/t Au for oxide and 0.55 g/t Au
for fresh, based on a US$1,100/oz gold price
  Underground reserves cut-off grades range from 2.3 g/t Au to 2.6 g/t Au, based on a
US$1,200/oz gold price
  Sum of individual amounts may not equal due to rounding.
2 Reported to CIM definitions
Final
July 2016
Page 34 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The Niakafiri Main deposit is adjacent to the Sabodala village and relocation of at least 
some portion of the village will be required which will necessitate a negotiated 
resettlement program with the affected community members.
Snowden was able to reproduce the Mineral Reserves numbers and classifications for 
the main open pits (Sabodala, Gora, Masato, Golouma, and Kerekounda).
A minor inconsistency in application of cut-off grades for Sabodala and Masato was 
noted but this is not considered to be material. The Sabodala pit design has a number of 
potential design issues associated with narrow (or non-existent) access which may 
result in some additional waste mining costs although the change is not expected to be 
material.
Snowden also completed pit optimisations using the Mineral Reserve parameters 
reported in Teranga’s current NI 43-101 Technical Report and was able to reasonably 
match the ore and waste tonnes from each deposit. The Mineral Reserves were 
developed at a gold price of US$1,100/oz and there is an opportunity to add about 36% 
more tonnes and 23% more ounces in the main pits at a US$1,300/oz gold price as 
summarised in Table 4.2.
The operating costs and recoveries used in the optimisation were applied from current 
operations and appear to be a reasonable basis for developing the mining inventory.
Table 4.2
Comparison of Whittle results for the main deposits at US$1,100/oz and 
US$1,300/oz
US$1,100/oz
US$1,300/oz
Deposits
Total  
(t ‘000)
Ore
(t ‘000)
Strip 
(t:t)
Au 
(g/t)
Total 
(t ‘000)
Ore
(t ‘000)
Strip 
(t:t)
Kerekounda
17,756
829
20.42
3.47
28,935
1,165
23.84
Golouma
66,202
5,405
11.25
2.34
83,922
6,372
12.17
Sabodala
56,179
5,702
Masato
103,639
14,853
8.85
5.98
1.70
94,463
8,932
1.21
138,069
20,742
9.58
5.66
Gora
Total
34,914
1,660
20.04
4.85
36,878
1,727
20.35
278,690
28,449
8.80
1.80
382,267
38,938
8.82
Au 
(g/t)
3.17
2.25
1.56
1.11
4.76
1.62
In Snowden’s opinion, the tonnes used in the Mineral Reserve production schedule are 
reasonable.
Snowden was provided with diluted block models. The reconciliation of recent 
production is positive for Golouma. The reconciliation for Gora is negative and Snowden 
understands that this may be due to excavation of the >1.0 g/t Au mineralisation by 
artisanal mining down to the 620 level. Thereafter, reconciliation returns to positive. 
Overall, the Sabodala reconciliation is robust. In Snowden’s opinion, the grades used in 
the Mineral Reserve production schedule are reasonable.
Snowden is comfortable with the basis of the mining inventory used in the Mineral 
Reserve, subject to validation of the diluted ore grades.
Final
July 2016
Page 35 of 57
4.3  Mining
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Sabodala is a conventional open pit truck and shovel operation. Mining is undertaken on 
10 m and 5 m high benches with selective material excavated on 2.5 m flitches in the 
areas where mineralisation is narrow. Ore is initially defined using RC grade control 
drilling in advance of mining. The results from the RC drilling are modelled by personnel 
on site using methods which suit the style of mineralisation. The ore is marked on the 
ground after being blasted. There is good visual control over ore and waste and ore 
spotters are utilised to assist in sending material to the correct destination. The amount 
of ore mining on night shifts is minimised.
The original fleet was purchased from Komatsu on an “as-needs” basis. A renewal of the 
mobile fleet repair and maintenance contract (RAMP) with Komatsu has recently been 
signed for another three years. Snowden was able to confirm that there is sufficient 
mining equipment on site to meet the production requirements. Blasting is carried out on 
a total load service contract basis by Orica. Table 4.3 summarises the current mining 
fleet at Sabodala.
Table 4.3
Sabodala mining fleet
Make
Model
Function
No. of machines
Komatsu
785
Haul truck
Komatsu
PC3000
Hydraulic shovel bulk/selective mining
Komatsu
PC2000
Hydraulic shovel selective mining
Komatsu
PC1250
Hydraulic excavator selective mining
Komatsu
WA900
Wheel loader floor clean-ups/ancillary
Sandvik
DP1500
5 m bench drill rig
SKF
Komatsu
HD465-7R
10 m drill rig
Water cart
Komatsu
GD825A-2
Road maintenance
Komatsu
D375-6R
Dumps, pit floor clean-up
Komatsu
WD600
Dumps, pit floor clean-up
24
3
1
3
3
9
3
4
6
8
2
Performance of the primary fleet (trucks and shovels) is as per plan, while performance 
of the ancillary fleet (track dozers, graders) is reported by Teranga to be inadequate. 
Drilling is done on 10 m and 5 m high benches using 152 mm diameter blast holes and 
127 mm blast holes respectively.
Snowden observed the commencement of pre-stripping at Kerekounda pit, the 
operations at Gora and Galouma pits and the currently non-operating Masato and 
Sabodala pits. Snowden reviewed the satellite maintenance facilities at Gora and the 
new fuelling station at Galouma. The mining infrastructure is a mix of old from the initial 
plan construction with new facilities being installed as required.
4.4  Mineral processing and metallurgical testing
The processing facility at Sabodala comprises crushing, milling and CIL gold recovery. It 
has been in operation since 2010, treating ores form the Sabodala, Masato and Gora 
pits. Future ore is planned from Kerekounda, Goulouma, Niakafiri, Maki Medina and 
Sabodala underground deposits in the future.
An RPA report indicates a past three-year average recovery of 91.2% whilst the Mineral 
Reserve cash flow model reports an average recovery of 89.9% over the LOM.
Final
July 2016
Page 36 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The reported capacity of the plant is 3.5 Mt/a processing only primary (harder) ore; and 
4.0 Mt/a treating a mix of primary and oxide ores. The parallel primary crusher (PPC) 
project which is due for completion late 2016 is expected to increase the plant capacity 
by a further 10%. The May 2016 monthly report indicates that the plant is already 
achieving in excess of 4.0 Mt/a, with the PPC project still to be commissioned.
In Snowden’s opinion, the CIL processing rates shown in the Mineral Reserve schedule 
are reasonable. The grade/recovery forecasts are influenced by the different source and 
lithology of material treated in any given year. The recovery performance of these 
materials has all been tested the results incorporated into the Mineral Reserve schedule.
Actual year-to-date (YTD) grades and recoveries to May 2016 indicate that the grades 
and recoveries budgeted are currently being achieved. Overall, a CIL recovery of about 
90% is reasonable.
4.5
Capital and operating costs
4.5.1  Capital costs
The Sabodala mine is an operating, well established facility, as such the only capital 
requirement is for sustaining and project capital. The 2016 capital forecast from H2 2016 
onwards (Table 4.4) is reported as US$190.7 million, inclusive of tailings dam raises, 
development of Maki Medina, underground mining equipment and the completion of the 
parallel primary crushing project.
Sustaining capital comprises mining equipment, processing plant replacements and 
community projects.
Table 4.4
2016 Project and sustaining capital costs
Cost centre
Maki Medina
TSF1 raise
TSF2
PPC and upgrades
Underground equipment
Mining
Processing
Administration and other sustaining
Community relations
Total capital
Estimate (US$ M)
1.0
1.8
7.2
4.2
102.1
25.19
18.1
6.68
24.5
190.70
Three process related capital projects are listed in the RPA NI 43-101 report; raising of 
TSF1, which is currently on schedule for completion by Q4 2016, construction of TSF2 
planned for completion by 2021 and the completion of the PPC project. This project is 
nearing completion and planned to be commissioned by August 2016.
Snowden considers that the capital cost estimates are reasonable for the style and 
location of this project.
Final
July 2016
Page 37 of 57
4.5.2  Operating costs
Mining
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Mine operating costs for YTD show an average of $2.20/t against an operating budget of 
$2.30/t. Mineral Reserve mining costs for the LOM are stated to be $2.25/t. Snowden 
verified this cost from the Mineral Reserve cash flow model and calculated it to be 
$2.16/t mined. The lower mining costs assigned for the Mineral Reserve cash flow 
include about $2 million in business improvement initiatives, resulting in the stated 
mining cost of $2.25/t.
The mining costs derived for the 2015 Mineral Reserve have been applied in a manner 
consistent with usual practise for Mineral Reserve estimation and reporting. Based on 
current operating performance, mining costs will have to be reduced by 12% to 13% in 
order to achieve the stated LOM assumptions for mining costs.
Given the exchange rate of the Central African Franc (CFA), this is most likely 
achievable; however, this reduction also relies on the business improvement initiatives 
also being realised.
Snowden considers that the cost estimates are reasonable and fall within the standard 
+/- 15% estimate range of Snowden’s expectations.
Processing costs
The March 2016 RPA NI 43-101 report presents a LOM operating cost for processing of 
$10.33/t milled, whilst the LOM cash flow model projects a LOM processing cost of 
$15.12/t milled. The cost decreases projected in the RPA report are premised on 
reductions in the fuel price, and significant government granted exemptions to levies and 
productivity improvements estimated due to the installation and commissioning of the 
PPC project. These will be quantified once the project is commissioned.
The processing cost for the 2016 YTD as reported in the Teranga monthly report for 
May indicates an actual YTD cost of $10.30/t milled. This figure is in line with RPA’s cost 
projected.
As a result, Snowden is of the opinion that the operating costs projection should be 
achievable, based on 2016 YTD actual data reported.
Other operating costs
Other operating costs included in the Teranga LOM forecast are:
  G&A costs
  Management fees
  Social funding costs at mine closure)
  Allowance for rehabilitation at the end of the mine’s life.
There is a salvage value allowed at the end of the mine life.
4.5.3  Production and cost schedules
The Mineral Reserve production schedule appears to conform to reasonable production 
rates from each area and reasonable advance rates. The use of this schedule for cash 
flow modelling is reasonable.
Figure 4.2 summarises, by calendar year, the mine production and processing 
production. Figure 4.3 summarises, by calendar year, the operating and capital costs.
Final
July 2016
Page 38 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Figure 4.2
Teranga LOM mining and processing schedule
Figure 4.3
Teranga operating and capital cost schedule
Final
July 2016
Page 39 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
5
MINERAL ASSET VALUATION OPINION
Snowden is qualified to and has provided an opinion of Technical Value of both Teranga 
and Gryphon’s Mineral Assets1 that are not contemplated by financial models. This 
includes Exploration Targets, exploration tenements, and Inferred Mineral Resources 
that cannot be included in mining models.
This valuation opinion has been prepared in accordance with the VALMIN Code (2015). 
Compliance with the Code is obligatory to all members of the Australasian Institute of 
Mining and Metallurgy (AusIMM), the Mineral Industry Consultants Association (MICA) 
and the Australian Institute of Geoscientists (AIG) who are involved in independent 
technical and valuation reports.
5.1
Valuation Date
Snowden opinion is effective 1 July 2016. As at this date, Gryphon’s Banfora project 
remained an active advanced exploration project and mine operations at Teranga’s 
Sabodala project continued as described (refer Section 4 above).
The opinions expressed and conclusions drawn with respect to this opinion are 
appropriate at the Valuation Date. This opinion is only valid for this date and may 
change with time in response to variations in economic, market, legal or political 
conditions in addition to ongoing exploration results.
5.2
Currency
The financial statements of the Company and valuations are reported in United States 
dollars (US$). Some of the underlying data has been expressed in Central African 
Francs (CFA) and Snowden has applied the approximate US$ exchange rate current at 
the Valuation Date of 0.0017.
5.3
Snowden
Snowden is an independent firm providing specialist mining industry consultancy 
services in the fields of geology, exploration, resource estimation, mining engineering, 
geotechnical engineering, risk assessment, mining information technology, and 
corporate services. The company operates from offices in Perth, Brisbane and 
Johannesburg (South Africa) and has prepared independent technical reviews and 
mineral asset valuations on a variety of mineral commodities in many countries for more 
than 28 years.
5.4
Disclaimer
Snowden has relied on the accuracy and completeness of the documentation and 
advice supplied to it by Gryphon and Teranga and has made reasonable enquiries into 
the material aspects of the project, including a site visit to Sabodala. Snowden makes no 
warranty or representation as to the accuracy or completeness of the information 
provided. Furthermore, Snowden accepts no responsibility for the information or 
statements, opinions, or matters expressed or implied arising out of, contained in, or 
derived from information contained in this report, unless specifically disclosed by 
Snowden.
This report is provided subject to the following assumptions and qualifications:
  Gryphon and Teranga and their agents have made available to Snowden all material
information in their possession or known to them in relation to the technical, 
development, mining and financial aspects of the project areas, that they have not
Final
July 2016
Page 40 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
withheld any material information and that the information provided is accurate and 
up to date in all material respects.
  All reports and other technical documents provided by Gryphon and Teranga and 
their agents correctly and accurately record the results of all geological and other 
technical activities conducted to date in relation to the project areas, and accurately 
record advice from any relevant technical experts.

In assessing Gryphon and Teranga Mineral Assets, Snowden has relied on the 
information provided by Gryphon and Teranga and their agents and has not 
undertaken independent audits of the data used to prepare the Mineral Resource 
estimates.
  All necessary governmental consents and approvals (including those regarding
environmental issues) required to manage mineral production from the project areas 
have been obtained or will be forthcoming without any material delay and on terms 
which will not cause any material change to any mining, exploration or other activities 
proposed and will not cause any material change to the costs of such activities.
  All of the information provided by Gryphon and Teranga and their agents pertaining 
to project areas or their history or future intentions, financial forecasting or the effect 
of relevant agreements is correct and accurate in all material respects.
In relation to the above qualifications, Snowden did not undertake any independent 
enquiries or audits to verify that the assumptions are correct and gives no representation 
that they are correct. Snowden has not carried out any type of audit of Gryphon and 
Teranga’s records to verify that all material documentation has been provided.
Snowden has endeavoured, by making reasonable enquiry of Gryphon and Teranga 
and their agents to ensure that all material information in their possession has been fully 
disclosed to Snowden. Gryphon and Teranga and their agents have agreed to indemnify 
Snowden from any liability arising from Snowden’s reliance upon information provided or 
not provided to it.
5.5
Independence
At the date of the valuation opinion, Mr Peters and Snowden had no association with 
Gryphon and Teranga and their agents, or their individual employees, or any interest in 
the securities of Gryphon and Teranga and their agents, which could be regarded as 
affecting the ability to give an independent valuation opinion.
5.6
Fees, commissions and other benefits that Snowden may receive
Snowden charges fees for providing reports, including this report. These fees are 
negotiated and agreed with the person who engages us to provide the report. Fees are 
agreed on an hourly basis or as a fixed amount depending on the terms of the 
agreement. The fee payable to Snowden for this engagement is approximately 
A$78,000. The fees are not contingent on the results of the valuation opinion.
Except for the fees referred to above, neither Snowden, nor any of its directors, 
employees or related entities, receive any pecuniary benefit or other benefit, directly or 
indirectly, for or in connection with the provision of the report.
Final
July 2016
Page 41 of 57
5.7
Responsibility
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The Snowden person responsible for the valuation opinion is Mr Jeremy Peters 
FAusIMM CP (Min, Geo), Principal Consultant, a full-time employee of Snowden.
Mr Peters is a mining engineer and geologist with 25 years’ relevant practical 
experience in mining and exploration. He has a Bachelor of Engineering in Mining and a 
First Class Mine Manager’s Certificate (Western Australia). He has a Bachelor of 
Science, majoring in geology and has the appropriate qualifications, expertise and 
experience to form this valuation opinion, as described by the VALMIN Code (2015).
Mr John Hearne, CEO Snowden, undertook the peer review of the valuation opinion to 
ensure it complies with the guidelines of both the VALMIN Code (2015) and JORC Code 
(2012).
5.8
Valuation opinion methodology
5.8.1  Valuation opinion considerations
The authors and reviewers of this report are members of the AusIMM and therefore are 
obliged to prepare mineral asset valuations in accordance with the Australian reporting 
requirements as set out in the VALMIN Code.
The objective of the engagement is to establish an opinion of mineral asset value for an 
asset in the context of the factors outlined in the body of this report.
5.8.2  Technical value of mineral assets
Mineral Assets are defined in the VALMIN Code as all property including, but not limited 
to real property, mining and exploration tenements held or acquired in connection with 
the exploration, the development of and the production from those tenements together 
with all plant, equipment and infrastructure owned or acquired for the development, 
extraction and processing of minerals in connection with those tenements.
The VALMIN Code defines Technical Value of a mineral asset as an assessment of a 
Mineral Asset’s future net economic benefit at the Valuation Date under a set of 
assumptions deemed most appropriate by a Practitioner, excluding any premium or 
discount to account for market considerations.
The Valuation Expert is effectively assumed to have the knowledge and experience 
necessary to establish a realistic value for a mineral asset. The real value of an asset 
can only be established in an open market situation where an informed public is able to 
bid for an asset. The most open valuation of mineral assets occur when they are sold to 
the public through a public share offering by a company wishing to become a public 
listed resource company, or by a company raising additional finance. In this instance, 
the public is given a free hand to make the decision, whether to buy or not buy shares at 
the issue price, and once the shares of the company are listed, the market sets a price.
Valuation Experts recognise two distinct markets operate and that values achieved for 
mineral assets sold through public flotation are higher than where values are established 
through other means such as the cash sale by a liquidator; the sale by a small 
prospector to a large company neighbour, or through joint venture arrangements.
The VALMIN Code describes the value of a Mineral Asset as consisting of two 
components; the underlying or Technical Value, and the Market component which is a 
premium or discount relating to market, strategic or other considerations. When the 
Technical and Market components of value are added together the resulting value is 
referred to as the Market Value.
Final
July 2016
Page 42 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
The value of mineral assets is time and circumstance specific. The asset value and the 
market premium or discount changes, sometimes significantly, as overall market 
conditions, commodity prices, exchange rates, political and country risk change. Other 
factors that can influence the valuation of a specific asset include the size of the 
company’s interest, whether it has sound management and the professional 
competence of the asset’s management. All these issues can influence the market’s 
perception of a mineral asset over and above its technical value.
5.8.3  Valuation of mineral assets with Ore Reserves
Where Ore Reserves have been defined, Snowden’s approach is to excise them from 
the mineral property and to value them separately on a value per resource tonne/metal 
unit basis or on the basis of a Discounted Cash Flow (DCF). The value of the 
exploration potential of the remainder of the property can then be assessed. Where 
appropriate, discounts are applied to the estimated contained metal to represent 
uncertainty in the information.
In Snowden’s opinion, an Expert valuing a development or production project must 
consider technical issues as well as make a judgement about the market:
  Confidence in the Mineral Resource/Ore Reserve estimate
  Metallurgical characteristics
  Difficulty and cost of extraction
  Economies of scale
  Proximity of and access to supporting infrastructure.
A DCF analysis determines the Technical Value of a project by approximating its value if 
it were developed under the prevailing economic conditions.
When an Ore Reserve is scheduled for mining and capital costs, financing and taxes are 
considered, the net present value (NPV) of the project is established by discounting 
future annual cash flows using an appropriate discount rate.
The resulting “classical” NPV has several recognised deficiencies linked to the fact that 
the approach assumes a static approach to investment decision making; however, the 
NPV represents a fundamental approach to valuing a proposed or ongoing mining 
operation and is widely used within the mining industry.
5.8.4  Valuation of mineral assets with Mineral Resources
When the economic viability of a Mineral Resources has not been determined by 
financial studies, then a comparable market transaction value approach is typically 
applied. This approach for resources is a similar process to that for exploration property 
however, a dollar value per resource tonne/metal in the ground is determined.
As no two mineral assets are the same, the Expert must be cognisant of the quality of 
the assets in the comparable transactions, with specific reference to:
  The grade of the resource
  The metallurgical qualities of the resource
  The proximity to infrastructure such as an existing mill, roads, rail, power, water,
skilled work force, equipment, etc.
  Likely operating and capital costs
  The amount of pre-strip (for open pits) or development (for underground mines)
necessary
Final
July 2016
Page 43 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
  The likely ore to waste ratio (for open pits)
  The size of the tenement covering the mineral asset
  The overall confidence in the resource.
5.8.5  Valuation of mineral assets in the exploration stage
When valuing an exploration property, the Expert is attempting to arrive at a value that 
reflects the potential of the property to yield a mineable Ore Reserve and which is, at the 
same time, in line with what the property will be judged to be worth when assessed by 
the market. Arriving at the value estimate by way of a desktop study is difficult and no 
single approach.
Such Valuations are based entirely on professional judgement, where the judgement 
reflects the Expert’s previous geological experience, local knowledge of the area, 
knowledge of the market. Valuers are likely to differ on the merits of a particular property 
and their assessments of value are likely to differ.
The most commonly employed methods of exploration asset valuation are:
  Multiple of exploration expenditure method (exploration based) also known as the
premium or discount on costs method or the appraised value method
  Joint venture terms method (expenditure based)
  Geoscience rating methods such as the Kilburn method (potential based)
  Comparable market value method (real estate based).
It is possible to identify positive and negative aspects of each of these methods and 
most valuers favour a single method of valuation, although all methods are largely 
subjective. It is obvious that the Expert must be cognisant of actual transactions taking 
place in the industry in general to ensure that the value estimates are realistic.
In Snowden’s opinion, a valuer charged with the preparation of a tenement valuation 
must consider:
  Geological setting of the property
  The relative size of the landholding
  Results of exploration activities on the tenement
  Evidence of mineralisation on adjacent properties
  Proximity to existing production facilities of the property.
In addition to these technical issues, the Expert has to take particular note of the 
market’s demand for the type of property being valued Snowden’s view is that an 
adjustment of the technical value of a mineral tenement should only be made if the 
technical and market values are obviously out of phase with each other.
Snowden’s observation of the market for mineral deposits in Africa is that the market 
may pay a premium over the technical value for assets that hold defined resources that 
are likely to be mined profitably in the short term or projects that are believed to have the 
potential to develop into mining operations in the short term, even though no Mineral 
Resources have been defined. Exploration tenements that have no defined attributes 
apart from interesting geology or a “good address” may well trade at a discount to 
technical value. Deciding upon the level of discount or premium is entirely a matter of 
the Expert’s professional judgement. This judgement must of course take account of the 
commodity potential of the tenement, the proximity of an asset to an established 
processing facility and the size of the land holding.
Final
July 2016
Page 44 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
5.8.6  Snowden’s valuation methodology
Snowden’s view is that no single valuation approach should be used in isolation, as 
each approach has its own strengths and weaknesses. Where practicable, Snowden 
undertakes its valuation opinions using a combination of valuation techniques in order to 
help form its opinion.
Snowden has formed its opinion of value of Gryphon and Teranga’s exploration mineral 
assets based on recent comparable transactions for similar African projects. Snowden’s 
criteria is a selection of West African projects that involve Australian and Canadian 
operators with identified Reserves and Resources, irrespective of the commercial nature 
of the transaction.
Snowden has identified a number of transactions that it considers to be comparable to 
the Teranga/Gryphon transaction. These have been sourced from a public subscription 
database.
Noyem-Nyafoman
On 16 October 2014, Ghana-based AKA Petroleum Ghana Ltd (AKA) acquired a 100% 
of Ghana-based AQ Ghana Gold Limited (AQ) from Vancouver-based African Queen 
Mines. The principal asset of AQ is its Noyem-Nyanfoman exploration licence in the 
Birim North district of eastern Ghana. AKA paid $1 million in cash and issued a 2% net 
smelter royalty to acquire a reported 1.15 million ounces endowment. This implies a 
mineral inventory3 value of $0.90/oz.
Central Houndé
On 27 November 2014, Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corporation’s London-based 
subsidiary Acacia Mining plc (Acacia) finalised an agreement to acquire up to an 80% 
interest in the Central Houndé project from Vancouver-based Thor Explorations Ltd, 
through an earn-in joint venture transaction. Central Houndé consists of three early 
stage gold exploration licences located in South West Burkina Faso, approximately 
260 km southwest of the capital city, Ouagadougou. Acacia will spend approximately 
$3.5 million over a four-year period to earn up to a 51% interest in Central Houndé 
project and will complete a prefeasibility study on the project to earn an additional 29% 
interest. This implies a mineral inventory value of $13.35/oz.
Ity
On 21 October 2015, Vancouver-based Endeavour Mining Corporation’s Halifax-based 
subsidiary Endeavour Resources Inc. (Endeavour) acquired a 55% interest in Cote 
d'Ivoire-based Société des Mines d'Ity S.A. (SMI) from Luxembourg-based Orascom 
TMT Investments S.ὰ r.l. SMI operates the Ity gold mine in Côte d'Ivoire and various 
regional exploration properties. Endeavour issued 177,061,572 shares of its common 
stock to acquire a 55% interest in SMI. This implies a mineral inventory value of 
$44.82/oz.
3 “Mineral inventory” has no definition under the JORC Code, but in this context is interpreted to consider the 
identified mineral endowment of a project, Ore Reserves and Mineral Resources of any classification.
Final
July 2016
Page 45 of 57
Karma
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
On 11 October 2014, Canadian Franco-Nevada Corporation and Sandstorm Gold Ltd 
(investors) acquired the Burkina Faso Karma gold project from Vancouver -based True 
Gold Mining Inc. (True). The investors paid $100.0 million to acquire 100,000 oz of gold 
produced within five years and 6.5% of gold produced thereafter from Karma, starting 
31 March 2016. The parties will pay 20% of the spot price of gold to True for each ounce 
delivered under the agreement. This implies a mineral inventory value of $20.07/oz.
Mansounia
On 19 May 2014, Ghana-based Waratah Investments Ltd’s (Waratah’s) subsidiary 
Vancouver-based Blox Inc. acquired a 78% stake in the Mansounia gold project from an 
investor group comprised of Perth-based Burey Gold Ltd and Sydney-based Equus 
Mining Ltd. The Mansounia project is located in Guinea. Waratah paid approximately 
FG1.055 billion in cash and issued 6,514,350 common shares of Blox Inc. to acquire a 
78% interest in Mansounia. In addition, within 14 days of commercial gold production 
being publicly declared from ore mined from the property the company will issue a 
second tranche of Blox Inc. shares valued at FG8.087 billion. This implies a mineral 
inventory value of $0.002/oz.
Valuation range
Snowden’s analysis indicates a per-ounce in-ground valuation of between US$44.82/oz 
and less than US$0.01/oz (Table 5.1). Both Teranga and Gryphon have been valued 
according to the NPV of their Ore Reserves.
Table 5.1
Comparable transaction statistics
Comparable transactions
Value (US$/oz)
Mean
Median
Minimum
Maximum
19.72
13.35
0.002
44.82
For Gryphon, Snowden’s attitude is that identified ounces, whether this be Inferred 
Resource and that Measured and Indicated Resource which has not been included in 
the Base Case Ore Reserve (“unassigned Measured and Indicated Mineral Resource”) 
attract a range of between US$3.00/oz and US$8.00/oz (Table 5.2). This range is 
predicated on Snowden’s observation that gold exploration and development projects in 
any jurisdiction do not currently attract the type of premium observed to be attached to 
gold producers with significant Ore Reserves and established processing facilities.
Snowden has identified a preferred value at the lower end of this range, recognising the 
situation for gold exploration projects and the fact that significant capital must be 
expended to develop the project.
Table 5.2
Gryphon exploration inventory valuation opinion
Mineral Resource
Unassigned M&I
Inferred
Low
High
Preferred
(US$/oz in-ground)
(US$/oz in-ground)
(US$/oz in-ground)
3.00
0.20
8.00
3.00
3.83
0.67
Final
July 2016
Page 46 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
For Teranga, Snowden’s attitude is that identified ounces beyond and within the Ore 
Reserve attract a range of between US$5.00/oz and US$44.82/oz (Table 5.3), 
dependent on confidence. This range is predicated on Snowden’s observation that gold 
production projects with established processing facilities in any jurisdiction attract a 
premium to exploration or development projects.
Table 5.3
Teranga exploration inventory valuation opinion
Mineral Resource
Low
High
Preferred
(US$/oz in-ground)
(US$/oz in-ground)
(US$/oz in-ground)
Ore Reserve
Upside 1
Upside 2
19.72
13.35
5.00
44.82
19.72
13.35
32.27
16.53
9.17
5.8.7  Gold price
Snowden’s understanding of the consensus view of the gold price is that it remained 
elevated in US dollar terms during the period of US monetary policy of “quantitative 
easing” (Figure 5.1). When it became apparent that the US economy was gradually 
recovering from the lingering effects of the 2008 Financial Crisis and that this policy 
would be replaced, the US dollar appreciated and gold reduced in value in US dollar 
terms.
Snowden does not forecast metal prices but understands that the current recovery in the 
gold price is largely due to uncertainty relating to world political events, including Islamic 
terrorism in Europe, Britain’s vote to exit the European Union, China’s militarism in the 
South China Sea, the result of impending US elections and war in Syria and other 
places.
Figure 5.1
Gold price (last five years)
Final
July 2016
Page 47 of 57
5.9
Valuation Opinion
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Snowden’s opinion of the value of Gryphon’s Mineral Resources not contemplated by 
financial models at between $10.45 million and $28.20 million, with a preferred value of 
$15.41 million.
Snowden’s opinion of the value of Teranga’s Mineral Resources, exploration potential 
and mineral inventory outside Mineral Reserves is between $38.57 million and 
$96.49 million, with a preferred value of $51.10 million (Table 5.4).
Table 5.4
Exploration valuation opinion summary
Entity
Component
Low ($ M)
High ($ M)
Preferred ($ M)
Gryphon
Teranga
Resources
Exploration
Boss JV
Total
Resources
Exploration
Total
6.07
3.55
0.82
10.45
15.86
22.71
38.57
17.83
9.56
0.82
28.20
27.77
68.72
96.49
8.03
6.56
0.82
15.41
21.81
29.28
51.10
5.9.1  Gryphon valuation opinion
Gryphon has internally analysed its exploration potential, supported by the results of 
extensive field sampling, interpretation of magnetic imagery and scout drilling 
programs4. Snowden attributes two sources of value to Gryphon’s exploration projects:
  The value of the Mineral Resource beyond that incorporated in the Ore Reserve
  The value of the exploration tenements, based on Snowden’s subjective assessment
of the results of exploration to date in relation to overall prospectivity.
Mineral Resource
Snowden has removed the Measured and Indicated Mineral Resource incorporated in 
the Ore Reserve from Gryphon’s Global Mineral Resource and has separately valued 
conjectural, but supported, mineral inventory. The remaining inventory has been valued 
by Snowden based on its observation of the behaviour of comparable transactions (refer 
Table 5.1). Snowden has similarly valued the Inferred Mineral Resource (Table 5.5).
Snowden considers that this approach implies a valuation for Gryphon’s Mineral 
Resources outside of the Ore Reserve of somewhere between $6.07 million and 
$17.83 million, with a preferred value at the lower and of the range of $8.03 million. 
Snowden observes that gold exploration projects in any jurisdiction and at any stage of 
development remain a suppressed market, as opposed to gold producers.
4 A document titled BGP_exploration_upside__geology_report_July15 – final.pdf
Final
July 2016
Page 48 of 57
i
F
n
a
l
l
J
u
y
 
2
0
1
6
T
O
T
A
L
–
U
n
a
s
s
g
n
e
d
a
n
d
i
I
n
f
e
r
r
e
d
N
o
g
b
e
e
l
S
t
i
n
g
e
r
S
a
m
a
v
o
g
o
F
o
u
r
k
o
u
r
a
S
u
b
t
o
t
a
l
 
I
n
f
e
r
r
e
d
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
I
n
f
e
r
r
e
d
i
T
O
T
A
L
–
U
n
a
s
s
g
n
e
d
M
e
a
s
u
r
e
d
a
n
d
I
i
n
d
c
a
t
e
d
R
e
s
e
r
v
e
S
u
b
t
o
t
a
l
S
t
i
n
g
e
r
S
a
m
a
v
o
g
o
F
o
u
r
k
o
u
r
a
N
o
g
b
e
e
l
–
M
e
a
s
u
r
e
d
a
n
d
I
i
n
d
c
a
t
e
d
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
M
e
a
s
u
r
e
d
a
n
d
I
i
n
d
c
a
t
e
d
5
.
3
8
.
5
1
.
1
1
.
0
5
0
.
4
0
(
1
6
.
7
0
)
6
7
.
1
0
1
4
.
3
1
2
.
5
7
.
3
3
3
1
.
3
1
.
3
1
.
1
1
.
1
1
.
2
2
(
1
.
9
5
)
1
.
4
0
1
.
4
1
.
8
1
.
2
1
.
3
D
e
p
o
s
i
t
T
a
b
l
e
 
5
.
5
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
 
v
a
l
u
a
t
i
o
n
o
p
n
o
n
i
i
O
w
n
e
r
s
h
p
i
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s
T
o
n
n
e
s
 
(
M
t
)
A
u
 
(
g
/
t
)
0
.
2
2
0
.
3
6
0
.
0
4
0
.
0
4
1
.
9
8
(
1
.
0
5
)
2
.
9
9
0
.
6
4
0
.
7
1
0
.
2
8
1
.
3
6
M
o
z
6
.
0
7
0
.
1
3
0
.
0
4
0
.
0
7
0
.
0
1
0
.
0
1
5
.
9
4
1
7
.
8
3
1
.
9
8
0
.
6
6
1
.
0
8
0
.
1
2
0
.
1
2
1
5
.
8
5
8
.
0
3
0
.
4
4
0
.
1
5
0
.
2
4
0
.
0
5
0
.
0
5
7
.
5
9
L
o
w
(
$
M
)
i
H
g
h
 
(
$
M
)
P
r
e
f
e
r
r
e
d
 
(
$
M
)
P
a
g
e
4
9
o
f
5
7
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
M
n
e
r
a
s
 
L
m
i
l
i
i
t
e
d
:
K
P
M
G
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
 
r
e
v
e
w
i
i
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
M
n
e
r
a
s
 
r
e
v
e
w
l
i
Gryphon tenements
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Gryphon’s projects are spread across six tenements (Figure 5.2) that attract a minimum 
expenditure from the Burkina Faso authorities, based on the area of these tenements 
(Figure 5.3). This is conventional practice in most jurisdictions. Snowden’s view is that at 
a minimum, a mineral tenement is valued at its minimum statutory expenditure.
Figure 5.2
Gryphon tenements
Figure 5.3
Banfora statutory minimum expenditure
At the time of Snowden’s valuation opinion, a CFA was valued at $0.00175 and 
Snowden has used this commitment to set a minimum value on Gryphon’s interests 
using the Geoscientific (Kilburn) method, as modified by Snowden through its 
experience in the field.
5 https://www.google.com.au/?gws_rd=cr,ssl#q=conversion+cfa+en+dollars+us
Final
July 2016
Page 50 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Snowden has examined the exploration results described in Gryphon’s publicly released 
statements6, cf. Figure 5.4) and in its internal exploration documents and multiplied the 
statutory holding cost of each project area according to its view of these results. As for 
the unassigned and Inferred Mineral Resource valuation, Snowden observes that there 
is a suppressed market for gold exploration projects in any jurisdiction, particularly in the 
absence of and established processing facility.
Snowden’s opinion of the value of the exploration tenements (Table 5.6) consequently 
lies between $3.55 million and $9.56 million. Snowden’s preferred value, $6.56 million, 
lies at the median of this range, reflecting its view that the value of these tenements is 
already suppressed by reportedly favourable holding costs on the part of the statutory 
authority.
Figure 5.4
Gryphon exploration targets and geology
Boss Joint Venture
On 17 July 2014, Gryphon announced that it could earn a majority interest in two 
Burkina Faso exploration projects, Golden Hill and Gourma, by meeting the minimum 
annual statutory commitments for these projects. Gryphon advises that the holding is 
strategic and that the projects remain low level grassroots exploration projects, distal to 
its main interest, Banfora.
Snowden’s view is that, under the circumstances, the projects should be valued at the 
exploration commitment only and Snowden has applied this uniformly (Table 5.4).
6 http://www.gryphonminerals.com.au/index.php/en/investors-4/asx-announcements
Final
July 2016
Page 51 of 57
i
F
n
a
l
T
O
T
A
L
S
u
b
t
o
t
a
l
i
N
a
n
k
a
l
J
u
y
 
2
0
1
6
F
a
r
m
n
i
N
o
g
b
e
e
l
F
a
r
m
n
i
S
u
b
t
o
t
a
l
N
o
g
b
e
e
S
u
d
l
1
0
0
%
Z
e
g
u
e
d
o
u
g
o
u
1
0
0
%
i
D
e
r
i
s
s
o
i
N
a
n
k
a
N
o
g
b
e
e
l
i
N
a
n
k
a
N
o
r
d
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
p
r
o
p
e
r
t
y
l
E
x
p
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
O
w
n
e
r
s
h
p
i
4
6
8
1
,
3
2
2
3
9
1
2
7
2
5
0
2
2
3
2
4
5
2
2
8
(
k
m
A
r
e
a
2
)
0
.
2
1
0
.
6
1
0
.
0
2
0
.
0
6
0
.
1
1
0
.
1
0
0
.
1
1
0
.
1
1
(
U
S
$
M
)
c
o
s
t
A
n
n
u
a
l
1
.
0
1
.
0
2
.
0
2
.
0
2
.
0
1
.
0
1
.
0
2
.
0
L
o
w
1
.
0
1
.
0
2
.
5
2
.
5
2
.
5
1
.
5
1
.
5
2
.
5
i
H
g
h
1
.
0
1
.
0
1
.
0
1
.
0
1
.
0
1
.
0
1
.
0
2
.
0
L
o
w
1
.
0
1
.
0
1
.
5
1
.
5
1
.
5
1
.
5
1
.
5
2
.
5
i
H
g
h
1
.
0
1
.
0
1
.
0
1
.
0
1
.
5
1
.
5
1
.
5
3
.
0
L
o
w
1
.
5
1
.
5
2
.
0
2
.
0
2
.
0
3
.
5
i
H
g
h
1
.
0
1
.
0
0
.
8
0
.
8
1
.
5
1
.
5
1
2
L
o
w
1
.
0
1
.
0
2
.
0
2
.
0
1
.
5
2
.
5
i
H
g
h
4
.
3
7
0
.
8
2
1
.
0
1
.
0
3
.
5
5
0
.
0
3
0
.
0
9
0
.
5
0
0
.
2
3
0
.
1
7
2
.
5
3
1
0
.
3
8
0
.
8
2
1
.
0
1
.
0
9
.
5
6
0
.
1
0
0
.
3
3
1
.
6
8
0
.
9
3
0
.
7
7
5
.
7
6
7
.
3
8
0
.
8
2
0
.
2
1
0
.
6
1
6
.
5
6
0
.
0
6
0
.
2
1
1
.
0
9
0
.
5
8
0
.
4
7
4
.
1
4
(
U
S
$
M
)
(
U
S
$
M
)
(
U
S
$
M
)
O
f
f
 
p
r
o
p
e
r
t
y
O
n
p
r
o
p
e
r
t
y
A
n
o
m
a
l
y
G
e
o
o
g
y
l
L
o
w
i
H
g
h
P
r
e
f
e
r
r
e
d
P
a
g
e
5
2
o
f
5
7
T
a
b
l
e
 
5
.
6
l
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
 
e
x
p
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
v
a
l
u
a
t
i
o
n
o
p
n
o
n
i
i
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
M
n
e
r
a
s
 
L
m
i
l
i
i
t
e
d
:
K
P
M
G
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
 
r
e
v
e
w
i
i
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
M
n
e
r
a
s
 
r
e
v
e
w
l
i
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
5.9.2  Teranga valuation opinion
Snowden identifies three aspects of value to Teranga’s Senegalese Mineral Assets and 
has formed an opinion of the value:
  The Upside1 Inferred Mineral Resources, outside the Ore Reserves of the Banfora
project
  The Upside 2 mineral inventory, beyond the Inferred Mineral Resources
  The subjective exploration potential of Teranga’s exploration assets.
Upside 1 and Upside 2
Snowden is aware of and includes in its valuation opinion, extrapolations of mining 
inventory, as identified by its own work and examination of Teranga’s work. Upside 1 
material is derived from inclusion of Inferred Mineral Resource in the informing 
optimisations and Upside 2 includes Upside 1 and any other material identified at a 
moderately elevated gold price. In Snowden’s view this represents a conjectural mining 
inventory and it has valued this accordingly.
In valuing the Upside 1 and Upside 2 mining inventories, Snowden considers that it is 
effectively valuing the upside potantial of the mining concessions and has not applied a 
geoscientific value to the area of these concessions. Snowden has incrementally valued 
this mineral inventory over and above that estimated for the Ore Reserve, which has 
been valued elsewhere (Table 5.7).
Table 5.7
Teranga incremental mineral inventory valuation opinion
Inventory
Constituents
Ore Reserve  Measured +
Tonnes
(Mt)
59.3
Au 
(g/t)
Oz
Low
High
(Moz)
(US$ M)
(US$ M)
Preferred 
(US$ M)
1.38
2.63
NPV
NPV
NPV
Upside1
Upside 2
indicated
Measured + 
indicated + 
Inferred
Measured + 
Indicated + 
Inferred + 
upside
19.60
1.45
0.91
12.21
18.04
15.10
12.70
1.79
0.73
3.64
9.73
6.70
Incremental valuation
15.86
27.77
21.81
Exploration permits
Snowden has applied a geoscientific (Kilburn) approach to valuing Teranga’s exploration 
permits, in a similar manner to that used to value Gryphon’s tenure. The tenements are 
currently in a state of conversion and Snowden explains this to support its valuation 
opinion.
Current situation
The regional exploration package consists of eight permits (Table 5.8) covering an area 
of 967 km2. Permits are grouped into near mine, Feleme, Dembala and Massakounde. 
Snowden has not independently verified the validity of these permits and has relied on 
the Sabodala Project Technical Report NI 43-101, March 2016 for this information.
Final
July 2016
Page 53 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Table 5.8
Granted gold exploration permits and applications
Project
Permit
Original
SMC
grant date
interest
Status
Area 
(km2)
Maximum
Renewal
validity (inc.
due
two-year
extensions)
Bransan
Dec 2016
70%
3rd validity
200.00  May 2016
May 2018
period
Bransun Sud
Nov 2010
100%
2nd validity
6.00
Nov 2016
Nov 2019
period
Near mine
Sabodala Ouest  Oct 2010
100%
2nd validity
2.00
Nov 2016
Nov 2019
Sounkounkou
Sep 2006
100%
Feleme
Heremakono
Oct 2005
100%
Dembala Berola
Jan 2005
100%
Dembala
period
2nd year 
extension
period
2nd year 
extension
period
2nd year 
extension
period
166.00
NA
Sep 2017
182.00
NA
Oct 2016
208.00
NA
Jan 2017
Saiansoulltou
Nov 2010
100%
2nd validity
57.00
Nov 2016
Nov 2019
Massakounda  Massakounda
Jan 2005
100%
period
3rd validity
period
146.00
NA
Nov 2017
Total
967.00
Source: Teranga Gold Corporation – Sabodala Project Technical Report NI 43-101 (22 March 2016)
Revised situation
Snowden has been advised7 that as of May 2012, Teranga has material reason to 
expect that the statutory authority will accept its proposal to relinquish a significant 
proportion of the tenure and re-establish a reduced holding under new tenure 
(Figure 5.5) and conditions (Table 5.9).
Snowden has formed an opinion of the value of this reduced tenure, recognising that 
this process was well in train as at the Valuation Date and it has been advised that there 
is no indication that the authorities wish to reject the proposal.
Table 5.9
Revised Teranga commitments
New property
Heremakono
Sounkounkou
Bransan
Dembala Berola
New area (km2)
New budget ($ M)
224
77
79
266
10.01
4.19
1.84
5.90
Period
3 years
3 years
3 years
3 years
7 Email to Jeremy Peters from Andrew Bradbury, of Teranga, dated 18 July 2016
Final
July 2016
Page 54 of 57
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Figure 5.5
Teranga proposed relinquishment (pink)
Source: Teranga
Geoscientific valuation
Snowden has used the revised annual commitments and has subjectively discounted 
these for uncertainty relating to unexpected decisions on the part of the issuing 
authorities. Snowden’s view of the prospectivity of each area has been informed by 
publicly released exploration results and descriptions provided to it in the supplied data.
Snowden’s opinion of the value of Teranga’s exploration projects according to its view of 
the prospectivity implied by the exploration results to date and has arrived at a range of 
values that lies between $22.71 million and $68.72 million (Table 5.10).
Snowden’s preferred value, $29.28 million, lies toward the lower end of this range, 
reflecting its view that the value of these tenements is affected by regulatory uncertainty 
and the large future exploration expenditure required to develop the identified prospects 
into future mill feed.
5.9.3  Comparable transactions
Snowden compares its valuation opinions of Gryphon and Teranga’s exploration 
potential against its selected comparable transactions and identifies the Ity and Karma 
transactions as being most similar.
Ity represents a transaction of a reported inventory of 1.8 Moz equivalent in Cote d’Ivoire 
for a reported equivalent of $83.28 million at a then current gold price of $1,007/oz.
Karma represents a transaction of a reported inventory of 5.0 Moz equivalent in Burkina 
Faso for a reported equivalent of $100.0 million at a then current gold price of $1,050/oz.
Snowden considers that these figures support its valuation of the exploration potential of 
each party.
Final
July 2016
Page 55 of 57
i
F
n
a
l
T
o
t
a
l
l
J
u
y
 
2
0
1
6
p
r
o
p
e
r
t
y
B
r
a
n
s
a
n
S
o
u
n
k
o
u
n
k
o
u
H
e
r
e
m
a
k
o
n
o
l
E
x
p
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
l
D
e
m
b
a
a
B
e
r
o
a
l
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
1
0
0
%
2
6
6
7
9
7
7
2
2
4
O
w
n
e
r
s
h
p
i
(
k
m
A
r
e
a
2
)
0
.
0
1
0
.
0
1
0
.
0
2
0
.
0
1
(
$
M
k
m
/
c
o
s
t
2
)
A
n
n
u
a
l
1
.
5
0
2
.
0
0
2
.
0
0
1
.
5
0
L
o
w
2
.
0
2
.
5
2
.
5
2
.
0
i
H
g
h
1
1
.
5
1
1
L
o
w
1
.
5
2
1
.
5
1
.
5
i
H
g
h
1
.
5
1
.
5
2
2
L
o
w
2
2
2
.
5
2
.
5
i
H
g
h
0
.
9
1
.
5
1
0
.
9
L
o
w
1
2
1
.
5
1
3
.
9
8
4
.
1
4
5
.
5
9
9
.
0
0
1
1
.
7
9
1
2
.
2
5
1
9
.
6
6
2
5
.
0
1
5
.
1
0
5
.
3
0
7
.
6
0
1
1
.
2
9
2
2
.
7
1
6
8
.
7
2
2
9
.
2
8
i
H
g
h
(
U
S
$
M
)
(
U
S
$
M
)
(
U
S
$
M
)
O
f
f
 
p
r
o
p
e
r
t
y
O
n
p
r
o
p
e
r
t
y
A
n
o
m
a
l
y
G
e
o
o
g
y
l
L
o
w
i
H
g
h
P
r
e
f
e
r
r
e
d
P
a
g
e
5
6
o
f
5
7
T
a
b
l
e
 
5
.
1
0
l
T
e
r
a
n
g
a
 
e
x
p
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
 
a
s
s
e
t
s
 
v
a
l
u
a
t
i
o
n
o
p
n
o
n
i
i
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
M
n
e
r
a
s
 
L
m
i
l
i
i
t
e
d
:
K
P
M
G
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
 
r
e
v
e
w
i
i
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
M
n
e
r
a
s
 
r
e
v
e
w
l
i
6
REFERENCES
Gryphon Minerals Limited: KPMG Gryphon review 
Gryphon Minerals review
Pertel, D, 2013. NI 43-101 Technical Report, Gryphon Minerals Limited, Banfora Gold 
Project, Burkina Faso, West Africa, January 2013, unpublished report.
Brooks, S, 2014. Nogbele and Fourkoura Deposits, Banfora Gold Deposit, Burkina 
Faso, Resource Estimate January 2014, January 2014, unpublished report.
Brooks, S, 2015. Banfora Gold Deposit, Burkina Faso, Resource Estimate Update April 
2015 Addendum to January 2014 Resource Report, April 2015, unpublished report.
Final
July 2016
Page 57 of 57
Appendix A
Data supplied by Gryphon
Data supplied by Gryphon for the Samavogo deposit
Filename
CSA_SAM_diluted_model.csv
File type
Block model
Composites used in estimation.csv
Composited assays
R229.2013 Banfora Report NI 43 101 CSA.pdf
Resource report
Data supplied by Gryphon for the Stinger deposit
Filename
CSA_STG_diluted_model.csv
File type
Block model
Composites used in estimation.csv
Composited assays
R229.2013 Banfora Report NI 43 101 CSA.pdf
Resource report
Data supplied by Gryphon for the Fourkoura deposit
Filename
Fourkoura_LMIK_model_0515.csv
FKR_8001_8002_3m_comps.csv
Banfora Gold Deposit, Burkina Faso, Resource Estimate Update April 
2015 Addendum to January 2014 Resource Report.pdf
Data supplied by Gryphon for the Nogbele Central deposit
File type
Block model
Composited assays
Resource report
Filename
Nogbele Central_LMIK_model_0515.csv
NGC_3m_LMIKcomposites.csv
Banfora Gold Deposit, Burkina Faso, Resource Estimate Update 
April 2015 Addendum to January 2014 Resource Report.pdf
File type
Block model
Composited assays
Resource report
Data supplied by Gryphon for the Nogbele North deposit
Filename
Nogbele North_LMIK_model_0515.csv
Banfora Gold Deposit, Burkina Faso, Resource Estimate Update April 
2015 Addendum to January 2014 Resource Report.pdf
Data supplied by Gryphon for the Nogbele South deposit
File name
Nogbele South_LMIK_model_0515.csv
NGS_7002_3m_comps.csv
NGS_7003_4_3m_comps.csv
Banfora Gold Deposit, Burkina Faso, Resource Estimate Update April 
2015 Addendum to January 2014 Resource Report.pdf
File type
Block model
Resource report
File type
Block model
Composite file
Composite file
Resource report
H
i
l
l
l
G
o
d
e
n
M
o
u
g
u
e
2
0
1
3
-
0
1
8
 
/
I
n
t
i
e
d
o
u
g
o
u
2
0
1
3
-
0
3
0
 
/
B
a
n
i
r
i
2
0
1
3
-
0
3
1
 
/
/
M
M
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
/
/
M
M
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
/
/
M
M
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
/
1
7
/
0
5
/
2
0
0
5
0
2
/
0
3
/
2
0
1
8
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
1
7
/
0
5
/
2
0
0
5
0
2
/
0
3
/
2
0
1
8
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
1
7
/
0
5
/
2
0
0
5
0
2
/
0
3
/
2
0
1
8
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
a
n
d
i
n
a
n
d
i
n
a
n
d
i
n
g
o
o
d
s
t
a
n
d
n
g
i
g
o
o
d
s
t
a
n
d
n
g
i
g
o
o
d
s
t
a
n
d
n
g
i
G
o
u
r
m
a
F
o
u
t
o
u
r
i
T
y
a
b
o
K
a
n
k
a
n
d
i
T
y
a
r
a
i
D
a
b
a
t
o
u
B
o
u
t
o
u
a
n
o
u
2
0
1
2
-
0
7
6
/
M
C
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
C
/
/
2
0
1
2
-
0
7
4
/
M
C
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
C
/
/
1
7
/
1
2
/
2
0
0
8
1
6
/
1
2
/
2
0
1
7
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
1
7
/
1
2
/
2
0
0
8
1
6
/
1
2
/
2
0
1
7
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
a
n
d
i
n
a
n
d
i
n
g
o
o
d
s
t
a
n
d
n
g
i
g
o
o
d
s
t
a
n
d
n
g
i
2
0
1
3
-
0
9
0
/
M
M
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
/
/
2
7
/
0
3
/
2
0
0
7
2
6
/
0
3
/
2
0
1
6
2
0
1
3
-
0
1
1
2
/
M
M
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
/
/
1
5
/
0
5
/
2
0
0
7
1
4
/
0
5
/
2
0
1
6
T
e
c
h
n
c
a
i
l
l
y
e
x
p
i
r
e
d
.
E
x
c
e
p
t
i
r
e
n
e
w
a
l
w
i
l
l
b
e
g
r
a
n
t
e
d
T
e
c
h
n
c
a
i
l
l
y
e
x
p
i
r
e
d
.
E
x
c
e
p
t
i
r
e
n
e
w
a
l
w
i
l
l
b
e
g
r
a
n
t
e
d
o
n
a
l
 
r
e
n
e
w
a
l
 
l
o
d
g
e
d
.
A
w
a
i
t
i
n
g
 
d
e
c
s
o
n
 
o
f
i
i
t
w
h
e
h
e
r
 
e
x
c
e
p
t
i
o
n
a
l
o
n
a
l
 
r
e
n
e
w
a
l
 
l
o
d
g
e
d
.
A
w
a
i
t
i
n
g
 
d
e
c
s
o
n
 
o
f
i
i
t
w
h
e
h
e
r
 
e
x
c
e
p
t
i
o
n
a
l
2
0
1
0
-
1
4
2
/
M
C
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
C
/
/
2
0
1
0
-
1
4
4
/
M
C
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
C
/
/
2
3
/
0
8
/
2
0
1
0
2
3
/
0
8
/
2
0
1
6
T
r
a
n
s
f
e
r
 
f
r
o
m
C
u
l
f
f
i
M
n
n
g
i
i
p
e
n
d
n
g
M
n
s
t
e
r
i
a
i
i
i
l
 
s
g
n
-
o
f
f
/
i
s
s
u
e
 
o
f
A
r
r
e
t
e
.
i
i
M
n
s
t
r
y
 
h
a
s
 
a
c
c
e
p
t
e
d
 
a
l
l
2
3
/
0
8
/
2
0
1
0
2
3
/
0
8
/
2
0
1
6
T
r
a
n
s
f
e
r
 
f
r
o
m
C
u
l
f
f
i
M
n
n
g
i
i
p
e
n
d
n
g
M
n
s
t
e
r
i
a
i
i
i
l
 
s
g
n
-
o
f
f
/
i
s
s
u
e
 
o
f
A
r
r
e
t
e
.
i
i
M
n
s
t
r
y
 
h
a
s
 
a
c
c
e
p
t
e
d
 
a
l
l
f
e
e
s
a
n
d
p
a
y
m
e
n
t
s
a
n
d
i
i
n
d
c
a
e
d
t
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
l
e
t
t
e
r
 
i
s
 
o
n
 
t
i
i
h
e
 
M
n
s
t
e
r
s
 
d
e
s
k
f
e
e
s
a
n
d
p
a
y
m
e
n
t
s
a
n
d
i
i
n
d
c
a
e
d
t
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
l
e
t
t
e
r
 
i
s
 
o
n
i
i
t
h
e
 
M
n
s
t
e
r
s
 
d
e
s
k
W
a
h
g
n
o
n
i
2
0
1
4
-
6
7
5
0
1
/
0
8
/
2
0
1
4
/
1
8
/
2
0
1
6
(
?
)
R
e
n
e
w
a
l
,
a
s
p
e
r
m
i
t
t
e
d
u
n
d
e
r
 
t
i
i
h
e
M
n
n
g
C
o
d
e
,
h
a
s
b
e
e
n
 
l
o
d
g
e
d
 
w
Z
e
g
u
e
d
o
u
g
o
u
2
0
1
5
-
0
0
0
-
0
9
/
M
M
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
/
/
0
8
/
0
3
/
2
0
0
3
1
2
/
0
9
/
2
0
1
7
S
u
b
e
c
t
j
o
f
n
e
w
p
e
r
m
i
t
a
p
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
b
y
 
G
R
Y
w
i
t
i
i
h
M
n
s
t
e
r
s
 
c
o
n
s
e
n
t
,
 
u
n
d
e
r
A
l
r
t
i
c
e
 
4
2
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
2
0
1
5
/
M
M
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
/
i
i
M
n
n
g
C
o
d
e
,
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
n
g
i
e
x
c
i
i
s
o
n
o
f
g
r
o
u
n
d
b
y
 
g
r
a
n
t
o
f
i
W
a
h
g
n
o
n
 
M
n
n
g
 
p
e
r
m
i
i
i
t
i
i
M
n
n
g
C
o
d
e
,
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
n
g
i
e
x
c
i
i
s
o
n
o
f
g
r
o
u
n
d
b
y
 
g
r
a
n
t
o
f
i
W
a
h
g
n
o
n
 
M
n
n
g
 
p
e
r
m
i
i
i
t
i
N
a
n
k
a
 
N
o
r
d
2
0
1
5
-
0
0
0
-
2
1
1
0
3
/
0
2
/
2
0
0
5
1
2
/
0
9
/
2
0
1
7
S
u
b
e
c
t
j
o
f
n
e
w
p
e
r
m
i
t
a
p
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
b
y
 
G
R
Y
w
i
t
i
i
h
M
n
s
t
e
r
s
 
c
o
n
s
e
n
t
,
 
u
n
d
e
r
A
l
r
t
i
c
e
 
4
2
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
2
0
1
5
i
D
e
r
i
s
s
o
2
0
1
5
-
0
0
0
-
2
1
0
1
2
/
0
9
/
2
0
0
5
1
2
/
0
9
/
2
0
1
7
S
u
b
e
c
t
j
o
f
n
e
w
p
e
r
m
i
t
a
p
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
b
y
 
G
R
Y
w
i
t
i
i
h
M
n
s
t
e
r
s
 
c
o
n
s
e
n
t
,
 
u
n
d
e
r
A
l
r
t
i
c
e
 
4
2
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
2
0
1
5
/
/
M
M
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
C
/
i
i
M
n
n
g
C
o
d
e
,
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
n
g
i
e
x
c
i
i
s
o
n
o
f
g
r
o
u
n
d
b
y
 
g
r
a
n
t
o
f
i
W
a
h
g
n
o
n
 
M
n
n
g
 
p
e
r
m
i
i
i
t
N
o
g
b
e
e
:
l
2
0
1
3
 
0
0
0
0
0
8
/
0
3
/
2
0
0
3
0
8
/
0
7
/
2
0
1
6
S
u
b
e
c
t
j
o
f
n
e
w
p
e
r
m
i
t
a
p
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
b
y
 
G
R
Y
w
i
t
i
i
h
M
n
s
t
e
r
s
 
c
o
n
s
e
n
t
,
 
u
n
d
e
r
A
l
r
t
i
c
e
 
4
2
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
2
0
1
5
/
9
5
/
M
M
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
/
i
i
M
n
n
g
C
o
d
e
,
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
n
g
i
e
x
c
i
i
s
o
n
o
f
g
r
o
u
n
d
b
y
 
g
r
a
n
t
o
f
i
W
a
h
g
n
o
n
 
M
n
n
g
 
p
e
r
m
i
i
i
t
i
N
a
n
k
a
2
0
1
3
 
0
0
0
1
3
3
/
M
M
E
S
G
D
G
M
G
/
/
0
8
/
0
3
/
2
0
0
3
0
8
/
0
7
/
2
0
1
6
S
u
b
e
c
t
j
o
f
n
e
w
p
e
r
m
i
t
a
p
p
/
/
P
R
E
S
P
M
M
M
E
M
E
F
M
E
D
D
/
/
b
e
g
r
a
n
t
e
d
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
b
y
 
G
R
Y
w
i
t
i
i
h
M
n
s
t
e
r
s
 
c
o
n
s
e
n
t
,
 
u
n
d
e
r
A
l
r
t
i
c
e
 
4
2
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
2
0
1
5
i
i
M
n
n
g
C
o
d
e
,
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
n
g
i
e
x
c
i
i
s
o
n
o
f
g
r
o
u
n
d
b
y
 
g
r
a
n
t
o
f
i
W
a
h
g
n
o
n
 
M
n
n
g
 
p
e
r
m
i
i
i
t
N
o
g
b
e
e
 
S
u
d
l
1
6
-
0
4
2
 
/
/
M
E
M
C
S
G
D
G
M
G
/
0
3
/
0
2
/
2
0
0
5
1
0
/
0
9
/
2
0
1
8
S
u
b
e
c
t
j
o
f
n
e
w
p
e
r
m
i
t
a
p
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
b
y
 
G
R
Y
w
i
t
h
 
M
n
s
t
i
i
e
r
s
 
c
o
n
s
e
n
t
,
 
r
e
c
o
n
f
i
g
u
r
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
B
G
P
t
e
n
u
r
e
G
r
y
p
h
o
n
 
t
e
n
e
m
e
n
t
 
r
e
g
i
s
t
e
r
R
e
g
o
n
i
N
a
m
e
A
r
r
e
t
e
G
r
a
n
t
 
d
a
t
e
E
x
p
i
r
y
d
a
t
e
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
s
t
a
t
u
s
i
i
i
t
h
 
M
n
s
t
r
y
 
a
n
d
 
i
s
 
e
x
p
e
c
t
e
d
 
t
o
ABCD
KPMG Financial Advisory Services 
(Australia) Pty Ltd
Australian Financial Services Licence No. 246901 
235 St Georges Terrace 
Perth  WA  6000 
 
GPO Box A29  
Perth  WA  6837 
Australia
ABN: 43 007 363 215
Telephone: +61 8 9263 7171 
Facsimile: +61 8 9263 7129 
www.kpmg.com.au
PART TWO – FINANCIAL SERVICES GUIDE
Dated 25 July 2016 
What is a Financial Services Guide (FSG)? 
This FSG is designed to help you to decide whether to use any of the general financial product advice provided by KPMG 
Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd ABN 43 007 363 215, Australian Financial Services Licence Number 246901 
(of which KPMG Corporate Finance is a division) (KPMG Corporate Finance) and Jason Hughes, Bill Allen and Ben  
Della-Bosca as authorised representatives of KPMG Corporate Finance (Authorised Representatives), Authorised 
Representative numbers 404183, 405336 and 401986 respectively. 
This FSG includes information about: 
  KPMG Corporate Finance and its Authorised Representatives and how they can be contacted 
 
  how KPMG Corporate Finance and its Authorised Representatives are paid 
 
  how complaints are dealt with as well as information about internal and external dispute resolution systems and how you can
any relevant associations or relationships of KPMG Corporate Finance and its Authorised Representatives
the services KPMG Corporate Finance and its Authorised Representatives are authorised to provide
access them; and the compensation arrangements that KPMG Corporate Finance has in place.
The distribution of this FSG by the Authorised Representatives has been authorised by KPMG Corporate Finance. 
This FSG forms part of an Independent Expert’s Report (Report) which has been prepared for inclusion in a disclosure 
document or, if you are offered a financial product for issue or sale, a Product Disclosure Statement (PDS).  The purpose of 
the disclosure document or PDS is to help you make an informed decision in relation to a financial product. The contents of 
the disclosure document or PDS, as relevant, will include details such as the risks, benefits and costs of acquiring the particular 
financial product.
foreign exchange contracts;
Financial services that KPMG Corporate Finance and the 
Authorised Representatives are authorised to provide 
KPMG Corporate Finance holds an Australian Financial 
Services Licence, which authorises it to provide, amongst other 
services, financial product advice for the following classes of 
financial products:  
  deposit and non-cash payment products; 
  derivatives; 
 
  government debentures, stocks or bonds; 

interests in managed investment schemes including       
investor directed portfolio services;  
securities; 
superannuation; 
carbon units;
 
 
 
  Australian carbon credit units; and 
 
to retail and wholesale clients. We provide financial product 
advice when engaged to prepare a report in relation to a 
transaction relating to one of these types of financial products. 
The Authorised Representatives is authorised by KPMG 
Corporate Finance to provide financial product advice on 
KPMG Corporate Finance's behalf. 
KPMG Corporate Finance and the Authorised 
Representatives responsibility to you 
KPMG Corporate Finance has been engaged by Gryphon 
Minerals Limited (the Client) to provide general financial 
product advice in the form of a Report to be included in the
eligible international emissions units,
Scheme Booklet prepared by the Client in relation to its 
proposed takeover by Teranga Gold Corporation (Teranga). 
You have not engaged KPMG Corporate Finance or the 
Authorised Representatives directly but have received a copy of 
the Report because you have been provided with a copy of the 
Document.  Neither KPMG Corporate Finance nor the 
Authorised Representatives are acting for any person other than 
the Client. 
KPMG Corporate Finance and the Authorised Representatives 
are responsible and accountable to you for ensuring that there is 
a reasonable basis for the conclusions in the Report. 
General Advice 
As KPMG Corporate Finance has been engaged by the Client, 
the Report only contains general advice as it has been prepared 
without taking into account your personal objectives, financial 
situation or needs.  
You should consider the appropriateness of the general advice 
in the Report having regard to your circumstances before you 
act on the general advice contained in the Report.  
You should also consider the other parts of the Document before 
making any decision in relation to the Transaction. 
Fees KPMG Corporate Finance may receive and 
remuneration or other benefits received by our 
representatives 
KPMG Corporate Finance charges fees for preparing reports. 
These fees will usually be agreed with, and paid by, the Client.  
Fees are agreed on either a fixed fee or a time cost basis.  In this 
instance, the Client has agreed to pay KPMG Corporate 
Finance $170,000 for preparing the Report. KPMG Corporate
KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd is affiliated with 
KPMG.   
 
KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG 
network of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG 
International Cooperative (“KPMG International”), a Swiss entity.
Finance and its officers, representatives, related entities and 
associates will not receive any other fee or benefit in 
connection with the provision of the Report. 
KPMG Corporate Finance officers and representatives 
(including the Authorised Representatives) receive a salary or a 
partnership distribution from KPMG’s Australian professional 
advisory and accounting practice (the KPMG Partnership). 
KPMG Corporate Finance's representatives (including the 
Authorised Representatives) are eligible for bonuses based on 
overall productivity. Bonuses and other remuneration and 
benefits are not provided directly in connection with any 
engagement for the provision of general financial product 
advice in the Report. 
Further details may be provided on request. 
Referrals 
Neither KPMG Corporate Finance nor the Authorised 
Representatives pay commissions or provide any other benefits 
to any person for referring customers to them in connection 
with a Report. 
Associations and relationships 
Through a variety of corporate and trust structures KPMG 
Corporate Finance is controlled by and operates as part of the 
KPMG Partnership. KPMG Corporate Finance's directors and 
Authorised Representatives may be partners in the KPMG 
Partnership. The Authorised Representatives a partner in the 
KPMG Partnership. The financial product advice in the Report 
is provided by KPMG Corporate Finance and the Authorised 
Representative and not by the KPMG Partnership. 
From time to time KPMG Corporate Finance, the KPMG 
Partnership and related entities (KPMG entities) may provide 
professional services, including audit, tax and financial 
advisory services, to companies and issuers of financial 
products in the ordinary course of their businesses. 
KPMG entities have not provided any services to the Client or 
Teranga over the past two years. 
No individual involved in the preparation of this Report holds a 
substantial interest in, or is a substantial creditor of, the Client 
or has other material financial interests in the transaction. 
Complaints resolution 
Internal complaints resolution process 
If you have a complaint, please let either KPMG Corporate 
Finance or the Authorised Representative know.  Formal 
complaints should be sent in writing to The Complaints Officer, 
KPMG, PO Box H67, Australia Square, Sydney NSW 1213. If
you have difficulty in putting your complaint in writing, please 
telephone the Complaints Officer on 02 9335 7000 and they 
will assist you in documenting your complaint. 
Written complaints are recorded, acknowledged within 5 days 
and investigated. As soon as practical, and not more than 45 
days after receiving the written complaint, the response to your 
complaint will be advised in writing. 
External complaints resolution process 
If KPMG Corporate Finance or the Authorised Representatives 
cannot resolve your complaint to your satisfaction within 45 
days, you can refer the matter to the Financial Ombudsman 
Service (FOS).  FOS is an independent company that has been 
established to provide free advice and assistance to consumers 
to help in resolving complaints relating to the financial services 
industry.  
Further details about FOS are available at the FOS website 
www.fos.org.au or by contacting them directly at: 
Address:
info@fos.org.au.
Financial Ombudsman Service Limited, GPO 
Box 3, Melbourne Victoria 3001  
1800 367 287  
(03) 9613 6399 Email:
Telephone:  
Facsimile:  
The Australian Securities and Investments Commission also has 
a freecall infoline on 1300 300 630 which you may use to 
obtain information about your rights. 
Compensation arrangements 
KPMG Corporate Finance has professional indemnity insurance 
cover as required by the Corporations Act 2001(Cth). 
Contact Details 
You may contact KPMG Corporate Finance or the Authorised 
Representatives using the contact details: 
KPMG Corporate Finance  
A division of KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) 
Pty Ltd  
10 Shelley St 
Sydney NSW 2000 
 
Jason Hughes 
PO Box H67 
Australia Square  
NSW 1213 
Telephone:  
Facsimile:
(02) 9335 7000 
(02) 9335 7200
© 2016 KPMG Financial Advisory Services (Australia) Pty Ltd, an affiliate of KPMG. KPMG is an Australian partnership and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms 
affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative ("KPMG International"), a Swiss entity. All rights reserved. The KPMG name, logo and "cutting through complexity" are registered trademarks or 
trademarks of KPMG International.
104
Annexure B – Comparison of Australian 
and Canadian legal regimes
References to ‘Australian law’ where they appear in this Annexure are references to the Corporations 
Act, ASX Listing Rules, ASX Settlement Rules and Australian common law, as applicable.  References 
to ‘Canadian law’ are references to the CBCA, TSX Company Manual, applicable provincial securities 
laws in Canada and Canadian common law, as applicable.
This comparison is not an exhaustive statement of all relevant laws, rules and regulations and is 
intended as a general guide only.  Gryphon Shareholders should consult with their own legal adviser if 
they require further information.  The following description of Canadian corporate law, Canadian 
securities law and Teranga’s constating documents does not purport to be complete and is qualified in 
its entirety by reference to the full text of such materials.  Gryphon Shareholders should review the full 
text of such materials.
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Rights of Teranga Shareholders
Share capital
Purchase of own shares
Transfer of shares
•
285
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Rights attaching to shares 
Under Australian law there is no concept of 
authorised capital, and the shares of a 
company have no par value.
Under the Corporations Act, Gryphon may 
buy-back its shares under a specific buy-
back scheme:
•
if the buy-back does not materially 
prejudice Gryphon’s ability to pay 
its creditors; and
•  Gryphon follows the procedures 
set out in the Corporations Act. 
Share buy-backs that intend to buy-back 
more than 10% of the votes attaching to the 
smallest number of shares in the previous 12 
months require approval by Gryphon’s 
Shareholders by way of ordinary resolution. 
The form of shareholder approval (e.g. 
ordinary resolution or special/unanimous 
resolution), if required, and the notice period 
and disclosure requirements to be given to 
Gryphon Shareholders will depend on the 
type of buy-back. Generally, buy-back 
schemes can be characterised as minimum 
holding, equal access, selective, on-market 
or relating to employee share schemes.
Under Gryphon’s constitution, the directors 
may refuse to register any transfer of 
Gryphon Shares where the ASX Listing 
Rules permit or require Gryphon to do so. 
The directors will refuse to register any 
transfer of Gryphon Shares where:
•
the Corporations Act or the ASX 
Listing Rules require Gryphon to 
do so, or the transfer is in breach 
of the ASX Listing Rules; or 
those Gryphon Shares are
Under Teranga’s constating documents, 
Teranga is authorised to issue an unlimited 
number of common shares. There is no 
minimum share capital prescribed by the 
CBCA. All shares of CBCA corporations 
must be issued as fully paid and non-
assessable. 
Under the CBCA, Teranga may repurchase 
its shares provided that there are no 
reasonable grounds for believing that the 
company is insolvent or making the payment 
or providing the consideration would render 
the company insolvent. 
The TSX Company Manual permits, subject 
to at least two clear trading days prior notice 
by an issuer, a normal course issuer bid to 
be conducted by an issuer for a period of up 
to one year which would allow the listed 
company to repurchase up to a prescribed 
percentage of the class of listed shares. A 
variety of restrictions are imposed upon the 
issuer including limitations upon the size and 
price at which purchases can be conducted. 
Within 10 days of the end of any month in 
which normal course issuer bid purchases 
are made, whether the securities were 
purchased through the TSX or otherwise, 
the issuer must report to the TSX on 
average prices and disposition of the 
securities that have been purchased. 
Under Canadian securities legislation, a 
repurchase of its shares in certain specified 
circumstances by Teranga may constitute an 
“issuer bid” and could only be effected in 
accordance with the provisions of the 
Canadian securities legislation. 
Under Teranga’s constating documents, no 
transfer of Teranga’s shares will be 
registered except upon:
•
•
presentation of the security 
certificate representing the 
security with an endorsement 
which complies with the CBCA (or 
if no certificate has been issued, a 
duly executed security transfer 
power); 
payment of all applicable taxes
Voting rights
Dividends and distribution
Rights of Teranga Shareholders
and fees permitted under the ASX 
Listing Rules and the ASX 
Settlement Rules; and 
compliance with Teranga’s 
articles.
•
Under the CBCA and Teranga’s constating 
documents, each common share of Teranga 
entitles the holder as of the record date to 
one vote at a meeting of shareholders. On a 
show of hands, each shareholder present in 
person or by proxy and entitled to vote has 
one vote. If a ballot is called, each 
shareholder present in person or by proxy 
will have one vote for each share in Teranga 
held. The CBCA and Teranga’s constating 
documents provide that a ballot (or poll) may 
be directed by the chair or demanded by any 
shareholder entitled to vote at the meeting or 
by their proxy. 
Under the CBCA, Teranga may pay a 
dividend by issuing fully paid shares or in 
property, including money. Teranga may not 
declare or pay a dividend if there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that 
Teranga is insolvent or the payment of the 
dividend would render Teranga insolvent.
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
restricted securities and the 
transfer is in breach of any 
restriction agreement in respect of 
those Gryphon Shares.
Under Gryphon’s constitution, generally, 
each Gryphon Shareholder has one vote on 
a show of hands and, on a poll, one vote for 
each share fully paid and if not fully paid, a 
fraction of a vote equivalent to the portion of 
the share paid up.
Under Gryphon’s constitution, the directors 
may declare a final dividend out of profits in 
accordance with the Corporations Act and 
may authorise the payment or crediting by 
Gryphon of that dividend to Gryphon 
Shareholders.   
Directors may also authorise the payment or 
crediting by Gryphon of an interim dividend 
to Gryphon Shareholders if the payment of 
an interim dividend appears to the directors 
to be justified by the profits of Gryphon.  
Under the Corporations Act, Gryphon must 
not pay a dividend unless:
•  Gryphon’s assets exceed its 
liabilities immediately prior to the 
dividend declaration (and the 
excess is sufficient for the payment 
of the dividend); 
the payment of the dividend is fair 
and reasonable to the Gryphon 
Shareholders as a whole; and 
the payment of the dividend does 
not materially prejudice Gryphon’s 
ability to pay its creditors.
•
•
Variation of class rights
Issue of shares
Under Gryphon’s constitution, if at any time 
the share capital of Gryphon is divided into 
different classes of Gryphon Shares, the 
rights attached to any class may be varied or 
cancelled (unless otherwise provided by the 
terms of the issue of that class of Gryphon 
Shares) with the consent in writing of holders 
of 75% of the issued shares of that class or 
by a special resolution passed at a separate 
meeting of the Gryphon Shareholders 
included in that class.
Capital raising
If at any time the share capital of Teranga is 
divided into different classes of shares, 
under the CBCA, rights attaching to a class 
of shares may only be varied by an 
amendment to the articles of Teranga 
approved by special resolution of the holders 
of that class of shares and a separate 
special resolution of all shareholders.
Under Gryphon’s constitution, unissued 
Gryphon Shares are under the control of the 
directors who, subject to the Corporations 
Act, the ASX Listing Rules and any rights 
attached to any special class of Gryphon 
Shares may, on behalf of Gryphon, allot or 
dispose of all or any of those unissued 
Gryphon Shares to such persons, at such 
times at such price and on such terms and 
conditions, with such preferred, deferred, or 
other special rights or restrictions as the 
directors think fit.
Under the CBCA, the Teranga Board is 
authorised to issue any shares in the capital 
of Teranga. Under the CBCA, shares issued 
by Teranga are non-assessable and may 
only be issued if consideration for such 
shares is fully paid. Stated capital accounts 
must be maintained for each class of share. 
Upon the issuance of a share, Teranga may 
not add to the stated capital account in 
respect of the share an amount greater than 
the amount of the consideration it received 
for the share.
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
286
ASX Listing Rules/TSX 
Company Manual
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders 
Under ASX Listing Rules (subject to 
specified exceptions for pro rata issues etc.), 
Gryphon is restricted from issuing or 
agreeing to issue more shares than the 
number calculated below in any 12 month 
period unless Gryphon has shareholder 
approval, that is 15% of the total of:
the number of shares on issue 12 
months before the date of the 
issue or agreement to issue; plus 
the number of shares issued in the 
12 months before the date of the 
issue or agreement to issue 
without shareholder approval but 
pursuant to one of the specified 
exceptions; plus 
the number of shares issued in the 
preceding 12 months with 
shareholder approval; less 
the number of partly paid shares 
that became fully-paid in the 12 
months; plus 
the number of shares cancelled in 
that 12 month period; less 
the number of shares issued or 
agreed to be issued in the 
preceding 12 months without 
shareholder approval and without 
the benefit of one of the specified 
exceptions.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Under the ASX Listing Rules, shares or 
options may be issued to the directors with 
the approval of Gryphon Shareholders.
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
Under the TSX Company Manual, Teranga 
will require the approval of the TSX to issue 
securities other than unlisted non-voting, 
non-participating securities. The TSX may 
impose conditions in connection with any 
approval of a transaction or grant 
exemptions from its own requirements. The 
TSX will consider various factors, including 
the involvement of insiders in the 
transaction, whether the transaction 
materially affects control of the issuer, the 
issuer’s corporate governance practices and 
disclosure practices, the size of the 
transaction relative to the liquidity of the 
issuer and whether a court or administrative 
body has considered the interest of 
shareholders. 
The TSX will generally require shareholder 
approval of any transaction that materially 
affects control of the issuer or provides 
consideration to insiders that represents 
10% or more of the issuer’s market 
capitalisation (subject to certain conditions) 
during any six month period, and has not 
been negotiated at arm’s length. For 
distributions of listed securities in reliance on 
a prospectus exemption (known as private 
placements), the TSX may require 
shareholder approval depending on the price 
at which the securities are being sold and 
the number being sold in relation to the 
number outstanding. Issuers may qualify for 
exemptions from the shareholder approval 
requirements in certain situations including 
financial distress of the issuer.   
If the price is below the TSX “market price” 
(being a 5 day volumed weighted average 
price) and the number of securities to be 
issued represents more than 25% of the 
number outstanding (on a non-diluted basis), 
shareholder approval will be required, while 
if the price is at or above such market price, 
shareholder approval will generally not be 
required regardless of the number of 
securities issued. If the issuance is to be 
less than or equal to 25% of the number 
outstanding, shareholder approval will not be 
required unless the price is below a 
permitted discount to market (which can be 
up to 25%, 20% or 15% depending on the 
trading price of the shares in question). 
TSX-listed issuers must obtain shareholder 
approval when the number of securities 
issued in payment for an acquisition 
exceeds 25% of the number of issued and 
outstanding securities of the issuer (on a 
non-diluted basis). 
In private placements to insiders and 
acquisitions involving issuances of listed 
securities to insiders, the TSX will require 
shareholder approval depending on the 
number of securities issued in relation to the 
number outstanding. Specifically, if insiders 
will be issued, by way of private placements 
during any six month period, or if insiders 
will receive, as consideration in an 
acquisition, securities or options, rights or 
other entitlements to listed securities 
representing more than 10% of the number 
of securities outstanding on a non-diluted 
basis, shareholder approval will be required 
and the insiders may not vote their
287
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Continuous disclosure
Under ASX Listing Rules, Gryphon is 
required to disclose to ASX any information 
concerning Gryphon that a reasonable 
person would expect to have a material 
effect on the price or the value of its shares 
(or options).
Directors
•
•
exercise prices for any stock 
options granted under a security 
based compensation arrangement 
may not be lower than market 
price of the securities at the time 
the stock options are granted;  
there must be a maximum number 
or percentage of securities 
issuable; and
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
securities. 
The TSX also requires shareholder approval 
of securities-based compensation 
arrangements (which includes stock option 
plans and other executive compensation 
plans and arrangements), including any 
compensation or mechanism involving the 
potential issuance of securities from 
treasury.  The TSX prescribes specific 
disclosure requirements for the materials 
provided to shareholders for the purposes of 
such approval, including all material 
information that shareholders may 
reasonably require to approve the 
arrangements.   
Certain substantive requirements are 
imposed that must be complied with, 
including:
•  most amendments also require
shareholder approval.
The TSX Company Manual permits capital 
raising via public offering or private 
placement with listing subject to approval by 
the TSX. 
Canadian securities laws require the 
immediate disclosure by issuing and filing a 
news release of any material change 
occurring in the affairs of an issuer.  As soon 
as practicable thereafter, and in any such 
event within 10 days of the date on which 
the change occurs, an issuer must also file a 
material change report in the prescribed 
form with the applicable provincial and 
territorial securities commissions. 
The TSX Company Manual also sets out 
timely disclosure requirements for listed 
issuers, including in relation to timely 
disclosure of material facts. 
As a company subject to the ASX Listing 
Rules, Teranga is required to disclose to 
ASX any information concerning Teranga 
that a reasonable person would expect to 
have a material effect on the price or the 
value of its shares (or options).
Number of directors
Directors’ remuneration
Under Gryphon’s constitution, the number of 
directors must be not less than three nor 
more than 10, or such lesser number as the 
directors determine (provided that the 
number determined is not less than the 
number of directors when the determination 
takes place).  
Under the Corporations Act, at least two 
directors of Gryphon must reside in Australia. 
Gryphon’s constitution provides the following 
with respect to the remuneration of 
Gryphon’s directors, including:
•
that such remuneration will be paid
The CBCA requires that public companies 
have a minimum of three directors. At least 
25% of the directors of a CBCA company 
must be resident Canadians (or if there are 
less than four directors at least one must be 
a resident Canadian).  Teranga’s constating 
documents set a minimum of one director 
and a maximum of 10 directors. Currently, 
there are nine Teranga directors. 
Under the CBCA, the directors of Teranga 
may fix the remuneration of the directors of 
the company.  
Teranga’s constating documents provide the 
following with respect to the remuneration of
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
288
Powers of the board of 
directors
Transaction involving 
directors, officers and other 
related parties
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
289
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
Teranga’s directors, including:
out of the funds of Gryphon, by 
way of remuneration for their 
services as directors; 
that such remuneration will be a 
sum not exceeding such fixed sum 
per annum as may be determined 
by the directors prior to the first 
annual general meeting of 
Gryphon, to be divided among 
themselves and, in default of 
agreement, then in equal shares;  
that such remuneration shall not 
be increased except pursuant to a 
resolution passed at a general 
meeting of Gryphon, where notice 
of the suggested increase has 
been given to Gryphon 
Shareholders in the notice 
convening the meeting; 
no executive director will be paid 
as whole or part of his 
remuneration a commission on or 
a percentage of operating revenue; 
the non-executive directors will be 
paid as part or whole of their 
remuneration, a commission on or 
a percentage of profits, or a 
commission on or a percentage of 
operating revenue; 
the remuneration of directors will 
accrue from day to day; and 
a director is entitled to be 
reimbursed for travelling and other 
expenses properly incurred by 
them in attending, participating in 
and returning from meetings or 
otherwise in connection with the 
business of the company.
Under Gryphon’s constitution, subject to the 
Corporations Act, the ASX Listing Rules and 
Gryphon’s constitution, the business of 
Gryphon is to be managed by the Gryphon 
Board, and the Gryphon Board may exercise 
all such powers of Gryphon which are not 
required by the Corporations Act or 
Gryphon’s constitution to be exercised by 
Gryphon in general meeting. 
Under the Corporations Act, Gryphon is 
prohibited from giving related parties 
(including directors) a financial benefit unless 
it:
obtains the approval of Gryphon 
Shareholders and gives the benefit 
within 15 months after approval; or  
the financial benefit is exempt 
(including in respect of 
indemnities, insurance premiums 
and payments for legal costs which 
are not otherwise prohibited by the 
Corporations Act and benefits 
given on arms’ length).
A related party is defined to include any 
entity which controls the public company, 
directors of the public company, directors of 
any entity which controls the public company 
and, in each case, spouses and certain 
relatives of such persons. 
Under ASX Listing Rules, listed companies 
such as Gryphon are prohibited from
•
•
•
•
•
•
that such remuneration will be a 
sum not exceeding such fixed sum 
per annum as set forth in 
Teranga’s constating documents, 
to be divided among themselves 
and, in default of agreement, then 
in equal shares; 
shall not be increased except 
pursuant to a resolution passed at 
a general meeting of Teranga, 
where notice of the suggested 
increase has been given to 
Teranga Shareholders in the 
notice convening the meeting; 
no director will be paid as whole or 
part of his remuneration a 
commission on or a percentage of 
operating revenue; 
executive directors shall have their 
remuneration fixed by the 
directors, and may be in the form 
of salary or commission or 
participation in profits, or by all or 
any of these modes, but may not 
be by commission on, or a 
percentage of, operating revenue;  
the remuneration of directors will 
accrue from day to day; and 
a director is entitled to be 
reimbursed for travelling and other 
out-of-pocket expenses properly 
incurred by them in attending 
meetings and the performance of 
their duties as directors.
Teranga’s constating documents do not 
restrict the powers of the Teranga Board. 
Under the CBCA, the Teranga Board is to 
supervise the management of and the 
business and affairs of Teranga.
The CBCA requires directors to disclose to 
Teranga the nature and extent of any 
interest that they, any other company in 
which they are a senior officer or director, or 
any other company in which they have an 
interest, may have in a material contract or 
transaction, whether made or proposed, with 
Teranga.  
Except as provided in the CBCA, no 
Teranga director having such an interest 
may vote on any resolution to approve such 
contract or transaction unless the contract or 
transaction:
•
• 
•
relates primarily to his or her 
remuneration as a director of the 
company or an affiliate; 
is for indemnity or insurance; or 
is with an affiliate,
Under the CBCA, a director may be liable to 
account to the company for any profit that 
accrues to the director as a result of a
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders 
acquiring a substantial asset (an asset the 
value or consideration for which is 5% or 
more of the entity’s equity interests) from, or 
disposing of a substantial asset to, certain 
related parties of the company  unless it 
obtains the approval of shareholders.  The 
related parties include a director, a person 
who has or has had in the prior 6 month 
period an interest in 10% or more of the 
shares in the company and, in each case, 
any of their associates. The provisions apply 
even where the transaction may be on arms’ 
length terms. 
Additionally, ASX Listing Rules prohibit a 
listed company such as Gryphon from 
issuing (or agreeing to issue) shares to a 
director unless it obtains the approval of 
shareholders or the share issue is exempt 
(such as pro rata issues to all shareholders, 
an underwriting agreement or under a 
dividend or distribution plan).  
Under the Corporations Act, a director who 
has a material interest in a matter that relates 
to the affairs of a company must give the 
other directors notice of that interest.  This is 
confirmed in Gryphon’s constitution.  
A director who has a material personal 
interest in a matter must not be present at a 
meeting where the matter is considered or 
vote on the matter unless:
•
•
•
the interest did not need to be 
disclosed in certain prescribed 
circumstances; 
the directors who do not have a 
material personal interest have 
passed a resolution that, identifies 
the director, the nature and extent 
of the director’s interest in the 
matter and its relation to the affairs 
of the company and states that 
those directors are satisfied that 
the interest should not disqualify 
the director from voting or being 
present; or 
ASIC approves.
Directors of Gryphon, when entering into 
transactions with Gryphon, are subject to the 
common law and statutory duties to avoid 
conflicts of interest imposed by Australian 
law.
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
contract or transaction in which the director 
holds a disclosable interest, except where:
•
•
the directors approved the 
contract or transaction after the 
interest was disclosed; or 
the contract or transaction is 
approved by a special resolution 
of the shareholders.
Where such approval is not obtained, or a 
director fails to comply with the procedures 
set forth in the CBCA, a court may set aside 
the  contract or transaction on any terms that 
it thinks fit, or require the director to account 
to the corporation for any profit or gain 
realised on it, or do both those things. 
Teranga is subject to Multilateral Instrument 
61-101 - Protection of Minority Security 
Holders in Special Transactions (MI 61-101), 
which, among other things, imposes 
valuation, minority approval and disclosure 
requirements on entities involved in certain 
related party transactions.  MI 61-101 
contains highly detailed and technical 
requirements the following of which is a brief 
summary.  Under MI 61-101, a related party 
transaction includes a transaction between 
an issuer and a person that is a related party 
to the issuer at the time that the transaction 
is agreed to, whether or not there are also 
other parties to the transaction, as a 
consequence of which, either through the 
transaction itself or together with a 
connected transaction, the issuer directly or 
indirectly, among other things:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
purchases or acquires an asset 
from a related party for valuable 
consideration; 
sells, transfers or disposes of an 
asset to a related party; 
leases property to or from a 
related party; 
acquires a related party or 
combines with a related party 
through an amalgamation, 
arrangement or otherwise, 
whether alone or with joint actors; 
issues a security to, or subscribes 
for a security of, a related party; 
becomes subject to a liability of a 
related party or provides or 
materially amends the terms of a 
guarantee or collateral security for 
a debt or liability of a related party; 
or 
borrows money from or lends 
money to a related party, or 
releases, cancels, forgives or 
materially amends the terms of an 
outstanding debt or liability owed 
by or to a related party.
Related parties of an entity include, among 
others:  (i) “control persons” of the entity 
(being holders of more than 20 percent of 
the voting securities of that entity in absence 
of evidence to the contrary); (ii) control 
persons of persons listed in (i); (iii) persons 
of which the entity itself is a control person; 
(iv) a person having beneficial ownership, 
direction or control (directly or indirectly) of
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
290
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Removal of directors
Under the Corporations Act and Gryphon’s
291
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
more than 10 percent of the voting securities 
of the entity; (v) a director or senior officer of 
any the entity or any person listed in (i)-(iv), 
and (vi)-(vii); (vi) a person which beneficially 
owns more than 50 percent of any of the 
entities listed in (i)-(iv) and (vii); and, (vii) any 
affiliate of any of the persons listed in (i)-
(viii).   
Pursuant to MI 61-101, parties must obtain 
(1) a formal valuation of assets or securities 
that are the subject of a related party 
transaction, and (2) approval of a majority of 
the minority of holders of the class of 
affected securities, unless a prescribed 
exemption is available, or discretionary relief 
is obtained from the applicable Canadian 
securities regulatory authority. 
The valuation requirement requires that a 
valuation must be prepared by an 
appropriately qualified independent valuator 
no more than 120 days before the earlier of 
the date that a disclosure document for the 
transaction is first sent to securityholders (if 
applicable) and the date that a disclosure 
document is filed with the relevant securities 
regulatory authorities. The valuation must 
contain certain required content and provide 
sufficient disclosure to allow the 
securityholders to understand the principal 
judgments and underlying reasoning of the 
valuator so as to form a reasoned judgment 
of the valuation. 
The minority approval requirement consists 
of the approval of the proposed transaction 
by a majority of the votes cast by holders of 
each class of affected securities at a 
meeting of securityholders of that class 
called to consider the transaction, excluding 
the votes attached to the securities of the 
issuer held or controlled, directly or 
indirectly, by the issuer, any interested party, 
their respective directors or senior officers, 
and any related parties or joint actors of 
such persons.  If minority approval is 
required, it must be obtained from the 
holders of every class of affected securities 
of the issuer, in each case voting separately 
as a class. There are additional specific 
rules in MI 61-101 regarding obtaining 
minority approval, including the 
determination of the excluded votes and the 
disclosure required to be sent to 
securityholders. 
MI 61-101 also requires an issuer to include 
certain detailed disclosure regarding related 
party transactions in a material change 
report that is required to be filed under 
applicable securities laws and in an 
information circular that is being sent to 
securityholders to obtain minority approval in 
respect of a related party transaction. 
The TSX Company Manual also prescribes 
requirements to obtain shareholder approval 
for certain transactions where securities are 
to be issued to insiders of a listed issuer 
where the number of securities issued to 
insiders as a group (either under one or a 
series of transactions in the preceding six 
months) exceeds 10 percent of the number 
of outstanding securities of the listed issuer. 
Under the CBCA, the shareholders of
Rotation of directors
Retirement benefits
Indemnification of directors 
and officeholders
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders 
constitution, Gryphon Shareholders may 
remove a director by passing a resolution to 
do so at a general meeting.  
A notice of intention to move the resolution 
must be given to Gryphon at least two 
months before the meeting is to be held. 
However, if Gryphon calls a meeting after the 
notice of intention is given, the meeting may 
pass the resolution even though the meeting 
is held less than two months after the notice 
of intention is given. 
Under ASX Listing Rules, the directors of 
Gryphon, other than the managing director, 
are to retire by rotation. 
Under Gryphon’s constitution, at every 
annual general meeting, one third of the 
directors or, any director who has held office 
for three years or more (other than the 
managing director), must retire from office.  
Such directors are eligible to be re-elected. 
The directors to retire must be those who 
have been longest in office since their last 
election.  No director, except a managing 
director, can hold office for a period of more 
than three years or until the third annual 
general meeting following his appointment, 
whichever is longer, without submitting 
himself for re-election.
Under the Corporations Act, Gryphon is 
allowed to pay benefits to directors and 
officers on their retirement or termination. 
Such benefits require shareholder approval 
in certain circumstances. 
Under ASX Listing Rules, termination 
benefits to directors (that are or may be 
payable to all officers) must not exceed 5% 
of the equity interests of Gryphon as set out 
in its latest financial statements given to 
ASX. The 5% limit may, however, be 
exceeded with shareholder approval. 
Under the Corporations Act, indemnification 
of Gryphon’s directors against specific 
liabilities is prohibited.  These are liabilities: 
owed to a company or a Related 
Body Corporate; 
for a pecuniary penalty order or a 
compensation order; or 
that is owed to someone other 
than a company or a Related Body 
Corporate and did not arise out of 
conduct in good faith.
•
•
•
Additionally, under the Corporations Act an 
indemnity for legal costs in specific 
circumstances (such as where an officer is 
liable, found guilty or where the grounds for a 
court order have been made out) is 
prohibited.  Payments by Gryphon of 
insurance premiums which cover conduct 
that involves a wilful breach of duty or a 
breach of certain statutory directors duties is 
also prohibited under the Corporations Act.
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
Teranga may, by ordinary resolution at a 
special meeting, remove any director or 
directors from office.
Under the CBCA, directors shall be elected 
for a term not exceeding three years.  The 
TSX requires that shareholders be provided 
with the opportunity to elect directors at each 
annual meeting of shareholders. 
Teranga has adopted a majority voting 
policy for the election of directors.  Pursuant 
to this policy, any nominee for director of 
Teranga who, in an uncontested election, 
receives a greater number of votes withheld 
than number of votes in favour will promptly 
submit his or her resignation to Teranga’s 
Board for consideration following the 
meeting.  
The Teranga Board will consider such 
resignation and may choose to accept or 
reject this resignation.  Teranga will 
announce the decision within 90 days.  
Teranga’s Board should accept such 
resignation absent exceptional 
circumstances.   
There are no restrictions on the quantum of 
retirement benefits that Teranga may pay to 
its directors or officers in its constating 
documents.
•
• 
• 
•
Teranga’s constating documents provide 
that Teranga must indemnify to the fullest 
extent permitted by the CBCA:  
a director or officer; 
a former director or officer; 
an individual who acts or acted at 
Teranga’s behest as a director or 
officer, or in a similar capacity, of 
another entity; and  
his or her heirs and legal personal 
representatives.
The CBCA permits a company to indemnify 
a director or officer of a corporation or 
another individual who acts or acted at the 
corporation’s request as a director or officer, 
or an individual acting in a similar capacity, 
of another entity, against all costs, charges 
and expenses, including an amount paid to 
settle an action or satisfy a judgment, 
reasonably incurred by the individual in 
respect of any civil, criminal, administrative, 
investigative or other proceeding in which 
the individual is involved because of that 
association with the corporation or other
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
292
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Directors’ liability
Under the Corporations Act, there is a 
general prohibition on Gryphon or a Related 
Body Corporate exempting officers from 
liability.
Directors’ duties
Under Australian law, the directors of 
Gryphon have certain fiduciary obligations to 
Gryphon.  These fiduciary obligations 
include: 
•
a duty to act in good faith in the 
best interests of the company; 
a duty to act for a proper purpose; 
a duty not to fetter their discretion; 
a duty to exercise reasonable care 
and diligence; 
a duty to avoid conflicts of interest; 
a duty not to use their position to 
their advantage; and 
a duty not to misappropriate 
company property.
• 
• 
•
• 
•
•
•
•
•
• 
•
•
• 
•
•
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
entity. 
Under the CBCA, a company may not 
indemnify any of the aforementioned 
individuals unless:
•
•
such individual acted honestly and 
in good faith with a view to the 
best interests of the corporation, 
or, as the case may be, to the best 
interests of the other entity for 
which the individual acted as 
director or officer or in a similar 
capacity at the corporation’s 
request; and 
in the case of a criminal or 
administrative action or 
proceeding that is enforced by a 
monetary penalty, the individual 
had reasonable grounds for 
believing that the individual’s 
conduct was lawful.
The CBCA and Teranga’s constating 
documents authorise Teranga to purchase 
and maintain liability insurance for the 
benefit of the individuals described above 
against such liabilities. 
Under the CBCA, a Teranga director is not 
liable for a resolution he or she voted in 
favour of if the director has relied in good 
faith on:
financial statements of the 
company represented to the 
director by an officer of the 
company or in a written report of 
the auditor of the company to fairly 
reflect the financial position of the 
company; or 
a written report of a person whose 
profession lends credibility to a 
statement made by the 
professional person.
Under Canadian law, every director of 
Teranga has certain obligations in exercising 
their powers and discharging their duties, 
including to:
act honestly and in good faith with 
a view to the best interests of 
Teranga (commonly referred to as 
the ‘duty of loyalty’); 
act for a proper purpose; 
act in accordance with the 
applicable laws; 
exercise the care, diligence and 
skill that a reasonably prudent 
person would exercise in 
comparable circumstances 
(commonly referred to as the ‘duty 
of care’); 
avoid conflicts of interest; 
not use their position to their 
advantage; and 
not misappropriate company 
property.
Nomination of directors
Under ASX Listing Rules, Gryphon is 
required to accept nominations for the 
election of its directors up to 35 days (30 
days in the case of a meeting requested by 
Gryphon Shareholders) before the date of a
Teranga has adopted an advance notice by-
law which sets out a prescribed mechanism 
for nominations of directors by shareholders 
in advance of shareholder meetings at which
293
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Casual vacancies
Corporate governance
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders 
general meeting at which the directors are 
elected.  
Under Gryphon’s constitution, the company 
in general meeting or the Gryphon Board is 
authorised to appoint a person to fill a casual 
vacancy, or as an addition to the Gryphon 
Board. 
Under ASX Listing Rules and Gryphon’s 
constitution, any such appointed director may 
hold office only until the next annual general 
meeting of Gryphon. They will then be 
eligible for re-election at that meeting but will 
not be taken into account in determining the 
number of directors who are to retire by 
rotation at that meeting. 
The structures of the Gryphon Board, and 
Gryphon’s corporate policies as a whole, 
must comply with the requirements of ASX 
Listing Rules in relation to corporate 
governance.
Insider trading
Under the Corporations Act, any person who 
possesses price sensitive information 
relating to Gryphon or its securities is 
prohibited (subject to exceptions) from 
buying or selling those securities or procuring 
others do so, or from communicating the 
information to third parties.
Quorum of shareholders
Annual general meeting
Members’ meetings
Under Gryphon’s constitution, the quorum for 
a general meeting of Gryphon Shareholders 
is three Gryphon Shareholders who are 
entitled to vote.
Under the Corporations Act, the annual 
general meeting of Gryphon is required to be 
held at least once every calendar year and 
within five months after the end of each 
financial year (unless an extension is granted 
by ASIC).
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
directors may be elected.
Subject to the CBCA, Teranga’s constating 
documents provide that the directors of 
Teranga may appoint one or more directors, 
however the total number of directors so 
appointed may not exceed one third of the 
number of directors elected at the previous 
annual meeting of shareholders. A director 
so appointed will hold office until a term 
expiring not later than the close of the next 
annual meeting of shareholders.
National Instrument 58-101 of the Canadian 
Securities Administrators requires issuers to 
annually disclose certain corporate 
governance information including in relation 
to independence of directors, board 
mandates, position descriptions, corporate 
governance practices, committee mandates 
and functions, director term limits and 
policies with respect to the representation of 
women on boards as part of prescribed 
disclosure of an issuer’s corporate 
governance practices in its management 
information circular. Audit committee 
composition and practices are subject to 
separate reporting requirements mandating 
publication in the issuer’s management 
information circular. 
Canadian securities laws prohibit certain 
persons (including directors, officers and 
employees) from trading securities of a 
reporting issuer with knowledge of a material 
fact or material change with respect to a 
reporting issuer that has not been generally 
disclosed. 
In addition, National Instrument 55-102 of 
the Canadian Securities Administrators 
establishes a mandatory system of 
electronic reporting of trading activity by 
certain insiders of each reporting issuer. 
Insiders generally have to report within 5 
days following any trade in securities of the 
issuer.
Teranga’s constating documents provide 
that the presence of two persons who are, or 
who represent by proxy, shareholders who, 
in the aggregate, hold at least 20% of the 
shares entitled to be voted at such meeting 
will constitute quorum for the transaction of 
business at the meeting of shareholders. 
Under the CBCA, the annual meeting of 
Teranga Shareholders must be called by the 
directors at least once per calendar year and 
not later than 15 months after holding the 
last preceding annual meeting (but no more 
than six months following the end of its most 
recent financial year). 
The TSX Company Manual mandates that 
each listed issuer must hold its annual 
meeting of shareholders within six months 
from the end of its fiscal year, or at such 
earlier time as is required by applicable law. 
An issuer may seek an exemption to hold a
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
294
Notice of shareholders 
meetings
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Under Gryphon’s constitution and the 
Corporations Act, not less than 28 days’ 
notice of a general meeting must be given to 
Gryphon Shareholders.  
The notice of a meeting must specify the 
date, time and place of the meeting and state 
the general nature of the business to be 
transacted at the meeting.
Calling meetings
Shareholder proposed 
resolutions
Under the Corporations Act, a general 
meeting of Gryphon Shareholders may be 
called by individual directors, or by Gryphon 
Shareholders holding at least 5% of the total 
votes that may be cast at the meeting. 
Additionally, under Gryphon’s constitution, 
the Gryphon Board is given the power to 
convene a general meeting at any time, 
provided that if there are no directors holding 
office, the secretary will convene a general 
meeting for the purpose of electing directors.  
Under the Corporations Act, Gryphon 
Shareholders holding at least 5% of the 
votes that may be cast at a general meeting, 
or at least 100 Gryphon Shareholders who 
are entitled to vote at the meeting may, by 
written notice to the company, propose a 
resolution for consideration at the next
295
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
meeting at a later date. 
Under Teranga’s constating documents and 
the CBCA, notice of a general meeting of 
Teranga’s shareholders must be given to the 
shareholders entitled to vote (and the 
directors and auditors) at least 21 days 
before the date of the meeting. The record 
date for the giving of notice of the meeting 
must not precede the meeting date by more 
than 60 days. 
A notice of a meeting at which special 
business is to be transacted must state the 
nature of that business in sufficient detail to 
permit the shareholder to form a reasoned 
judgement thereon, as well as the text of any 
special resolution to be submitted to the 
meeting. Any business, other than the 
election of directors, reappointment of the 
incumbent auditor, consideration of the 
financial statements and reports of the 
directors or auditor, and business relating to 
the conduct of or voting at the meeting, is 
deemed to be special business. 
National Instrument 51-102 of the Canadian 
Securities Administrators requires that a 
reporting issuer calling a meeting of its 
shareholders provide an information circular 
to its shareholders. The information circular 
must describe any matters to be acted upon 
in sufficient detail to enable reasonable 
security holders to form a reasoned 
judgement concerning the matter. 
National Instrument 54-101 of the Canadian 
Securities Administrators requires a 
reporting issuer that is required to give 
notice of a meeting to fix a date for the 
meeting and a record date for notice for the 
meeting which shall be no fewer than 30 and 
no more than 60 days before the meeting 
date, and, if required or permitted by 
corporate law, fix a record date for voting at 
the meeting. The reporting issuer is 
required, subject to certain exemptions, to 
notify certain intermediaries at least 25 days 
prior to the record date as part of a process 
of ensuring that beneficial shareholders that 
are not directly on the share register, receive 
notice of the meeting and are able to vote 
their shares by proxy. Certain of these 
timelines may be abridged by following 
procedures set forth in National Instrument 
54-101. 
Under the CBCA, the Teranga Board may 
call a special meeting of shareholders at any 
time. 
The CBCA further provides that the holders 
of not less than 5% of the issued shares of a 
company that carry the right to vote at a 
meeting may requisition the directors to call 
a meeting of shareholders for the purposes 
stated in the requisition unless the directors 
are excused from doing so.
The CBCA entitles a registered or beneficial 
holder of not less than 1% (or having a fair 
market value in excess of the prescribed 
amount) of Teranga shares eligible to be 
voted at its annual shareholder meeting to 
submit to Teranga notice of any matter that 
the person proposes to raise at the meeting
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders 
general meeting occurring more than two 
months after the date of their notice.
Passing resolutions at a 
general meeting
Special resolutions
Under Australian law, a resolution at a 
general meeting of Gryphon Shareholders is 
to be passed by a simple majority of votes 
cast by the Gryphon Shareholders present 
and voting at the meeting. 
Under the Corporations Act, a special 
resolution is to be passed by 75% of the 
votes cast by Gryphon Shareholders present 
and voting on the resolution.  
Approval by special resolution of Gryphon 
Shareholders is required for actions such as:
•
•
•  modifying or repealing a 
company’s constitution; 
changing a company’s name or 
type; 
selectively reducing or buying back 
capital (in some circumstances); 
giving financial assistance in 
connection with the acquisition of 
shares in a company; and 
undertaking a voluntary winding up 
of a company.
•
•
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
(a “Proposal”) and discuss at the meeting 
any matter in respect of which the person 
would have been entitled to submit a 
Proposal. If Teranga receives notice of a 
Proposal at least 90 days prior to the 
anniversary of the previous year’s annual 
reference date, and is soliciting proxies, it 
would then be required to set out the 
Proposal in its management proxy circular 
(and, if requested by the person submitting 
the Proposal, include or attach the Proposal 
and a statement in support of the Proposal 
not exceeding 500 words in the aggregate).  
The CBCA provides for exemptions from the 
requirements to include a proposal in a 
company’s management proxy circular in 
certain circumstances, including where:
•
•
•
•
•
it clearly appears that the primary 
purpose of the proposal is to 
enforce a personal claim or 
redress a personal grievance 
against the company or its 
directors, officers or security 
holders; 
it clearly appears that the proposal 
does not relate in a significant way 
to the business or affairs of the 
company; 
substantially the same proposal 
failed to receive a certain amount 
of support at a prior meeting held 
not more than the prescribed 
number of years before the receipt 
of the proposal; 
not more than the prescribed 
period before the receipt of a 
proposal, a person failed to 
present, in person or by proxy, at 
a meeting of shareholders, a 
proposal that at the person’s 
request, had been included; or 
the proposal mechanism is being 
abused to secure publicity.
Under the CBCA, an ordinary resolution at a 
general meeting of Teranga’s shareholders 
is to be passed by a simple majority of votes 
cast by the shareholders entitled to vote on 
the resolution.  
Under the CBCA, a special resolution must 
be passed by a majority of not less than two-
thirds of the votes cast by the shareholders 
entitled to vote on the resolution. 
Approval by special resolution of the 
shareholders is required for actions such as:
• 
• 
•
•
•
•
•
amending a company’s articles; 
changing a company’s name; 
increasing or reducing stated 
capital, if the company’s stated 
capital is stated in its articles; 
undertaking a voluntary liquidation 
and dissolution; 
amalgamating with another arm’s 
length company; 
continuing under the laws of 
another jurisdiction; and 
undertaking the sale, lease or 
exchange of all or substantially all
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
296
Derivative action and 
shareholder class action
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Rights of Teranga Shareholders
of the property of the company 
other than in the ordinary course 
of business.
Relationship between the company and its members 
Under the Australian common law, Gryphon 
Shareholders do not have the right to bring a 
common law action on behalf of Gryphon. 
Under the Corporations Act, a statutory 
derivative action may be instituted by a 
shareholder, former shareholder or person 
entitled to be registered as a shareholder. 
In all cases, leave of the court is required. 
Such leave will be granted if:
Under the CBCA, representative 
shareholder actions or derivative actions are 
available to Teranga Shareholders and other 
‘complainants’ (as defined under the CBCA 
to include among others, shareholders and 
any other person whom the court considers 
to be an appropriate person to bring an 
action).
•
•
•
•
•
it is probable that the company will 
not itself bring the proceedings or 
properly take responsibility for 
them; 
the applicant is acting in good 
faith; 
it is in the best interests of the 
company; 
there is a serious question to be 
tried; and 
either: 
o
at least 14 days before 
making the application, the 
applicant gave written notice 
to the company of the 
intention to apply for leave 
and of the reasons for 
applying; or 
it is otherwise appropriate for 
the court to grant leave.
o
Relief from oppression
Under the Corporations Act, any shareholder 
can bring an action in cases of conduct 
which is either contrary to the interests of 
Gryphon Shareholders as a whole, or 
oppressive to, unfairly prejudicial to, or 
unfairly discriminatory against, any Gryphon 
Shareholders in their capacity as a 
shareholder, or themselves in a capacity 
other than as a shareholder. Former 
Gryphon Shareholders can also bring an 
action if it relates to the circumstances in 
which they ceased to be a shareholder.
297
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
A shareholder may apply to a Canadian 
court for an order under section 241 of the 
CBCA on the grounds that:
•
•
•
any act or omission of the 
corporation or any of its affiliates 
effects a result; 
the business or affairs of the 
corporation or any of its affiliates 
are or have been carried on or 
conducted in a manner; or 
the powers of the directors of the 
corporation or any of its affiliates 
are or have been exercised in a 
manner,
that is oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to or 
that unfairly disregards the interests of any 
security holder, creditor, director or officer, 
the court may make an order to rectify the 
matters complained of. 
On an application under this section, the 
court may, with a view to remedying or 
bringing to an end the matters complained 
of, make any interim or final order it 
considers appropriate. 
The CBCA further provides that if a 
company or any director, officer, employee, 
agent or mandatary, auditor, trustee, 
receiver, receiver-manager, sequestrator or 
liquidator of a company contravenes or is 
about to contravene a provision of the CBCA 
or the regulations or the articles of the 
company, a complainant may, in addition to 
any other rights that that person might have,
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
apply to the court for an order that the 
person who has contravened or is about to 
contravene the provision comply with or 
refrain from contravening the provision. 
On the application of one or more 
shareholders, the court may appoint an 
inspector to conduct an investigation of the 
company, and determine the manner and 
extent of the investigation, if it appears to the 
court that:
•
•
•
•
the business of the corporation or 
any of its affiliates is or has been 
carried on with intent to defraud 
any person; 
the business or affairs of the 
corporation or any of its affiliates 
are or have been carried on or 
conducted, or the powers of the 
directors are or have been 
exercised in a manner that is 
oppressive or unfairly prejudicial 
to or that unfairly disregards the 
interests of a security holder; 
the corporation or any of its 
affiliates was formed for a 
fraudulent or unlawful purpose or 
is to be dissolved for a fraudulent 
or unlawful purpose; or 
persons concerned with the 
formation, business or affairs of 
the corporation or any of its 
affiliates have in connection 
therewith acted fraudulently or 
dishonestly.
Representative shareholder actions or 
derivative actions are also available to other 
‘complainants’, such as a director of a 
company or any other person the court 
considers appropriate. The CBCA allows a 
complainant, with leave of the court, to 
prosecute or defend in the name and on 
behalf of a company, an action, provided 
that:
•
•
•
the complainant has given notice 
to the directors of the corporation 
or its subsidiary of the 
complainant’s intention to apply to 
the court not less than 14 days 
before bringing the application, or 
as otherwise ordered by the court, 
if the directors of the corporation 
or its subsidiary do not bring, 
diligently prosecute or defend or 
discontinue the action; 
the complainant is acting in good 
faith; and 
it appears to be in the interests of 
the corporation or its subsidiary 
that the action be brought, 
prosecuted, defended or 
discontinued.
Whether seeking to bring an action or 
defend an action, certain substantive and 
procedural requirements must first be met.  
In any case, to bring a derivative action it is 
first necessary to obtain leave of the court.  
The granting of leave is not automatic, but 
requires the court to exercise a judicial 
discretion. 
The powers of the court under the CBCA in
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
298
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Statutory rights of action for 
misrepresentations
Under the Corporations Act, any shareholder 
who suffers a loss as a result of misleading 
or deceptive conduct relating to securities 
can bring an action against the person 
engaged in the conduct.  Similarly, any 
shareholder who suffers loss as a result of a 
misleading or deceptive statement contained 
in a disclosure document (i.e. a prospectus) 
can bring an action against the company, 
any director or the underwriter to the offer 
made through the disclosure document.
Inspection of books
Under the Corporations Act, a shareholder 
must obtain a court order to obtain access to 
Gryphon’s books and records.
Financial records and reports
Under the Corporations Act, Gryphon must 
report annually to its members, which report 
must include a financial report, directors 
report (which includes the remuneration 
report) and the auditors report on the 
financial report for each relevant year.  The 
ASX Listing Rules also require the company 
to provide a preliminary financial report to the 
ASX annually.
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
making an order are broad: it may make any 
order it thinks fit, from a simple order 
amending a company’s articles to an order 
liquidating and dissolving the company.   
In addition to the above, shareholders may 
be able to bring claims against a company 
based on the general laws of contract, tort or 
other private laws applicable in Canada. 
In jurisdictions within Canada, a statutory 
right of action is conferred by securities 
legislation on purchasers of securities of a 
company against various persons or 
companies including the issuer of securities, 
the underwriter, directors and officers of the 
issuer, and certain other persons or 
companies responsible for the issue of a 
prospectus in respect of damage suffered by 
reason of a misrepresentation therein.  A 
similar right of action is available in some 
jurisdictions in Canada against certain 
persons or companies in respect of 
misrepresentations contained in other 
disclosure documents such as offering 
memoranda or take-over bid circulars.  
Under the CBCA, shareholders may 
examine certain corporate records of 
Teranga (including the securities register, 
articles, minutes of meetings and resolutions 
of shareholders) at Teranga’s registered 
office or such other place where such 
records are kept during Teranga’s usual 
business hours free of charge, and copies 
may be obtained for a fee. 
Any person wishing to examine the list of 
shareholders must first make a request to 
the company, accompanied by an affidavit 
stating that the list will not be used except 
for certain purposes permitted under the 
CBCA.  
Under applicable Canadian securities law 
Teranga is required to file audited annual 
financial statements and accompanying 
management discussions and analysis 
within 90 days of the most recently 
completed financial year end and interim 
(three month) financial statements and 
accompanying management discussions 
and analysis within 45 days of the end of the 
interim period. All financial statements and 
accompanying management and discussion 
and analysis must be filed on SEDAR, a 
Canadian mandatory document filing and 
retrieval system established by the provincial 
and territorial securities commissions. 
Teranga is also generally required to send a 
paper copy of the audited annual financial 
statements and a copy of the interim 
financial statements and accompanying 
management discussion and analysis to 
each shareholder who requests them from 
Teranga.
Takeovers
Takeovers
Under the Corporations Act, any acquisition 
by a person of a “relevant interest” in a 
“voting share” of Gryphon is restricted where, 
because of a transaction, that person or 
someone else’s percentage “voting power” in 
Gryphon increases above 20% (or, where 
the person’s voting power was already above
In Canada, takeover bids are regulated 
primarily by provincial and territorial 
securities legislation and related rules and, 
to a limited extent, the corporate statutes 
under which the target company is 
incorporated. Unless an exemption from the 
formal takeover bid requirements under
299
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders 
20% and below 90%, increases in any way at 
all). 
There is an exception from these restrictions 
where the shares are acquired under 
takeover offers made under the Corporations 
Act to all shareholders, which must be on the 
same terms for all Gryphon Shareholders 
(subject to minor exceptions) and which must 
comply with the timetable and disclosure 
requirements of the Corporations Act.  
There are also other exceptions from the 
20% limit for acquisitions made through 
permitted gateways such as acquisitions with 
shareholder approval or “creeping” by 
acquiring up to 3% every six months (if 
throughout the six months before the 
acquisition the person has had voting power 
in the company of at least 19%).  
The purpose of these provisions is to attempt 
to ensure that Gryphon Shareholders in the 
target company have a reasonable and equal 
opportunity to share in any premium for 
control and that they are given reasonable 
time and enough information to assess the 
merits of the proposal.
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
securities legislation is available or can be 
obtained, persons or companies making an 
offer to acquire Teranga shares in a 
Canadian jurisdiction where the subject 
shares, together with the offeror’s securities 
(including any securities held by joint 
offerors), constitute in aggregate 20% or 
more of the outstanding shares of the 
company at the time of the offer are required 
to extend the offer to all shareholders in the 
jurisdiction. These provisions require, among 
other things, the production, filing and 
mailing of a takeover bid circular to 
shareholders of the target company.  
Takeover bids must treat all Canadian 
Teranga Shareholders alike and must not 
involve any collateral agreements, with 
certain exceptions for employment 
compensation arrangements. Takeover bids 
must remain open for a minimum of 105 
days from the date of the mailing of the 
circular (which can be reduced to 35 days on 
consent of the target board).  
For the protection of target shareholders, the 
takeover bid rules contain various additional 
requirements, such as restrictions applicable 
to conditional offers and the withdrawal, 
amendment or suspension of offers. 
Securities regulators also retain a general 
‘public interest jurisdiction’ to regulate 
takeovers and may intervene to halt or 
prevent activity that is abusive.  
There are extensive disclosure requirements 
associated with takeover bids, beginning 
with early warning disclosure required 
generally when an acquirer crosses the 10% 
ownership threshold of a class of voting or 
equity securities. Generally, further 
disclosure is required for additional 
purchases or dispositions of 2% or more of 
the outstanding security for which such early 
warning disclosure is required. Purchases 
outside the bid before, during and after the 
bid are also restricted.  
Following a bid, second step transactions 
where the acquirer brings its percentage 
ownership to 100% are governed by the 
CBCA and Multilateral Instrument 61-101. 
No shareholder approval of the acquisition 
would be required if the acquirer obtained 
90% of the outstanding securities owned by 
minority shareholders during the bid, 
provided that certain prescribed conditions 
are met. Otherwise, a special shareholder 
meeting must be called and associated 
regulations complied with for an acquisition, 
including obtaining a two-thirds majority 
approval. The acquirer is generally permitted 
to vote the shares acquired pursuant to the 
bid at such meeting.  Appraisal (or dissent) 
rights are available for objecting 
shareholders who fulfil certain procedural 
requirements. 
Under Canadian law, certain exemptions to 
the formal bid requirements, on specified 
conditions, are allowed. For example, private 
agreements to purchase securities from up 
to five persons are permitted if certain 
conditions are met, including that the 
purchase price does not exceed 115% of the 
market price. Under the normal course 
purchase exception, the offeror (together
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
300
Disclosure of substantial 
holdings
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Under the Corporations Act, a shareholder 
who begins or ceases to have a substantial 
holding in a company listed on ASX or has a 
substantial holding in a company listed on 
ASX, and there is a movement by at least 
1% in their holding, must give a notice to the 
company and ASX. A person has a 
substantial holding if that person and that 
person’s associates have a relevant interest 
in 5% or more of the voting shares in the 
company
Winding up
Winding up
Under Australian law, an insolvent company 
may be wound up by a liquidator appointed 
by either creditors or the court. Directors 
cannot use their powers after a liquidator has 
been appointed. If there are funds left over 
after payment of the costs of the liquidation, 
and payments to other priority creditors, 
including employees, the liquidator will pay 
these to unsecured creditors. The Gryphon 
Shareholders rank behind the creditors. 
Under Australian law, shareholders of a 
solvent company may decide to wind up the 
company if the directors are able to form the 
view that the company will be able to pay its 
debts in full within 12 months after the 
commencement of the winding up. A meeting 
at which a decision is made to wind up a 
solvent company requires at least 75% of 
votes cast by the shareholders present and 
voting. 
Gryphon’s constitution states that if Gryphon 
is wound up, the liquidator may, with the 
sanction of a special resolution, divide 
among the Gryphon Shareholders in kind, 
the whole or any part of the property of 
Gryphon, and may for that purpose set 
whatever value the liquidator considers fair 
on any property to be so divided and 
determine how the division should be carried 
out between the Gryphon Shareholders or 
different classes of Gryphon Shareholders.
301
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
with any joint offerors) may acquire up to 5% 
of a class of securities within a 12-month 
period, provided that certain prescribed 
conditions are met. 
Under applicable Canadian securities laws, 
generally, any person that acquires 
beneficial ownership of, or power to exercise 
control or direction over, 10% of more of the 
voting or equity securities of Teranga is 
required to issue a press release and to file 
an early warning report in accordance with 
National Instrument 62-103, disclosing their 
shareholdings to Teranga and the public. A 
person that files an early warning report for 
Teranga will also be required to file a news 
release and early warning report for every 
additional 2% of voting or equity securities of 
Teranga that such person acquires. Such 
person will also be required to file a news 
release and early warning report for every 
disposition of 2% of voting or equity 
securities of Teranga. 
Furthermore, directors, certain executive 
officers, shareholders holding 10% or more 
of the voting securities of Teranga, and other 
prescribed individuals (“Reporting Insiders”) 
are required to file an Insider report under 
National Instrument 55-104. Insider reports 
set out the percentage of Teranga Shares 
that an Insider owns or exercises control or 
direction over. Insider reports are publicly 
disclosed on the System for Electronic 
Disclosures by Reporting Insiders 
(www.sedi.ca) and must be filed within ten 
days of a person becoming a Reporting 
Insider and within five days of a change of 
that person’s shareholdings in Teranga.
Under the CBCA, a company will cease to 
exist if it is voluntarily dissolved or if it is 
wound up. 
Liquidation and dissolution may be proposed 
by a director or a shareholder entitled to vote 
at an annual meeting (i.e. a voluntary 
liquidation) or by the court on the application 
of a shareholder, creditor or other person 
authorised under the legislation (i.e. an 
involuntary or compulsory liquidation). A 
liquidation may begin as a voluntary, 
shareholder driven proceeding, but then be 
continued under court supervision upon the 
application of any interested person. In all 
cases, the corporation must be neither 
insolvent nor bankrupt to have its existence 
terminated under the CBCA. 
Liquidation of the company may also take 
place completely outside the framework of 
the CBCA. A CBCA corporation may also be 
liquidated under the provisions of the 
Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act (Canada), 
either by way of assignment into bankruptcy 
(voluntary) or on petition by a creditor 
(involuntary) or under the Companies’ 
Creditors Arrangement Act (Canada). 
Finally, a CBCA corporation may be 
liquidated informally under contractual 
arrangement, usually by way of the private 
appointment of a receiver and manager. 
Under the CBCA, voluntary liquidation may 
be initiated or proposed by the directors or
Rights of Gryphon Shareholders
Rights of Teranga Shareholders  
shareholders, but must be sanctioned by a 
special resolution of the shareholders. 
Under the CBCA, dissolution by the court 
may be commenced by application of a 
shareholder if the court is satisfied that there 
has been conduct that is oppressive or 
unfairly prejudicial to the interests of 
shareholders, creditors, directors or officers 
or that it is just and equitable that the 
company should be liquidated and 
dissolved. A liquidator may be appointed by 
the court. 
Teranga’s constating documents do not 
place any restriction on Teranga’s winding 
up procedure.
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
302
Annexure C – Scheme of Arrangement
303
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
SCHEME OF ARRANGEMENT MADE UNDER SECTION 411 OF THE 
CORPORATIONS ACT 2001 (CTH)
DETAILS
Parties
Gryphon Minerals Limited 
31 107 690 657 
288 Churchill Road, Subiaco, Western Australia 6008, 
Australia 
+61 (08) 287 4334 
steve.parsons@gryphonminerals.com.au 
Mr Stephen Parsons, Managing Director
Gryphon 
 
Name 
ABN 
 
Address 
 
 
 
Fax 
Email 
 
Attention 
 
The registered holders of the fully paid ordinary shares in the capital of 
Gryphon as at 5:00pm on the Record Date
1
DEFINED TERMS & INTERPRETATION
1.1
Defined terms
In this Scheme, except where the context otherwise requires:
ASIC means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
ASX means ASX Limited (ABN 98 008 624 691) or the Australian Securities Exchange, as 
appropriate.
ASX Settlement means ASX Settlement Pty Ltd ABN 49 008 504 532.
ASX Settlement Rules means ASX Settlement Operating Rules of ASX Settlement.
Business Day means Monday to Friday inclusive, except New Year's Day, Good Friday, 
Easter Monday, Christmas Day, Boxing Day and any other day that the ASX declares is not a 
business day.
CDN means CHESS Depositary Nominees Pty Ltd (ABN 75 071 346 506) (AFSL 25414), in 
its capacity as depositary of the Teranga CDIs under the ASX Settlement Rules.
CHESS means the clearing house electronic sub-register system of share transfers operated 
by ASX Settlement.
Conditions Precedent means the conditions precedent set out in clause 3.1 of the 
Implementation Agreement.
Corporations Act means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
Court means the Federal Court of Australia.
1
Deed Poll means the deed poll between executed by Teranga in the form of Annexure D to 
the Scheme Booklet, with any amendments approved in writing by Teranga and Gryphon.
Effective means, when used in relation to a Scheme, the order of the Court made under 
section 411(4)(b) in relation to the Scheme taking effect pursuant to section 411(10) of the 
Corporations Act, but in any event at no time before an office copy of the order of the Court 
is lodged with ASIC.
Effective Date means the date on which the Scheme becomes Effective.
Election Form means the form accompanying the Scheme Booklet, pursuant to which 
Scheme Participants (other than Ineligible Shareholders) may elect whether to receive their 
Scheme Consideration in the form of Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs.
Encumbrance means any mortgage, lien, charge, pledge, assignment by way of security, 
security interest, title retention, preferential right or trust arrangement, claim, covenant, profit 
à prendre, easement or any other security arrangement having the same effect.
End Date means 31 December 2016, or such later date as agreed to in writing between 
Teranga and Gryphon.
Excluded Shareholder means Teranga and any related body corporate.
Gryphon Share means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of Gryphon.
Gryphon Shareholder means each person who is registered in the Register as the holder of 
Gryphon Shares.
Implementation Agreement means the Scheme Implementation Agreement dated on or 
about 19 June 2016 between Teranga and Gryphon, as amended or varied from time to time.
Implementation Date means the fifth Business Day after the Record Date, or such other date 
agreed to in writing by Teranga and Gryphon.
Ineligible Shareholder means a Gryphon Shareholder whose address shown in the Register 
is in a jurisdiction outside Australia, New Zealand and Canada in which Teranga determines, 
acting reasonably, does not permit the issue of Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs to that 
Gryphon Shareholder either unconditionally or after compliance with terms that Teranga 
reasonably regards as acceptable and practical.
Performance Right means a performance right issued by Gryphon.
Record Date means the fifth Business Day following the Effective Date, or such other date 
(after the Effective Date) as Gryphon and Teranga may agree in writing.
Register means the share register of Gryphon kept pursuant to the Corporations Act.
Sale Agent means a person appointed by Teranga to sell the Teranga Shares that are 
attributable to Ineligible Shareholders.
Scheme means the scheme of arrangement pursuant to Part 5.1 of the Corporations Act 
proposed between Gryphon and the Gryphon Shareholders as set out in this document, 
together with any alterations or conditions made or required by the Court under section 
411(6) of the Corporations Act and approved in writing by Teranga and Gryphon.
2
Scheme Booklet means the scheme booklet published by Gryphon in connection with this 
Scheme.
Scheme Consideration means means 0.169 Teranga CDIs or, if so elected, 0.169 Teranga 
Shares, for every one Scheme Share.
Scheme Meeting means the meeting of Gryphon Shareholders convened by the Court in 
relation to the Scheme pursuant to section 411(1) of the Corporations Act and includes any 
adjournment of that meeting.
Scheme Participant means each person who is a Gryphon Shareholder as at 5:00pm on the 
Record Date (other than Excluded Shareholders).
Scheme Share means a Gryphon Share held by a Scheme Participant as at 5:00pm the Record 
Date.
Second Court Date means the first day on which an application made to the Court for an 
order pursuant to section 411(4)(b) of the Corporations Act approving the Scheme is heard or, 
if the application is adjourned or subject to appeal for any reason, the day on which the 
adjourned or appealed application is heard.
Teranga means Teranga Gold Corporation, a company incorporated and existing under the 
laws of Canada, having its principal office at 121 King Street West, Suite 2600, Toronto, 
Ontario M5H 3T9, Canada.
Teranga CDIs means CHESS depositary interests, issued by CDN, each representing a 
beneficial interest in one Teranga Share.
Teranga Register means the share register of Teranga kept pursuant to applicable law in 
Canada.
Teranga Share means one fully paid common share in the capital of Teranga.
TSX means the Toronto Stock Exchange.
1.2
Interpretation
In this Scheme:
1.2.1
1.2.2
1.2.3
1.2.4
1.2.5
the singular includes the plural and vice versa, and a gender includes other 
genders;
another grammatical form of a defined word or expression has a corresponding 
meaning;
a reference to a clause, paragraph, or schedule is to a clause or paragraph of, or 
schedule to, this document, and a reference to this agreement includes any 
schedule;
a reference to a document or instrument includes the document or instrument as 
novated, altered, supplemented or replaced from time to time;
a reference to A$, dollar or $ is to Australian currency;
3
1.2.6
1.2.7
1.2.8
1.2.9
1.2.10
1.2.11
1.2.12
1.2.13
1.2.14
1.2.15
a reference to C$ is to the lawful currency of Canada;
a reference to time is to Perth, Western Australia time, unless otherwise noted;
a reference to a party is to a party to this agreement, and a reference to a party to 
a document includes the party's executors, administrators, successors and 
permitted assigns and substitutes;
a reference to a person includes a natural person, partnership, body corporate, 
association, governmental or local authority or agency or other entity;
a reference to a statute, ordinance, code or other law includes regulations and 
other instruments under it and consolidations, amendments, re-enactments or 
replacements of any of them;
a word or expression defined in the Corporations Act and not otherwise defined 
in this agreement has the meaning given to it in the Corporations Act;
the meaning of general words is not limited by specific examples introduced by 
including, for example or similar expressions;
any agreement, representation, warranty or indemnity in favour of two or more 
parties (including where two or more persons are included in the same defined 
term) is for the benefit of them jointly and severally;
a rule of construction does not apply to the disadvantage of a party because the 
party was responsible for the preparation of this document or any part of it; and
if a day on or by which an obligation must be performed or an event must occur is 
not a Business Day, the obligation must be performed or the event must occur on 
or by the next Business Day.
2
2.1
THE SCHEME
Subject to and conditional on:
2.1.1
2.1.2
2.1.3
2.1.4
approval of the Scheme by the Court pursuant to section 411(4)(b) of the 
Corporations Act and if applicable, Gryphon and Teranga having accepted in 
writing any modification or condition made or required by the Court under 
section 411(6) of the Corporations Act;
lodgement with ASIC of an office copy of the order of the Court approving the 
Scheme pursuant to section 411(10) of the Corporations Act;
all of the Conditions Precedent being satisfied or waived (other than those 
Conditions Precedent that cannot be waived) in accordance with the 
Implementation Agreement by the times set out in the Implementation 
Agreement;
as at 8:00 am on the Second Court Date, the Implementation Agreement not 
having been terminated by Gryphon or Teranga; and
4
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.1.5
as at 8:00 am on the Second Court Date, the Deed Poll not having terminated in 
accordance with its terms,
in consideration for the Scheme Consideration for the Scheme Shares in accordance with the 
terms of this Scheme, the Scheme Shares, and all rights and entitlements attaching to the 
Scheme Shares, will be transferred to Teranga with effect from the Implementation Date and 
without the need for any further act by the holders of the Scheme Shares (other than any acts 
performed by Gryphon or its directors or officers as attorney or agent for the Scheme 
Participants) on the terms of this Scheme.
The satisfaction of each condition in sub-paragraph 2.1.1 to 2.1.5 (inclusive) of this Scheme 
(Condition) is a condition precedent to the operation of this Scheme.
Gryphon will provide to the Court on the Second Court Date a certificate signed by Teranga 
and Gryphon (or such other evidence as the Court requests) stating whether or not the 
Conditions (other than the Conditions in sub-paragraphs 2.1.1 and 2.1.2) have been satisfied 
or waived as at 8:00am on the Second Court Date. The certificate referred to in this paragraph 
2.3 will constitute conclusive evidence of whether the Conditions in sub-paragraphs 2.1.3 to 
2.1.5 have been satisfied or waived as at 8:00am on the Second Court Date.
Subject to paragraph 2.5, this Scheme becomes Effective for all purposes on the Effective 
Date.
This Scheme will lapse and be of no further force or effect if the Effective Date has not 
occurred on or before the End Date, unless Teranga and Gryphon otherwise agree in writing.
In consideration of the transfer of the Scheme Shares to Teranga (as detailed in paragraph 
2.9), and subject to the other terms and conditions of this Scheme, on the Implementation 
Date:
2.6.1
2.6.2
each Scheme Participant (who is not an Ineligible Shareholder) will be issued the 
Scheme Consideration in respect of the Gryphon Shares held by them as at 
5:00pm on the Record Date;  and
the Sale Agent will be issued the Scheme Consideration (in the form of Teranga 
Shares) in respect of the Gryphon Shares held by all Ineligible Shareholders as at 
5:00pm on the Record Date.
Notwithstanding any rule of law or equity to the contrary, holders of Scheme Shares will be 
entitled to exercise all voting and other rights attached to the Scheme Shares pending their 
transfer pursuant to paragraph 2.9, subject to the restrictions on dealing in Scheme Shares set 
out in paragraph 4.
If the Scheme becomes Effective, a holder of Scheme Shares (other than an Ineligible 
Shareholder) will be deemed to have agreed to become a member of Teranga and to have 
accepted the Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs issued to that holder under this Scheme subject 
to, and to be bound by, Teranga's constitution.
On the Implementation Date Gryphon must:
2.9.1
procure the delivery of a duly completed transfer in respect of all the Scheme 
Shares to ASX Settlement by a broker nominated in writing by Teranga to effect 
a valid transfer of all the Scheme Shares to Teranga pursuant to section 1074D of 
the Corporations Act or, if such a procedure is not available for any reason,
5
2.10
deliver to Teranga a duly completed and executed instrument or instruments of 
transfer transferring all of the Scheme Shares to Teranga; and
2.9.2
subject to Teranga having executed that instrument of transfer, enter the name of 
Teranga in the Register as the holder of the Scheme Shares.
This Scheme attributes actions to Teranga but does not itself impose an obligation on Teranga 
to perform those actions. Teranga has agreed by executing the Deed Poll to perform (or 
procure the performance of) its obligations as contemplated by this Scheme, including to 
provide the Scheme Consideration to Scheme Participants.
2.11  Gryphon undertakes in favour of each Scheme Participant to enforce the Deed Poll against
Teranga on behalf of and as agent and attorney for the Scheme Participants.
2.12
Each Scheme Participant warrants to Teranga and is deemed to have authorised Gryphon to 
warrant to Teranga as agent and attorney for the Scheme Participant by virtue of this clause 
2.12, that:
2.12.1
2.12.2
all their Scheme Shares (including any rights and entitlements attaching to those 
shares) transferred to Teranga under the Scheme will, as at the date of the 
transfer, be fully paid and free from all Encumbrances; and
they have full power and capacity to sell and to transfer their Scheme Shares 
(including any rights and entitlements attaching to those shares) to Teranga under 
the Scheme.
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
ELECTION PROCEDURE
Subject to the remaining provisions of this paragraph 3, each Scheme Participant will be 
entitled to elect to receive as consideration for the transfer of its Scheme Shares to Teranga, 
under this Scheme, either Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs by completing the Election Form 
and returning it to the address specified in the Election Form so that it is received by 5:00pm 
on the Record Date.  An election (other than a deemed election) under this paragraph 3 must 
be made in accordance with the terms and conditions on the Election Form.
An Ineligible Shareholder may not make an election pursuant to this paragraph 3 and any 
election purportedly made by an Ineligible Shareholder will be invalid.  Ineligible 
Shareholders will be deemed to have elected Teranga Shares and will be dealt with in 
accordance with paragraph 6.
A Scheme Participant (who is not an Ineligible Shareholder) who does not validly elect 
between Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIs will be deemed to have elected to receive Teranga 
CDIs.  Accordingly, a Scheme Participant who wishes to receive Teranga CDIs does not need 
to make an election under this paragraph 3.
Subject to paragraph 3.5, an election made, or deemed to be made by a Scheme Participant 
under this paragraph 3 will be deemed to apply in respect of the Scheme Participant's entire 
registered holding of Gryphon Shares, regardless of whether the Scheme Participant's holding 
of Scheme Shares at the Record Date is greater or less than the Scheme Participant’s holding 
of Gryphon Shares at the time of the election.
6
3.5
3.6
4
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
A Scheme Participant who is noted on the Register as holding one or more parcels of Scheme 
Shares as trustee or nominee for, or otherwise on account of, another person, may make a 
separate election under this paragraph 3 in relation to each of those parcels of Scheme Shares 
(subject to it providing to Gryphon and Teranga any substantiating information they 
reasonably require), and an election made or deemed to be made in respect of any such parcel, 
will not be taken to extend to the other parcels.
Gryphon may, with the agreement of Teranga, settle as it thinks fit any difficulty, matter of 
interpretation or dispute which may arise in connection with determining the validity of any 
election under this paragraph 3, and any such decision will be conclusive and binding on 
Gryphon, Teranga and the relevant Scheme Participant.
DEALINGS IN GRYPHON SHARES
To establish the identity of Scheme Participants, dealings in Gryphon Shares will only be 
recognised if:
4.1.1
4.1.2
in the case of dealings of the type to be effected using CHESS, the transferee is 
registered in the Register as holder of the relevant Gryphon Shares on or before 
5:00pm on the Record Date; and
in all other cases, registrable transmission applications or transfers in registrable 
form in respect of those dealings are received on or before 5:00pm on the Record 
Date at the place where the Register is kept.
Gryphon must register any transmission application or transfer received in accordance with 
paragraph 4.1 by 5:00pm on the Record Date.
If the Scheme becomes Effective:
4.3.1
4.3.2
4.3.3
no dealing in Gryphon Shares, whenever initiated, will be given effect to if it is 
received after 5:00pm on the Record Date;
any purported dealing in Gryphon Shares after 5:00pm on the Record Date will 
be void and of no effect; and
with the exception of Gryphon Shares to be issued in respect of vested 
Performance Rights, in accordance with clause 5.1.20 of the Implementation 
Agreement, no Gryphon Shares or options to subscribe for Gryphon Shares will 
be allotted or issued by Gryphon after the Effective Date.
For the purpose of determining entitlements to the Scheme Consideration, Gryphon will 
maintain the Register in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph 4 until the Scheme 
Consideration has been paid to the Scheme Participants and Teranga has been entered in the 
Register as the holder of all the Scheme Shares.  The Register in this form will solely 
determine entitlements to the Scheme Consideration.
Subject to provision of the Scheme Consideration and registration of the transfer to Teranga 
contemplated in paragraph 2.9, any statements of holding in respect of Gryphon Shares will 
cease to have effect after 5:00pm on the Record Date as documents of title in respect of those 
shares.  After 5:00pm on the Record Date, each entry current on the Register as at 5:00pm on
7
4.6
4.7
4.8
5
5.1
5.2
5.3
the Record Date will cease to have effect except as evidence of entitlement to the Scheme 
Consideration.
As soon as practicable after the Record Date, and in any event within one Business Day of the 
Record Date, Gryphon will ensure that details of the names, registered addresses and holdings 
of Gryphon Shares for each Scheme Participant, as shown in the Register at 5:00pm on the 
Record Date, are available to Teranga in such form as Teranga reasonably requires.
Gryphon will apply to ASX to suspend trading on ASX in Gryphon Shares with effect from 
the close of trading on ASX on the Effective Date.
After the Scheme has been fully implemented, Gryphon will apply:
4.8.1
4.8.2
for termination of the official quotation of Gryphon Shares on ASX; and
to have itself removed from the official list of the ASX.
ISSUE OF TERANGA SHARES AND TERANGA CDIS
Not later than 1 Business Day after the Record Date, Gryphon will give to Teranga a notice 
specifying the persons to whom Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs are to be issued pursuant to 
paragraph 2.6 and the numbers of Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs to which they are entitled 
respectively. Where the calculation of the number of Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs to be 
issued to a particular Scheme Participant would result in the issue of a fraction of a Teranga 
Share or Teranga CDI, the fractional entitlement will be rounded down to the nearest whole 
number of Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs.
The obligation of Teranga to issue the Scheme Consideration in the form of Teranga Shares 
under this Scheme will be satisfied by Teranga procuring that:
5.2.1
5.2.2
the name and address of each Scheme Participant is entered into the Teranga 
Register on the Implementation Date in respect of the Teranga Shares to which it 
is entitled; and
a share certificate is sent to the registered address of each Scheme Participant, 
representing the number of Teranga Shares issued to the Scheme Participant.
The obligation of Teranga to issue the Scheme Consideration in the form of Teranga CDIs 
under this Scheme will be satisfied by Teranga:
5.3.1
5.3.2
5.3.3
issuing to CDN to be held on trust that number of Teranga Shares that will enable 
CDN to issue Teranga CDIs envisaged by paragraph 5.3.3 on the Implementation 
Date;
procuring that the name and address of CDN is entered into the Teranga Register 
in respect of those Teranga Shares on the Implementation Date and that a share 
certificate in the name of CDN representing those Teranga Shares is sent to CDN;
procuring that, on the Implementation Date, CDN issues to each such Scheme 
Participant the number of Teranga CDIs to which it is entitled;
8
6
6.1
5.3.4
5.3.5
5.3.6
procuring that, on the Implementation Date, the name of each such Scheme 
Participant is entered into the records maintained by CDN as the holder of the 
Teranga CDIs issued to that Scheme Participant on the Implementation Date;
in the case of such Scheme Participant who held Scheme Shares on the CHESS 
subregister, procuring that the Teranga CDIs are held on the CHESS subregister 
on the Implementation Date and sending or procuring the sending of an allotment 
advice that sets out the number of Teranga CDIs issued and procuring that ASX 
Settlement will provide at the end of the month of allotment a Teranga CDI 
holding statement confirming the number of Teranga CDIs held on the CHESS 
subregister by that Scheme Participant; and
in the case of each such Scheme Participant who held Scheme Shares on the 
issuer sponsored subregister, procuring that the Teranga CDIs are held on the 
issuer sponsored subregister on the Implementation Date and sending or 
procuring the sending of a Teranga CDI holding statement to each such Scheme 
Participant which sets out the number of Teranga CDIs held on the issuer 
sponsored subregister by that Scheme Participant.
INELIGIBLE SHAREHOLDERS
The Teranga Shares that would, but for this paragraph, have been issued to an Ineligible 
Shareholder must be issued by Teranga to the Sale Agent and Teranga must procure that:
6.1.1
6.1.2
the name and registered address of the Sale Agent is entered into the Teranga 
Register on the Implementation Date in respect of the Teranga Shares required to 
be issued to in under paragraph 2.6.2; and
a share certificate is sent to the Sale Agent representing the number of Teranga 
Shares so issued to it.
6.2
Teranga must procure that the Sale Agent:
6.2.1
6.2.2
6.2.3
as soon as reasonably practicable and, in any event, not more than 20 Business 
Days after the Implementation Date, sells those Teranga Shares for the benefit of 
the Ineligible Shareholders;
promptly after receiving the proceeds in respect of the sale of all of the Teranga 
Shares referred to in sub-paragraph 6.2.1, accounts to the Ineligible Shareholders 
for the net proceeds of sale (on an averaged basis so that all Ineligible 
Shareholders receive the same price per Teranga Share, subject to rounding to the 
nearest whole cent), and any income referable to those Teranga Shares, after 
deduction of any applicable costs or fees, brokerage, taxes and charges, at the 
Ineligible Shareholders’ risk in full satisfaction of the Ineligible Shareholders’ 
rights under this Scheme; and
promptly after receiving the proceeds in respect of the sale of all of the Teranga 
Shares referred to in sub-paragraph 6.2.1, remits the net proceeds of sale to the 
Ineligible Shareholders  by dispatching, or procuring the dispatch of, a cheque for 
the relevant amount in Canadian currency drawn in the name of the Ineligible
9
7
7.1
7.2
Shareholder (or in the case of joint holders, in accordance with paragraph 8.5) by 
ordinary pre-paid post to the address of that Ineligible Shareholder appearing in 
the Register at the Record Date.
WHEN SCHEME BECOMES BINDING
This Scheme will become binding on Gryphon and each Scheme Participant only if the Court 
makes an order under section 411(4)(b) of the Corporations Act approving the Scheme and 
that order becomes effective in accordance with section 411(10).  Gryphon must lodge an 
office copy of that order with ASIC not later than 5:00pm on the Business Day after the order 
has been made.
If this Scheme becomes binding as provided by paragraph 7.1, the rights of any holder at the 
Record Date of a Gryphon Share are the same as the rights that a Gryphon Shareholder who 
held that Gryphon Share immediately prior to the Effective Date would have had if he had 
remained the holder of the Gryphon Share until the Record Date.
7.3  Where this Scheme becomes binding as provided by paragraph 7.1, a holder of Gryphon
Shares (and any person claiming through that holder) may only assign, transfer or otherwise 
deal with those Gryphon Shares on the basis that the rights so assigned, transferred or dealt 
with are limited in the manner described in paragraph 7.1.
8
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
GENERAL
Gryphon may by its counsel or solicitors consent on behalf of all persons concerned to any 
modification of or addition to this Scheme or to any condition, which the Court may think fit 
to approve or impose and to which Teranga has consented (such consent not to be 
unreasonably withheld).
The accidental omission to give notice of the Scheme Meeting to any holder of Gryphon 
Shares or the non-receipt of such a notice by any holder of Gryphon Shares will not, unless so 
ordered by the Court, invalidate the Scheme Meeting or the proceedings at the Scheme 
Meeting.
For the purpose of this Scheme, the expression "send" or "sent" means:
8.3.1
8.3.2
8.3.3
for the purpose of sub-paragraphs 5.2.2, 5.3.5 and 5.3.6, sending by ordinary pre-
paid post to a Scheme Participant at the address of that Scheme Participant 
appearing in the Register at the Record Date;
for the purpose of sub-paragraph 6.1.2, sending by ordinary pre-paid post to the 
Sale Agent at its address; or
delivery to the relevant address by any other means at no cost to the recipient.
If a notice, transfer, transmission application, direction or other communication referred to in 
this Scheme is sent by post to Gryphon, it will not be taken to be received in the ordinary 
course of post or on a date and time other than the date and time (if any) on which it is 
actually received at Gryphon’s registered office or at the office of the registrar of Gryphon 
Shares.
10
8.5
8.6
In the case of Scheme Shares held in joint names:
8.5.1
8.5.2
8.5.3
the Teranga Shares or Teranga CDIs to be issued under this Scheme must be 
issued to and registered in the names of the joint holders;
any cheque required to be sent under this Scheme will be made payable to the 
joint holders and sent to the holder whose name first appears in the Register as at 
the Record Date; and
any other document required to be sent under this Scheme, will be forwarded to 
the holder whose name first appears in the Register as at the Record Date.
Each holder of Gryphon Shares (other than an Excluded Shareholder) will be deemed 
(without the need for any further act) to have irrevocably appointed Gryphon and each of its 
officers, jointly and severally, as the holder's attorney for the purpose of executing any 
document necessary to give effect to this Scheme, including executing a share transfer form 
or master share transfer form for the Gryphon Shares.
8.7
The Scheme Participants:
8.7.1
8.7.2
agree to the transfer of their Gryphon Shares to Teranga in accordance with the 
terms of this Scheme and consent to Gryphon doing all things necessary for or 
incidental to the implementation of this Scheme; and
acknowledges that this Scheme binds Gryphon and all Scheme Participants 
(including those who do not attend the Scheme Meeting or do not vote at that 
meeting or vote against the Scheme at that Meeting).
Gryphon must execute all deeds and other documents and do all acts and things as may be 
necessary or expedient on its part to implement this Scheme in accordance with its terms.
Neither Gryphon nor any of its officers will be liable for anything done or for anything 
omitted to be done in performance of this Scheme in good faith.
To the extent of any inconsistency, this Scheme overrides Gryphon's constitution and binds 
Gryphon and the holders of Gryphon Shares.
The proper law of this Scheme is the law of Western Australia and each party irrevocably and 
unconditionally submits to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of Western Australia.
8.8
8.9
8.10
8.11
11
Annexure D – Deed Poll
315
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
DEED POLL
Dnte Nan s\ \3 2016
BY Nun: Temnga Gold Corporation (TGI'IIgI)
Addrus 121 King Street West, Suite 2600, Toronta, Ontario. MSH
3T9

FIX +l 416 S94 0088
Email dsavarie@lerangagold.corn
Attenticm David Savarie

m nvoun or Each registered holder of fully paid ardinary shares in Gryphon Minerals
Limited ACN l07 690 657 ot'228 Churchill Avenue. Subileo, Western
Auslmlin, 6008 (Gryphnl) as at 5:00pm an the Record Date

INTRODUCTION

A Tuning: and Gryphon are parties to a scheme implementation agreunent dated l9 June ml 6
in respect to the Scheme and associated matters (Implementation Agreement)

B In accordance with clause 5.3.l2 of the Implementation: Agreement, Tnmnga is entering into
this deed pull tn cavenant in favour ofthe Scheme Participants that it will observe and
perfonn its obligations under the Implementatinn Agreement and the Scheme including
providing the Scheme Consideration.

AGREED TERMS

l DEFINED TERMS AND INTERPRETATION

l.l Deﬁned terms
In this deed poll:

Businesl Day for the purpase of receiving a notice under clause 6 means I day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, bank holiday or public holiday in Toronto, Ontm'io.
Scheme means the scheme ofan'angement pursuant to Pnrt 5.1 nf the Corps-inﬁrm: Act
pmposed between Gryphon and Gryphnn Slurcholders, substantially in the form of Annexure
A tn this deed poll, or as otherwise agreed by Gryphon and Temnga.
All other capitalised words and phrases have the same meaning as given to them in the
Scheme.
‘ 333


[.1 Interpretation

In this deed pull, headings and holdings are for convenienoe only and do not affect its

interpretation and, unless the context requires otherwise:

L2.l words importing the singular include the plural and vie: verse;

1.2.2 a reference to any document (including the Scheme) is to that document as
varied, novated, ratiﬁed or replaced; and

l.2.3 a reference to a clause, party, amexure or schedule is a reference to a clause of,
and a party, annexnre and schedule to, this deed poll and a reference to this deed
poll includes any annexure and schedule.

l.3 Nature of deed poll

Teranga acknowledges that:

l.3.l this deed poll may be relied on and enforced by any Scheme Participant in
accordance with its terms, even though the Scheme Participant is not party to it;
and

L32 under the Scheme, each Scheme Participant irrevocably appoints Gryphnn and
each of its directors and ofﬁcers (jointly and severally) as its agent and attorney
to enforce this deed poll against Teranga on behalf of that Scheme Participant.

2 CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
2.1 Conditions precedent to ohllgations of the Scheme
The obligations of Teranga under this deed poll are subject to the Scheme becoming
Eﬁ'ective.
2.1 Termination
The obligations of Teranga under this deed poll to the Scheme Participants will automatically
terminate and the terms of this deed poll will he of no force or effect if:
22.1 the Implementation Agreement is terminated in accordance with its terms; or
2.2.2 the Scheme is not Eﬁ‘ective by the End Date,
unless Teranga and Gryphan otherwise agree in writing
23 Conseqlenus of terminatlon
If this deed poll is terminated under clause 2.2, then, in addition and without prejudice to any
other rights, powers or remedies available to Scheme Participants:
2.3.] Teranga is released from its obligations to further perform this deed pull, except
obligatioiu under chime 7.6 and any other obligations which by their nature
survive termination; and


2.3.2 each Scheme Participant retains the rights, powers and remedies they have
against Teranga in respect of any breach of this deed poll which occurs before it
is Ierminated.

3 SCHEME OBLIGATIONS
3.] Undertaking to pay Scheme Conridmtlnl

Subject to clause 2, Terangn:

3.1.1 offers to acquire all the Gryphon Shares held by the Scheme Participants;

3.1.2 in consideration of the acceptance of that offer and the transfer ufeneh Gryphon
Share to Teranga, undertakes in frvonr of each Scheme Participant to issue and
provide to the Scheme Participant the Scheme Consideration for each Gryphon
Share held by each Scheme Participant; and

3. l .3 agrees to undertake all other actions attributed to it under the Scheme and
lmplemenmtion Agreement and do all acts and things necessary or desirable on
its part to give full effect to the Scheme,

all in accordance with the terms ofthe Scheme and the Implnnevttation Agreement.

4 WARRANTIES

Teranga represents and warrants in ﬁvour ofeaeh Scheme Participant that:

4.1 .I it is a corporation validiy existing under the laws ofits place of registration;

4.1.2 it has the corporate power to enter into and perform its obligations under this
deed poll and to carry out the nonunion: contemplated by this deed poll;

4.l .3 it has taken all necessary corporate action to authorise its entry into this deed poll
and has taken or wall take all necessary corporate action to authorise the
performance of this deed poll and to carry out the transactions contemplated by
this deed poll;

4.1.4 the Teranga Shares and Teranga CDIa which are issued to Scheme Participants, in
accordance with the Scheme, will:

AHA! rank equally with all existing Teranga Shares and Teranga CDls (as
applicable); and

4.] .41 be issued fully paid and free from any mortgage, charge, lien,
encumbrance or other security interest;

4.1.5 this deed poll is valid and binding on it and enforceable against it in aneurdame
with its terms; end

4. l .6 this deed poll does not conﬂict with, or result in the breach of or deﬁaull under,
any provision of the constitution ofTemngn or any material term or provision of

3 at


any agreement, or any writ, order or injunction, judgment, law, rule or regulation
to which Temnga is a party, is subject to, or is bound by.
5 CONTINUING OBLIGATIONS

This deed poll is irrevocable and, subject to clause 2, remains in full force and effect until:

5.] .l Teranga has ﬁrlly performed its obligations under this deed poll; or

5. l .2 the earlier termination of this deed poll under clause 2.

6 NOTICES
6.] Notices

Any notice or other communication to Teranga in respect of this deed poll musl be in legible

writing and in English and:

6.1.! ms! be uddmssedns shown below:

Teranga

Attention: Mr David Sovarie, VP General Counsel

Address: 121 King Street West, Suite 2600, Toronto, Ontario MSH 3T9.
Canada

Email: dsavarie@terangagold.com,

with a copy to: marewilshaw@dlapiper.com;

6.l 2 must be signed by the person making the communication or by a person duly
authorised Ivy that person;

6.1.3 must be delivered or posted by prepaid post to the address of Teranga in
mordurce with clause 6.1 .l or sent by email to the email address speciﬁed
above: and

6.1.4 will be regarded as received lry the addressee:
6.1.4.1 if by delivery, on delivery at the address ot'Teranga as provided in

clause 6.] ‘1, unless that delivery is not made on a Business Day or
aﬂer 5 :00 pm (in Toronto, Ontario) on a Business Day, when that
communication will be regarded as received at 9:00 am an Toronto,
Ontario) on the next Business Day;
6. l .41 ifsenl by prepaid posr, seven Business Days after posting; and
6.1.43 if sent by email, on the earlier of the sender receiving on automated
messlge conﬁrming delivery or. provided no automated message is
received stating that the email has not been delivered, three hours
« \ki‘s


aﬁer the time the email was sent by the sender, such time to be
determined by reference to the device ﬁ'orrr which the email was sent,
unless that local time is not a Business Day or is aﬁer 5.00 pm (in
Toronto, Ontario) on a Business Day when that communication will
be regarded as received at 9:00 am (in Toronto, Ontario) on the next
Business Day,
7 GENERAL
7.] Governing low llld jurisdiction
This deed lei is governed by the law of Watem Australia and each party irrevocably and
unconditionally submits to the non—exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of Western Australia.
7.2 Waiver
A party does not waive a right, power or remedy if it fails to exercise or delays in exercising
the right, power or remedy. A single or partial exemiae by a party ofa right, power or remedy
does not prevent another or further exercise of that or another right. power or remedy. A
waiver of a right, power or remedy must be in writing and sigred by the party giving the
waiver,
7.3 Alter-lions
This deed poll may not be altered unless:
7,3.l if before the First Court Date, the variation is agreed to by Gryphon; or
7.32 if on or alter the First Court Date, the variation is agreed to by Gryphon and the
Court indicates that the variation would not of itself preclude approval of the
Scheme
in which event Tom-go will enter into a further deed poll in favour of the Scheme Participants
giving effect to the variation
7.4 Cumulative rlglru
The riylts, powers and remedies of’l'eranga and the Scheme Participants under this deed poll
are cumulative and do not exclude any other rights, powers or remedies provided by law
independently of this deed poll.
75 Assignment
The rights created by this deed poll are pusonul to Teranga and each Scheme Participant and
may only be assigned with the prior written consent ofTelanga and Gryphon.
7.6 Stamp duty Ind costs
Terarrga must:
7r6rl pay any surrnp duties and any related ﬁnes and penalties in respect of this deed
poll, the perfomranoe of this deed poll and each transaction effected lry or made
under or pursuant to this deed poll;
5 N2:


16.2 pay other cosvs incurred in connection with ill: transfer ofGryphon Shares to
Temnga in accordance with thc terms at“ (he Scheme; and
7.6.3 indemnify on demand each Scheme Pnrlicipant against any liability arising from
failure to comply with clauses 7.6.1 or 7.6.1
7.1 Further assurances
Tmnga must promptly do all things necessary or axpediem lo be done by it in connection
with the malters mferred to in this dud poll Ind to implement die Scheme.
Exacuud u I Deed
Execuicd as I deed by Ternngl Gold
Carper-[inn in acmrdance with its conslimml
documents Ind the laws nf its place of
incorpmaﬁnn
Signature ofdircclor/nﬁicer
.kalx  .5ch23». , 
Name of director. ofﬁcer (print)
6 


Annexure A
Scheme
[ATTACHED]
7


Annexure E – Notice of meeting
Gryphon Minerals Limited
(ACN 107 690 657)
(“Company”)
Notice is hereby given that by an order of the Federal Court of Australia made on 16 August 2016 pursuant to 
section 411(1) of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) (“Corporations Act”) a meeting of the holders of ordinary shares 
will be held at 38 Station Street, Subiaco WA 6008 on 23 September 2016 at 10:00am. 
Business of the Meeting
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass the following resolution in accordance with section 411(4)(a)(ii) of the 
Corporations Act:
“That, in accordance with the provisions of section 411 of the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth):
(a)  the arrangement proposed between Gryphon and the holders of its ordinary shares, as contained in
and more particularly described in the Scheme Booklet accompanying the notice convening this 
meeting, is agreed to; and
(b)  the directors of Gryphon are authorised to agree to such alterations or conditions as are thought fit 
by the Court and, subject to approval of the scheme by the Court, the board of directors of Gryphon 
is authorised to implement the Scheme with any such modifications or conditions”
By order of the Court
Carl Travaglini 
Company Secretary
Date:  17 August 2016
323
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Explanatory Notes:
These notes should be read in conjunction with this Notice of Scheme Meeting. 
Terminology
Capitalised terms which are defined in section 11 of the Scheme Booklet which accompanies this Notice of 
Scheme Meeting have the same meaning when used in this notice (including these notes) unless the context 
requires otherwise. 
Chairperson
The Court has directed that Mr Mel Ashton act as Chairperson of the Scheme Meeting or, failing them, Mr Didier 
Murcia (unless the members at the meeting elect some other person to act as Chairperson of the meeting) and 
has directed the Chairperson to report the result of the meeting to the Court. 
Majority required
In accordance with section 411(4)(a)(ii) of the Corporations Act, the resolution contained in this Notice of Scheme 
Meeting must be passed by:
(a)
a majority in number of those Gryphon Shareholders present and voting at the Scheme Meeting (either 
in person, by proxy or (in the case of Gryphon Shareholders that are incorporated), by a corporate 
representative); and
(b)
at least 75% of the votes cast on the resolution contained in this Notice of Scheme Meeting.
The vote will be conducted by poll. 
Voting exclusion statement
The Company will disregard any votes cast on a resolution by Teranga or any associate of Teranga.  However, 
the Company need not disregard a vote if it is cast by a person as proxy for a person who is entitled to vote, in 
accordance with the directions on the proxy form. 
Entitlement to vote
The Court has ordered that, for the purposes of the Scheme Meeting, Gryphon Shares will be taken to be held by 
the persons who are registered as Gryphon Shareholders at 10:00am on 21 September 2016.  Accordingly, 
registrable transmission applications or transfers registered after this time will be disregarded in determining 
entitlements to vote at the Scheme Meeting.  
Voting in person
To vote in person at the Scheme Meeting, you must attend the Scheme Meeting to be held at 38 Station Street, 
Subiaco WA 6008 on 23 September 2016 at 10:00am.
You will be admitted to the Scheme Meeting and given a voting card upon disclosure at the point of entry of your 
name and address.
Voting by proxy
Proxy appointment
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
A member entitled to attend and vote may appoint a proxy.
A member entitled to cast two or more votes may appoint not more than two proxies.
A proxy can be an individual or a body corporate and need not be a member.
If the member appoints two proxies and the appointment does not specify the proportion or number of 
the member’s votes, each proxy may exercise half of the votes.
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
324
(e)
At least 48 hours before the meeting, the Company must receive:
•
•
the proxy’s appointment; and
any authority under which the appointment was signed or a certified copy of the authority.
(f)
The proxy appointment and any authority appointing an attorney must be:
•
•
•
sent by post or fax to the address or fax number set out below:  
Mail: 
Gryphon Minerals Limited 
C/-Link Market Services Limited 
Locked Bag A14 
Sydney South NSW 1235 
Australia 
 
Fax: 
+61 (02) 9287 0309 
 
hand delivered to:
Gryphon Minerals Limited 
C/-Link Market Services Limited 
1A Homebush Bay Drive 
Rhodes NSW 2138 or  
 
Gryphon Minerals Limited 
C/-Link Market Services Limited 
Level 12, 680 George Street 
Sydney NSW 2000  
 
or
lodged on-line at www.linkmarketservices.com.au by logging in to the Link website using the 
holding details as shown on the proxy form, selecting ‘Voting’ and following the prompts to 
lodge your vote.
Jointly held securities
If the Gryphon Shares are jointly held, only one of the joint Gryphon Shareholders is entitled to vote.  If more than 
one joint Gryphon Shareholder votes, only the vote of the Gryphon Shareholder whose name appears first in the 
Register will be counted. 
Voting by attorney
A Gryphon Shareholder entitled to attend and vote at the Scheme Meeting may appoint an attorney to vote at the 
Scheme Meeting.
Persons who are attending as an attorney should bring the original or a certified copy of the power of attorney to 
the Scheme Meeting, unless Gryphon has already noted it.
Voting by corporate representative
To vote at the Scheme Meeting a corporation who is a Gryphon Shareholder, or who has been appointed as a 
proxy by a Gryphon Shareholder, may appoint a person to act as its representative.
Persons who are attending as a corporate representative for a corporation must bring evidence of their 
appointment.  The appointment must comply with section 250D of the Corporations Act.  An authorised corporate 
representative will be admitted to the Scheme Meeting and given a voting card upon providing, at the point of 
entry to the Scheme Meeting, written evidence of their appointment including any authority under which it is 
signed, their name and address and the identity of their appointer.
325
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
Court approval
If the resolution contained in this Notice of Scheme Meeting is approved at the Scheme Meeting by the Requisite 
Majority, the implementation of the Scheme (with or without modification) will be subject to, among other things, 
the subsequent approval of the Court.
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals
326
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
Gryphon Minerals Limited
Gryphon Share Registry 
 
 
 
 
Australian Legal Adviser
Canadian Legal Adviser
Financial Adviser
288 Churchill Road 
Subiaco WA 6008 
Australia
Link Market Services Limited  
Locked Bag A14 
Sydney South NSW 1235 
Australia
King & Wood Mallesons 
Level 30, QVI Building 
250 St Georges Terrace 
Perth WA 6000 
Australia
Blake, Cassels & Graydon LLP 
199 Bay Street, Suite 4000,  
Toronto ON M5L 1A9 
Canada
Maxit Capital 
Brookfield Place  
181 Bay Street, Suite 830 
Toronto, ON M5J 2TS 
Canada
327
Scheme Booklet  | Gryphon Minerals