
EX-99.1 3 ex99-1.htm PRESS RELEASE DATED JULY 2, 2015 ex99-1.htm
Exhibit 99.1
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
LUCAS ENERGY ANNOUNCES 1-for-25 REVERSE STOCK SPLIT
HOUSTON,  TEXAS  –July  2,  2015  –  Lucas  Energy,  Inc.  (NYSE  MKT:  LEI)  (“Lucas”  or  the
“Company”), an independent oil and gas company with its operations in Texas, today announced
that,  pursuant  to  the  authorization  provided  by  the  Company’s  stockholders  at  the  Company’s
March  25,  2015  annual  meeting,  and  in  order  to  meet  the  continued  listing  standards  of  the
NYSE MKT, the Board of Directors has approved the filing of an amendment to the Company’s
Articles of Incorporation to effect a 1-for-25 reverse stock split of all outstanding common stock
shares of the Company.  We anticipate that the 1-for-25 reverse stock split will be effective as of
close of business on July 14, 2015 and the Company's common stock will begin trading on a
split-adjusted basis on July 15, 2015.
 
The effect of the reverse stock split will be to combine each 25 shares of outstanding common
stock into one new share, with no change in authorized shares or par value per share, and to
reduce the number of common stock shares outstanding from approximately 35.1 million shares
to approximately 1.4 million shares (prior to rounding).  Proportional adjustments will be made to
the  conversion  and  exercise  prices  of  the  Company's  outstanding  convertible  preferred  stock,
warrants  and  stock  options,  and  to  the  number  of  shares  issued  and  issuable  under  the
Company's  stock  incentive  plans.    The  reverse  stock  split  will  not  affect  any  shareholder's
ownership  percentage  of  the  Company’s  common  stock,  except  to  the  limited  extent  that  the
reverse stock split would result in any shareholder owning a fractional share. Fractional shares of
common stock will be rounded up to the nearest whole share.
 
The  Company's  trading  symbol  of  "LEI"  will  not  change  as  a  result  of  the  reverse  stock  split,
although  it  is  expected  that  the  letter  "D"  will  be  appended  to  the  Company's  ticker  for
approximately  20  trading  days  following  the  effective  date  to  indicate  the  completion  of  the
reverse  stock  split.    In  addition,  the  common  stock  will  trade  under  a  new  CUSIP  number,
549333300.
 
Shareholders who hold their shares in electronic form at a brokerage firm need not take action as
the shares will automatically be adjusted to reflect the reverse stock split.  Beneficial holders may
contact  their  bank,  broker  or  nominee  for  more  information.    Shareholders  holding  physical
certificates may (but are not required to), send their certificates to the Company’s transfer agent at
the  address  given  below  for  reissuance  in  post-split  form.    The  Company’s  transfer  agent,
ClearTrust, LLC, will act as the exchange agent for this reverse split and will issue a new share
certificate  reflecting  the  terms  of  the  reverse  stock  split  to  each  stockholder  who  submits  a
physical  stock  certificate  with  instructions  for  reissuance.    Regardless  of  whether  physical
certificates are submitted for reissuance, certificates evidencing pre-split holdings will only entitle
stockholders to their applicable post-split ownership of common stock.
The Company’s Transfer Agent is:
ClearTrust, LLC
16540 Pointe Village Dr., Suite 210
Lutz, Florida 33558
Phone (813) 235-4490
www.cleartrustonline.com
About Lucas Energy, Inc.
Lucas Energy (NYSE MKT: LEI) is engaged in the development of crude oil and natural gas in
the Austin Chalk and Eagle Ford formations in South Texas. Based in Houston, Lucas Energy's
management team is committed to building a platform for growth and the development of its five
million  barrels  of  proved  Eagle  Ford  and  other  oil  reserves  while  continuing  its  focus  on
operating efficiencies and cost control.
For more information, please visit the Lucas Energy web site at www.lucasenergy.com.
Safe Harbor Statement and Disclaimer
This news release includes “forward looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of
the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as  amended,  and  Section  21E  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of
1934, as amended. Forward looking statements give our current expectations, opinion, belief or
forecasts of future events and performance. A statement identified by the use of forward looking
words including “may,” “expects,” “projects,” “anticipates,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimate,” “should,”
and certain of the other foregoing statements may be deemed forward-looking statements. These
statements  include  statements  regarding  our  planned  fund  raising  and  drilling  activities,  the
planned  status  and  timing  of  production,  the  availability  of  funding,  and  related  disclosures.
Although Lucas believes that the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are
reasonable,  these  statements  involve  risks  and  uncertainties  that  may  cause  actual  future
activities and results to be materially different from those suggested or described in this news
release.  These  include  risks  inherent  in  natural  gas  and  oil  drilling  and  production  activities,
including risks of fire, explosion, blowouts, pipe failure, casing collapse, unusual or unexpected
formation  pressures,  environmental  hazards,  and  other  operating  and  production  risks,  which
may temporarily or permanently reduce production or cause initial production or test results to not
be  indicative  of  future  well  performance  or  delay  the  timing  of  sales  or  completion  of  drilling
operations; delays in receipt of drilling permits; risks with respect to natural gas and oil prices, a
material  decline  which  could  cause  Lucas  to  delay  or  suspend  planned  drilling  operations  or
reduce production levels; risks relating to the availability of capital to fund drilling operations that
can be adversely affected by adverse drilling results, production declines and declines in natural
gas and oil prices; risks relating to unexpected adverse developments in the status of properties;
risks relating to the absence or delay in receipt of government approvals or fourth party consents;
and other risks described in Lucas’s Annual Report on Form 10-Q, Form 10-K and other filings
with the SEC, available at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Investors are cautioned that any
forward-looking  statements  are  not  guarantees  of  future  performance  and  actual  results  or
developments may differ materially from those projected. The forward-looking statements in this
press release are made as of the date hereof. The Company takes no obligation to update or
correct its own forward-looking statements, except as required by law, or those prepared by third
parties  that  are  not  paid  for  by  the  Company.  The  Company's  SEC  filings  are  available  at
http://www.sec.gov.
Lucas Investor Relations Contact
Carol Coale / Ken Dennard
Dennard ▪ Lascar Associates, LLC
(713) 529-6600
ccoale@dennardlascar.com