
20-F 1 form20f.htm FORM 20-F FOR YEAR ENDED APRIL 30, 2016
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C.  20549
FORM 20-F
(Mark One)
☐REGISTRATION STATEMENT PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OR (g) OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
OR
☑ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016
OR
☐TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from ____________ to __________
OR
☐SHELL COMPANY REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Date of event requiring this shell company report ____________
Commission file number 001-33439 
JET METAL CORP.
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
 
British Columbia, Canada
(Jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
 
Suite 1240, 1140 West Pender Street, Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6E 4G1
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
Mark J. Morabito, Phone:  (604) 681-8030, mmorabito@kingandbay.com
Suite 1240, 1140 West Pender Street, Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6E 4G1
(Name, Telephone, E-mail and/or Facsimile number and Address of Company Contact Person)
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each className of Exchange on which registered
Common Shares
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
None
(Title of Class)
Securities for which there is a reporting obligation pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Act:
None
(Title of Class)
 
Indicate the number of outstanding shares of each of the issuer's classes of capital or common
stock as of the close of the period covered by the annual report:                   28,218,451
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405
of the Securities Act.
☐ Yes ☑ No
If this report is an annual or transition report, indicate by check mark if the registrant is not
required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
☐ Yes ☑ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or
for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been
subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.
☑ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its
corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted
pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).
☐ Yes ☐ No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a
non-accelerated filer.  See definition of "accelerated filer and large accelerated filer" in Rule 12b-
2 of the Exchange Act.  (Check one):
Large accelerated filer ☐ Accelerated filer  ☐Non-accelerated filer ☑
Indicate by check mark which basis of accounting the registrant has used to prepare the financial
statements included in this filing:
International Financial Reporting Standards as issued
U.S. GAAP ☐
by the International Accounting Standards Board  ☑
Other ☐
If "Other" has been checked in response to the previous question, indicate by check mark which
financial statement item the registrant has elected to follow.
☐ Item 17 ☐ Item 18
If this is an annual report, indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as
defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).
☐ Yes ☑ No
Index to Exhibits on Page 93
JET METAL CORP.
(the "Company" or "Jet Metal")
FORM 20-F ANNUAL REPORT
Identity of Directors, Senior Management and Advisers
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Part I
4
Item 1.
4
Item 2. Offer Statistics and Expected Timetable
4
Item 3. Key Information
14
Information on the Company
Item 4.
26
Item 4A. Unresolved Staff Comments
27
Item 5. Operating and Financial Review and Prospects
37
Item 6. Directors, Senior Management and Employees
50
Item 7. Major Shareholders and Related Party Transactions
51
Financial Information
Item 8.
52
The Offer and Listing
Item 9.
54
Item 10. Additional Information
61
Item 11. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
62
Item 12. Description of Securities Other Than Equity Securities
 
Part II
Item 13. Defaults, Dividend Arrearages and Delinquencies
63
Item 14. Material Modifications to the Rights of Security Holders and Use of Proceeds63
Item 15. Controls and Procedures
63
64
Item 16A.Audit Committee Financial Expert
64
Item 16B.Code of Ethics
Item 16C.Principal Accountant Fees and Services
64
65
Item 16D.Exemptions from the Listing Standards for Audit Committees
65
Item 16E.Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
Item 16F.Changes in Registrant's Certifying Accountant
65
65
Item 16G Corporate Governance
65
Item 16H Mine Safety Disclosure
Part III
 
66
Item 17. Financial Statements
66
Item 18. Financial Statements
Item 19. Exhibits
93
 
96
 
 
i
Glossary of Geological Terms
RESOURCE AND RESERVE ESTIMATES
The terms "mineral reserve," "proven mineral reserve" and "probable mineral reserve" used in
our disclosure are Canadian mining terms that are defined in accordance with National
Instrument 43-101 – Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects ("NI 43-101") under the
guidelines set out in the Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum (the "CIM") Best
Practice Guidelines for the Estimation of Mineral Resource and Mineral Reserves (the "CIM
Standards"), adopted by the CIM Council on December 11, 2005. These definitions differ from
the definitions in the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC" or the
"Commission") Industry Guide 7 under the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the
"Securities Act"). Under Industry Guide 7 standards, a "final" or "bankable" feasibility study is
required to report reserves, the three-year historical average price is used in any reserve or cash
flow analysis to designate reserves and the primary environmental analysis or report must be
filed with the appropriate governmental authority.
Canadian standards, including NI 43-101, differ significantly from the requirements of the
Commission, and reserve and resource information contained herein may not be comparable to
similar information disclosed by U.S. companies. In particular, and without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, the term "resource" does not equate to the term "reserves". Under U.S.
standards, mineralization may not be classified as a "reserve" unless the determination has been
made that the mineralization could be economically and legally produced or extracted at the time
the reserve determination is made. The Commission's disclosure standards normally do not
permit the inclusion of information concerning "measured mineral resources", "indicated mineral
resources" or "inferred mineral resources" or other descriptions of the amount of mineralization in
mineral deposits that do not constitute "reserves" by U.S. standards in documents filed with the
Commission. U.S. investors should also understand that "inferred mineral resources" have a
great amount of uncertainty as to their existence and great uncertainty as to their economic and
legal feasibility. It cannot be assumed that all or any part of an "inferred mineral resource" will
ever be upgraded to a higher category. Under Canadian rules, estimated "inferred mineral
resources" may not form the basis of feasibility or pre-feasibility studies. Investors are cautioned
not to assume that all or any part of an "inferred mineral resource" exists or is economically or
legally mineable. Disclosure of "contained ounces" in a resource is permitted disclosure under
Canadian regulations; however, the Commission normally only permits issuers to report
mineralization that does not constitute "reserves" by the Commission's standards as in place
tonnage and grade without reference to unit measures. The requirements of NI 43-101 for
identification of "reserves" are also not the same as those of the Commission. Accordingly,
information concerning descriptions of mineralization and resources contained in this Annual
Report on Form 20-F or in the documents incorporated by reference may not be comparable to
information made public by U.S. companies subject to the reporting and disclosure requirements
of the Commission.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements in this document constitute "forward-looking statements" under applicable
securities laws.  Forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of terminology such as
"anticipate," "believe," "plan," "estimate," "expect," and "intend," and statements that an action or
event "may," "might," "could," or "should," be taken or occur, or other similar expressions.
Forward looking statements contained in this document include, but are not limited to, statements
with respect to: (i) the estimation of inferred and indicated mineral resources; (ii) details and goals
of exploration activities; (iii) estimations of future costs and expenditures; (iv) currency
fluctuations; (v) requirements for additional capital and the sufficiency of working capital; (vi)
government regulation of mining operations; (vii) environmental risks; (viii) unanticipated
reclamation expenses; and (ix) increases in mineral resource estimates. These forward-looking
statements are not guarantees or predictions of future performance and involve known and
unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, many of which are beyond our control and which
may cause our actual results, performance or achievements, or other future events, to be
materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by
such forward-looking statements.  Such factors include, among others, the following risks:
·the risks associated with outstanding litigation, if any;
·risks associated with project development;
1
·the need for additional financing;
operational risks associated with mining and mineral processing, including risks related to
accidents, equipment breakdowns, labor disputes or other unanticipated difficulties with or
·
interruptions in operations which may or may not be insured;
·fluctuations in metal prices;
·title matters;
·environmental liability claims and insurance;
·reliance on key personnel;
·the receipt of necessary regulatory approvals;
the potential for conflicts of interest among certain officers, directors or promoters with certain
·
other projects;
·the absence of dividends;
·currency fluctuations;
·competition;
·dilution;
·the volatility of our common share price and volume;
·tax consequences to U.S. shareholders;
·risks related to our being subject to the penny stock rules;
·risks related to our being a foreign private issuer; and
·risks related to our possibly being a passive foreign investment company.
Forward-looking information and forward-looking statements are in addition based on various
assumptions including, without limitation, the expectations and beliefs of management, the
assumed long term price of commodities; that the Company can access financing, appropriate
equipment and sufficient labour availability and that the political environment will continue to
support the development and operation of mining projects.  Should one or more of these risks
and uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results
may vary materially from those described in forward-looking statements.  Some of the important
risks and uncertainties that could affect forward-looking statements are described further in "Item
3. Key Information—D. Risk Factors."  Accordingly, readers are advised not to place undue
reliance on forward-looking statements. The Company does not intend to update forward-looking
statements or information, except as may be required by applicable law. Except as required by
applicable regulations or by law, we do not undertake any obligation to publicly update or review
any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or
otherwise.
2
FINANCIAL AND OTHER INFORMATION
In this Annual Report, unless otherwise specified, all dollar amounts are expressed in Canadian
Dollars ("CDN$" or "$").  The Government of Canada permits a floating exchange rate to
determine the value of the Canadian Dollar against the U.S. Dollar (US$).
3
PART I
ITEM 1.  IDENTITY OF DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND ADVISERS
Not applicable
ITEM 2.  OFFER STATISTICS AND EXPECTED TIMETABLE
Not applicable
ITEM 3.  KEY INFORMATION
3.A. Selected Financial Data
Our selected financial data for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2016, 2015, 2014, 2013 and 2012
was derived from our financial statements that have been audited by Davidson & Company LLP,
independent Chartered Professional Accountants, as indicated in their audit reports.  Davidson &
Company LLP is a member of the Chartered Professional Accountants of Canada.
The selected financial data should be read in conjunction with and is qualified in its entirety by
reference to the financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
To date, we have not generated sufficient cash flow from operations to fund ongoing operational
requirements and cash commitments.  We have financed our operations principally through the
sale of our equity securities.  While we believe we have sufficient capital and liquidity to finance
current operations, nevertheless, our ability to continue operations is dependent on our ability to
obtain additional financing.  See "Item 3. Key Information—D. Risk Factors."
The information for years ended April 30, 2016, 2015, 2014, 2013 and 2012 in the following table
is derived from our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with the
International Financial Reporting Standards ("IFRS").
)
$(0.11
   --
) $(0.02
    --
2013
  IFRS 1
    --
2012
  IFRS 1
    --
For the Year Ended April 30,
 2016
 IFRS 1
   --
2015
  IFRS 1
    --
2014
  IFRS 1
    --
$(3,118,609 ) $(357,729 ) $(3,967,283 ) $(11,674,061) $(11,977,829)
Revenue 
Income (Loss) for the
Period
Basic and Diluted Income
(Loss)
Per Share2 3
Dividends Per Share 
Weighted Average
Shares (#)2 3
   28,218,451    19,659,075    6,578,035     65,782,178     50,377,698  
Period-end Shares (#)2 3     28,218,451    28,218,451    6,578,035     65,782,178     65,782,178  
Working Capital (Deficit)   $1,380,210   $2,099,399   $(716,619 ) $94,253
  $5,466,961  
Exploration and
Evaluation Assets
Long-Term Debt 
Capital Stock 
Shareholders' Equity 
For the Year Ended April
30,
$2,509,791   $2,509,791   $5,670,409   $11,592,105  
   --
 $20,807
 
  $227,617
 $90,663,999  $90,663,999  $87,411,032  $87,411,032   $87,457,513  
 $1,669,819   $4,788,428   $1,893,190   $5,905,723   $16,999,901
$2,145,557`   $5,325,176   $2,801,407   $6,635,616   $17,997,243
$19,267
$37,161
$558,742
) $(0.60
    --
) $(0.18
    --
) $(0.24
    --
4
The financial information for years ended April 30, 2016, 2015, 2014, 2013 and 2012 are
prepared using the International Financial Reporting Standards ("IFRS"). The Company's
1
transition date was May 1, 2010.  The cumulative net loss under IFRS at April 30, 2016 is
approximately $110 million.
2Under IFRS, basic loss per share is calculated using the weighted average number of common
shares outstanding during the year.
On October 28, 2010, the common shares of the Company were consolidated on the basis of
four pre-consolidation shares for one post-consolidation share.  The numbers presented for
fiscal 2013, 2012 and 2011 are presented on the four to one post-consolidated basis.  On
3
September 17, 2013, the common shares of the Company were further consolidated on a ten
pre-consolidation shares for one post-consolidation share.  The numbers presented for fiscal
2016, 2015 and 2014 are presented on the ten to one post-consolidation basis.
Exchange Rates
 
The following table sets forth the high and low rates of exchange for the Canadian Dollar for each
month during the previous six months. The table also sets forth the average exchange rates for
the Canadian Dollar for the five most recent fiscal years ended April 30th.  The yearly average
rate means the average of the exchange rates based on the daily rates during each fiscal period.
For purposes of this table, the rates of exchange are those quoted by the Bank of Canada.  The
table sets forth the number of Canadian Dollars required under that formula to buy one U.S.
Dollar.  
Period
 
July 2016 
June 2016 
May 2016 
April 2016 
March 2016 
February 2016 
 
 
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2016 1.3162
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2015 1.1570
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2014 1.0602
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2013 1.0054
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2012 0.9928
High (1)Low (1)
 
 
 
1.3225 1.2844
 
1.3091 1.2645
 
1.3136 1.2548
 
1.3170 1.2544
 
1.3468 1.2962
 
1.4040 1.3523
 
 
 
Average (2)
The exchange rate was $1.2857 on August 19, 2016.
(1)Means the intra-day high/low rate during the period.
(2) Means the average of the noon day rates on the last day of each month during the period.
3.B.Capitalization and Indebtedness
Not applicable
5
3.C. Reasons for the Offer and Use of Proceeds
Not applicable
3.D.Risk Factors
We are subject to a number of risks due to the nature of our business, including our present
exploration state.  The following describes the material risks that could affect us.
There has been significant economic uncertainty since the second half of 2008 and it has
affected the Company's operations.
The unprecedented events in global financial markets that have occurred since mid-2008 have
had a profound impact on the global economy. Many industries, including the mining industry,
are impacted by these market conditions.  Some of the key impacts of the current financial market
turmoil include contraction in credit markets resulting in a widening of credit risk, devaluations
and high volatility in global equity, commodity, foreign exchange and precious metal markets,
and a lack of market liquidity. A continued or worsened slowdown in the financial markets or
other economic conditions, including but not limited to, consumer spending, employment rates,
business conditions, inflation, fuel and energy costs, consumer debt levels, lack of available
credit, the state of the financial markets, interest rates, and tax rates may adversely affect the
Company's growth and profitability.  Specifically:
• the global credit/liquidity crisis could impact the cost and availability of financing and the
Company's overall liquidity;
• the volatility of mineral prices would impact the Company's revenues, profits, losses and cash
flow potential;
• volatile energy prices, commodity and consumables prices and currency exchange rates would
impact the Company's production costs; and
• the devaluation and volatility of global stock markets would impact the valuation of the
Company's equity and other securities.
These factors could have a material adverse effect on the Company's financial condition and
results of operations. As a result, the Company will consider its plans and options carefully in
fiscal 2016.
No known reserves
Our properties are in the exploration stage and are without a known body of mineral reserves.
We have no mineral producing properties at this time. Only those mineral deposits that we can
economically and legally extract or produce, based on a comprehensive evaluation of cost,
grade, recovery and other factors, are considered "reserves". We have not defined or delineated
any proven or probable reserves on any of our properties. Although the mineralized material and
mineralized deposit estimates included herein have been carefully prepared by us, or, in some
instances have been prepared, reviewed or verified by independent mining experts, these
amounts are estimates only and no assurance can be given that any particular level of recovery
of uranium, and other minerals from mineralized material will in fact be realized or that an
identified mineralized deposit will ever qualify as a commercially mineable (or viable) reserve.
Our planned exploration programs may not result in profitable commercial mining operations
Our operations involve exploration, and there is no guarantee that any of our activities will result
in commercial production of any mineral deposits.  The exploration for and development of
mineral deposits involves significant financial and other risks which even a combination of
careful evaluation, experience and knowledge may not
6
eliminate. Most exploration projects do not result in the discovery of commercially mineable
deposits.  Major expenses are required to locate and establish mineral reserves, to develop
metallurgical processes, and to construct mining and processing facilities at a particular site. Our
planned exploration programs may not result in a profitable commercial mining operation. 
Whether a mineral deposit will be commercially viable depends on a number of factors, some of
which are: the particular attributes of the deposit, such as quantity and quality of the minerals,
costs and efficiency of the recovery methods that can be employed; proximity to infrastructure;
financing costs; mineral prices, which are highly cyclical; and government regulations, including
regulations relating to prices, taxes, royalties, land  tenure, land use, importing and exporting of
minerals, and environmental protection.  The exact effect of these factors cannot be accurately
predicted but could have a material adverse effect upon our operations and/or our ability to
receive an adequate return on our invested capital.  There is no certainty that our expenditures
made towards the search and evaluation of uranium, and other minerals result in discoveries of
mineral resources, mineral reserves or any other mineral occurrences, or in profitable commercial
mining operations.
Mining operations generally involve a high degree of risk
Our operations are subject to all the hazards and risks normally encountered in the exploration,
development and production of uranium and other minerals, including environmental pollution,
accidents or spills, industrial accidents, labor disputes, changes in the regulatory environment,
natural phenomena, unusual and unexpected geologic formations, seismic activity, rock bursts,
cave-ins, flooding and other conditions involved in the drilling and removal of material, any of
which could result in damage to, or destruction of, mines and other producing facilities, damage
to life or property, environmental damage, delays in or cessation of production, exploration or
development, monetary losses and cost increases which could make us uncompetitive, and
could lead to possible legal liability. Although adequate precautions to minimize risk will be
taken, mining operations are subject to hazards such as equipment failure or failure of retaining
dams around tailings disposal areas which may result in environmental pollution and consequent
liability.  In addition, due to the radioactive nature of the materials handled in uranium mining,
applicable regulatory requirements result in additional costs that must be incurred.
Our resource estimates may not be reliable
There is no certainty that any of our mineral resources will be economically mineable. Until a
deposit is actually mined and processed the quantity of mineral resources and grades must be
considered as estimates only.  Valid estimates made at a given time may significantly change
when new information becomes available. In addition, the quantity of mineral resources may vary
depending on, among other things, metal prices.  Any material change in quantity of mineral
resources, grade or stripping ratio may affect the economic viability of our properties or any
project we undertake. In addition, there can be no assurance that mineral or other metal
recoveries in small scale laboratory tests will be duplicated in a larger scale test under on-site
conditions or during production.
Fluctuations in prices of uranium, and other minerals, results of drilling, metallurgical testing and
production and the evaluation of studies, reports and plans subsequent to the date of any
estimate may require revision of such estimate. Any material reductions in estimates of mineral
resources could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial
condition.
We rely on a limited number of properties
Our only properties of interest are currently the Central Mineral Belt property in Labrador, and the
Bootheel property in Wyoming, USA. As a result, unless we acquire additional property interests,
any adverse developments affecting these properties could have a material adverse effect upon
our business and would materially and adversely affect our potential mineral resource
production, profitability, financial performance and results of operations.
7
Competition from other energy sources and public acceptance of nuclear energy may affect the
demand for uranium
Nuclear energy competes with other sources of energy, including oil, natural gas, coal and hydro-
electricity.  These other energy sources are to some extent interchangeable with nuclear energy,
particularly over the longer term.  Lower prices of oil, natural gas, coal and hydro-electricity may
result in lower demand for uranium concentrate and uranium conversion services.  Furthermore,
the growth of the uranium and nuclear power industry beyond its current level will depend upon
continued and increased acceptance of nuclear technology as a means of generating electricity. 
Because of unique political, technological and environmental factors that affect the nuclear
industry, the industry is subject to public opinion risks which could have an adverse impact on
the demand for nuclear power and increase the regulation of the nuclear power industry.
We face strong competition for the acquisition of mining properties
The mining industry is competitive in all of its phases. We face strong competition from other
mining companies in connection with the acquisition of properties producing, or capable of
producing, uranium and other minerals.  Many of these companies have greater financial
resources, operational experience and technical capabilities than we do.  As a result of this
competition, we may be unable to maintain or acquire attractive mining properties on terms we
consider acceptable, if at all. Consequently, our revenues, operations and financial condition
could be materially adversely affected.
We do not have a history of mineral production or operations
There is no assurance that commercial quantities of minerals will be discovered at our current
properties or any future properties, nor is there any assurance that our exploration programs
thereon will yield any positive results.  Even if commercial quantities of minerals are discovered,
there can be no assurance that any of our properties will ever be brought to a stage where
mineral resources can profitably be produced thereon.  Factors which may limit our ability to
produce mineral resources from our properties include, but are not limited to, the price of the
mineral resources which are being explored for, availability of additional capital and financing
and the nature of any mineral deposits.
We do not have an extensive operating history and there can be no assurance of our ability to
operate our projects profitably in the future.
Our insurance will not cover all the potential risks associated with our operations
Our business is subject to a number of risks and hazards generally, including adverse
environmental conditions, industrial accidents, labor disputes, unusual or unexpected geological
conditions, ground or slope failures, cave-ins, changes in the regulatory environment and natural
phenomena such as inclement weather conditions, floods and earthquakes.  Such occurrences
could result in damage to mineral properties or production facilities, personal injury or death,
environmental damage to our properties or other properties, delays in mining, monetary losses
and possible legal liability.
Our insurance will not cover all the potential risks associated with a mining company's
operations.  We may also be unable to maintain insurance to cover these risks at economically
feasible premiums.  Insurance coverage may not be available or may not be adequate to cover
any resulting liability. Moreover, there are risks against which we cannot insure or against which
we may elect not to insure.  Insurance against risks such as environmental pollution or other
hazards as a result of exploration and production is not generally available to us or to other
companies in the uranium mining industry. We might also become subject to liability for pollution
or other hazards which we may not be insured against or which we may elect not to insure
against because of premium costs or other reasons. Losses from these events may cause
substantial delays and require us to incur significant costs that could have a material adverse
effect upon our financial condition, results of operations, competitive position and potentially our
financial viability.
8
Our operations are subject to environmental regulation
All phases of our operations are subject to environmental regulation in the various jurisdictions in
which we operate or may operate in the future. These regulations mandate, among other things,
the maintenance of air and water quality standards and land reclamation. They also set forth
limitations on the generation, transportation, storage and disposal of solid and hazardous waste. 
Environmental legislation is evolving in a manner that will require stricter standards and
enforcement, increased fines and penalties for non-compliance, more stringent environmental
assessments of proposed projects, and a heightened degree of responsibility for companies and
their officers, directors and employees.  There is no assurance that future changes in
environmental regulation, if any, will not adversely affect our operations. Environmental hazards
may exist on the properties on which we hold interests which are unknown to us at present and
which have been caused by previous or existing owners or operators of the properties.
Failure to comply with applicable laws, regulations and permitting requirements may result in
enforcement actions thereunder, including orders issued by regulatory or judicial authorities
causing operations to cease or be curtailed, and may include corrective measures requiring
capital expenditures, installation of additional equipment, or remedial actions.  Parties engaged
in mining operations or in the exploration or development of mineral properties may be required
to compensate those suffering loss or damage by reason of the mining activities and may have
civil or criminal fines or penalties imposed for violations of applicable laws or regulations.
Our operations are dependent on adequate infrastructure
Mining, processing, development and exploration activities depend, to one degree or another, on
adequate infrastructure.  Reliable roads, bridges, power sources and water supply are important
determinants, which affect capital and operating costs.  Unusual or infrequent weather
phenomena, sabotage, government or other interference in the maintenance or provision of such
infrastructure could adversely affect our operations, financial condition and results of operations.
Our properties may be subject to undetected title defects
It is possible there may still be undetected title defects affecting our properties. Title insurance
generally is not available, and our ability to ensure that we have obtained secure claim to
individual mineral properties or mining concessions may be severely constrained. Furthermore,
we have not conducted surveys of the claims in which we hold interests and, therefore, the
precise area and location of such claims may be in doubt. Accordingly, our properties may be
subject to prior unregistered liens, agreements, transfers or claims, and title may be affected by,
among other things, undetected defects which could have a material adverse impact on our
operations.  In addition, we may be unable to operate our properties as permitted or to enforce
our rights with respect to our properties.
We may be subject to additional costs for land reclamation
It is difficult to determine the exact amounts which will be required to complete all land
reclamation activities in connection with our properties.  Reclamation bonds and other forms of
financial assurance represent only a portion of the total amount of money that will be spent on
reclamation activities over the life of a mine.  Accordingly, it may be necessary to revise planned
expenditures and operating plans in order to fund reclamation activities.  Such costs may have a
material adverse impact upon our financial condition and results of operations.
The inability to obtain necessary permits would adversely affect our ability to operate our
business
We may not receive the necessary permits or receive them on acceptable terms, if at all, in order
to conduct further exploration and to develop our properties.  The failure to obtain such permits,
or delays in obtaining such permits, could adversely affect our operations.
Government approvals, approval of aboriginal people and permits are currently and may in the
future be required in connection with our operations. To the extent such approvals are required
and not obtained; we may be curtailed or
9
prohibited from continuing our mining operations or from proceeding with planned exploration or
development of mineral properties.
We will require additional capital for our operations
The development and exploration of our properties will require substantial additional financing. 
Failure to obtain sufficient financing may result in the delay or indefinite postponement of
exploration, development or production on our properties or even a loss of property interest.
There can be no assurance that additional capital will be available when needed or that, if
available, the terms of financing such capital will be acceptable to us.  In addition, any future
financing may be dilutive to our existing shareholders.
Future production from our mining properties, if any, is dependent upon the prices of uranium and
other minerals being adequate to make these properties economically viable
Mineral and base metals prices received, if any, could be such that our properties cannot be
mined at a profit.  The price of our common shares, and our financial results and exploration,
development and mining activities may in the future be significantly and adversely affected by
declines in the price of uranium, and other minerals. The price of uranium, and other minerals
fluctuates widely and is affected by numerous factors beyond our control such as the sale or
purchase of commodities by various central banks and financial institutions, interest rates,
exchange rates, inflation or deflation, fluctuation in the value of the United States dollar and
foreign currencies, global and regional supply and demand, the political and economic
conditions and production costs of major mineral-producing countries throughout the world, and
the cost of  substitutes, inventory levels and carrying charges.  With respect to uranium, such
factors include the demand for nuclear power, political and economic conditions in uranium
producing and consuming countries, uranium supply from secondary sources, uranium
production levels and costs of production.  Future serious price declines in the market value of
uranium, and other minerals could cause development of and commercial production from our
properties to be impracticable.  Depending on the price of uranium, and other minerals, cash flow
from mining operations may not be sufficient and we could be forced to discontinue production
and may lose our interest in, or may be forced to sell, some of our properties.  Future production
from our mining properties, if any, is dependent upon the prices of uranium, and other minerals
being adequate to make these properties economically viable.
In addition to adversely affecting our reserve estimates, if any, and our financial condition,
declining commodity prices can impact operations by requiring a reassessment of the feasibility
of a particular project. Such a reassessment may be the result of a management decision or may
be required under financing arrangements related to a particular project. Even if a project is
ultimately determined to be economically viable, the need to conduct such a reassessment may
cause substantial delays or may interrupt operations until the reassessment can be completed.
Exchange rate fluctuations may effectively increase our costs of exploration and production
Exchange rate fluctuations may affect the costs that we incur in our operations.  Uranium, and
other minerals are generally sold in U.S. dollars and our costs are incurred principally in
Canadian dollars.  We also maintain a mineral exploration project in the United States that
require payments to be made in U.S. dollars. The appreciation of non-U.S. dollar currencies
against the U.S. dollar can increase the cost of exploration and production in U.S. dollar terms,
which could materially and adversely affect our profitability, results of operations and financial
condition.
Our operations are subject to extensive governmental regulation that may adversely affect our
operating costs
Our mining, processing, development and mineral exploration activities are subject to various
laws governing prospecting, development, production, taxes, labor standards and occupational
health, mine safety, toxic substances, land use, water use, land claims of local people, and other
matters.  Although our exploration and development activities are currently carried out in
accordance with all applicable rules and regulations, new rules and regulations may be enacted
or existing rules and regulations may be applied in a manner which could limit or curtail
production or development.  Amendments to current laws and regulations governing operations
and activities of mining and
10
milling or more stringent implementation thereof could have a substantial adverse impact on our
operations. Worldwide demand for uranium is directly tied to the demand for energy produced by
the nuclear electric industry, which is also subject to extensive government regulations and
policies.
Amendments to current laws, regulations and permits governing operations and activities of
mining and exploration companies, or more stringent implementation thereof, could have a
material adverse impact on our operations and cause increases in exploration expenses, capital
expenditures or production costs, or reduction in levels of production at producing properties, or
require abandonment or delays in development of new mining properties.
Uncertainties associated with the Jetlines Transaction
The Jetlines Transaction will involve the integration of companies that previously operated
independently. An important factor in the success of the Jetlines Transaction will be the ability of
the management of the Resulting Issuer to integrate all or part of the operations, systems and
technologies of the Company and Jetlines following completion of the Jetlines Transaction. The
Jetlines Transaction and/or the integration of the two businesses can result in unanticipated
operational problems and interruptions, expenses and liabilities, the diversion of management
attention and the loss of key employees. There can be no assurance that the Jetlines Transaction
and business integration will be successful or that the combination will not adversely affect the
business, financial condition or operating results of the Company or Jetlines. In addition, the
Company or Jetlines may incur costs related to the Jetlines Transaction and related to the
Amalgamation.  There can be no assurance that the Company, Jetlines or the Resulting Issuer
will not incur additional material costs in subsequent quarters to reflect additional costs
associated with the Jetlines Transaction or that that the benefits expected from the Jetlines
Transaction will be realized.
The Company and Jetlines expect to incur significant costs associated with the Jetlines
Transaction
The Company and Jetlines will collectively incur significant direct transaction costs in connection
with the Jetlines Transaction. Actual direct transaction costs incurred in connection with the
Jetlines Transaction may be higher than expected.   Moreover, certain of the Company's and
Jetlines' costs related to the Jetlines Transaction, including legal, financial advisory services,
accounting, printing and mailing costs, must be paid even if the Jetlines Transaction is not
completed. There are also opportunity costs associated with the diversion of management
attention away from the conduct of the Company and Jetlines' respective businesses in the
ordinary course.
The Amalgamation Agreement may be terminated in certain circumstances
Each of the Company and Jetlines has the right to terminate the Amalgamation Agreement in
certain circumstances.  Accordingly, there is no certainty, nor can either of Jetlines or the
Company provide any assurance, that the Amalgamation Agreement will not be terminated by
either Jetlines or the Company before the completion of the Jetlines Transaction. For instance,
the Company and Jetlines have the right, in certain circumstances, to terminate the
Amalgamation Agreement if changes occur that have a material adverse effect. There is no
assurance that a material adverse effect will not occur before the closing date, in which case
either the Company or Jetlines could elect to terminate the Amalgamation Agreement and the
Jetlines Transaction would not proceed.
There can be no assurance that all conditions precedent to the Jetlines Transaction will be
satisfied
The completion of the Jetlines Transaction is subject to a number of conditions precedent, certain
of which are outside the control of the Company and Jetlines. There is no certainty, nor can
Jetlines or the Company provide any assurance, that these conditions will be satisfied or, if
satisfied, when they will be satisfied. The requirement to take certain actions or to agree to
certain conditions to satisfy such requirements or obtain any such approvals may have a material
adverse effect on the business and affairs of the Company or Jetlines or the trading price of the
the Company common shares. If for any reason the Jetlines Transaction is not completed, the
market price of the the Company common shares may be adversely affected. Moreover, if the
Amalgamation Agreement is terminated, there is no assurance that the Company Board will be
able to find another similar transaction to pursue.
11
Entry into New Business Activities
Completion of the Jetlines Transaction will result in a combination of the current business
activities carried on by each of the Company and Jetlines as separate entities. While the
Company has had minimal operations for several years, the combination of these activities into
the merged entity may expose the Company's shareholders and creditors to different business
risks than those to which they were exposed prior to the Jetlines Transaction. In particular,
shareholders will gain exposure to the business of Jetlines.
If the Jetlines Transaction is not completed, the Company's future business and operations could
be harmed
If the Jetlines Transaction is not completed, the Company may be subject to a number of
additional material risks, including the following:
the Company may have lost opportunities that would have otherwise been available had the
Amalgamation Agreement not been executed, including, without limitation, opportunities not
·
pursued as a result of affirmative and negative covenants made by it in the Amalgamation
Agreement, such as covenants affecting the conduct of its business outside the ordinary course
of business;
the Company may be unable to obtain additional sources of financing or conclude another sale,
·
merger or amalgamation on terms as favourable as those of the Jetlines Transaction, in a timely
manner, or at all.
The market price of our common shares may experience substantial volatility
In recent years, the securities markets in the United States and Canada have experienced a high
level of price and volume volatility, and the market price of securities of many mineral exploration
companies have experienced wide fluctuations in price which have not necessarily been related
to the operating performance, underlying asset values or prospects of such companies.  The
price of our common shares is also likely to be significantly affected by short-term changes in
prices of uranium, and other minerals, or in our financial condition or results of operations as
reflected in our quarterly earnings reports.  Other factors unrelated to our performance that may
have an effect on the price of our common shares include the following: the extent of analytical
coverage available to investors concerning our business may be limited if investment banks with
research capabilities do not follow our securities; lessening in trading volume and general market
interest in our securities may affect an investor's ability to trade significant numbers of our
common shares; the size of our public float may limit the ability of some institutions to invest in
our securities; and a substantial decline in the price of our common shares that persists for a
significant period of time could cause our securities to be delisted from such exchange, further
reducing market liquidity.
We have not paid dividends in the past and do not expect to pay dividends in the foreseeable
future
No dividends on our common shares have been paid to date as we have no earnings. We
currently plan to retain all future earnings and other cash resources, if any, for the future operation
and development of our business.  Payment of future dividends, if any, will be at the discretion of
our Board of Directors after taking into account many factors, including our operating results,
financial condition, and current and anticipated cash needs.
Future sales of common shares by existing shareholders could adversely affect the trading price
of our common shares
Sales of a large number of our common shares in the public markets, or the potential for such
sales, could decrease the trading price of the common shares and could impair our ability to raise
capital through future sales of common shares.
We are dependent upon the services of our key executives
We are dependent upon the services of key executives, including our directors and a small
number of highly skilled and experienced executives and personnel. Due to our relatively small
size, the unanticipated and/or unplanned loss
12
of our Chief Executive Officer or our Chairman or our inability to attract and retain additional
highly-skilled employees may adversely affect our future operations.
Our directors and officers have certain conflicts of interest
Certain of our directors and officers also serve as directors and/or officers of other companies
involved in natural resource exploration and development and, consequently, there exists the
possibility for such directors and officers to be in a position of conflict.
We have no positive cash flow and no recent history of earnings and we are dependent upon
public and private contributions of equity to obtain capital in order to sustain our operations
None of our properties have advanced to the commercial production stage and we have no
history of earnings or positive cash flow from operations.  Our cumulative loss, as of the year
ended April 30, 2016 determined in accordance with IFRS is approximately $110 million.  We do
not know if we will ever generate material revenue from mining operations or if we will ever
achieve self-sustaining commercial mining operations.  Historically, the only source of funds
available to us has been through the sale of our equity securities. Any future additional equity
financing would cause dilution to current shareholders.
Dilution through employee, director and consultant stock options and warrants could adversely
affect our shareholders by decreasing shareholder value
Because our success is highly dependent upon our employees, we have granted to some or all
of our key employees, directors and consultants options to purchase common shares as non-
cash incentives. In addition we have also issued share purchase units and warrants to investors
and brokers in connection with equity financings. To the extent that significant numbers of such
options, warrants and share purchase units may be granted and exercised, the interests of our
other shareholders may be diluted.
As of August 19, 2016 we had no share purchase options, and 20,000,000 share purchase
warrants outstanding.  If all of these securities were exercised, the number of common shares
issued and outstanding would increase from 28,218,451 to 48,218,451.  This represents an
increase of 70.88% in the number of shares issued and outstanding and would result in some
dilution to current shareholders.
U.S. investors may not be able to enforce their civil liabilities against us or our directors,
controlling persons and officers
It may be difficult to bring and enforce suits against us.  We are incorporated in the province of
British Columbia under the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia).  The majority of our
directors and officers are residents of Canada, and all or substantial portions of their assets are
located outside of the United States, predominately in Canada.  As a result, it may be difficult for
U.S. holders of our common shares to effect service of process on these persons within the
United States or to realize in the United States upon judgments rendered against them.  In
addition, a shareholder should not assume that the courts of Canada (i) would enforce judgments
of U.S. courts obtained in actions against us or such persons predicated upon the civil liability
provisions of the U.S. federal securities laws or other laws of the United States, or (ii) would
enforce, in original actions, liabilities against us or such persons predicated upon the U.S. federal
securities laws or other laws of the United States.
However, U.S. laws would generally be enforced by a Canadian court provided that those laws
are not contrary to Canadian public policy, are not foreign penal laws or laws that deal with
taxation or the taking of property by a foreign government and provided that they are in
compliance with applicable Canadian legislation regarding the limitation of actions.  Also, a
Canadian court would generally recognize a judgment obtained in a U.S. Court except, for
example, where:
a)
the U.S. court that rendered the judgment had no jurisdiction according to applicable Canadian
law;
13
b)
the judgment was subject to ordinary remedy (appeal, judicial review and any other judicial
proceeding which renders the judgment not final, conclusive or enforceable under the laws of
the applicable state) or not final, conclusive or enforceable under the laws of the applicable
state;
the judgment was obtained by fraud or in any manner contrary to natural justice or rendered in
contravention of fundamental principles of procedure; or
a dispute between the same parties, based on the same subject matter has given rise to a
judgment rendered in a Canadian court or has been decided in a third country and the
judgment meets the necessary conditions for recognition in a Canadian court.
c)
d)
As a "foreign private issuer", we are exempt from the Section 14 proxy rules and Section 16
reporting rules under the Exchange Act which may result in shareholders having less complete
and timely data
The submission of proxy and annual shareholder meeting information (prepared to Canadian
standards) on Form 6-K may result in shareholders having less complete and timely data than if
we were subject to the SEC's domestic issuer proxy rules under Section 14 of the Exchange Act. 
The exemption from Section 16 rules under the Exchange Act that require the reporting of
acquisitions and disposition of our equity securities by our officers, directors and greater than
10% shareholders also may result in shareholders having less data.
The Company believes that it may be a "passive foreign investment company" for the current
taxable year which would likely result in materially adverse U.S. federal income tax
consequences for U.S. investors
The Company believes that it may have been classified as a passive foreign investment
company ("PFIC") for the taxable year ending April 30, 2016, and, based on current business
plans and financial expectations, the Company expects that it may be classified as a PFIC for the
current taxable year and in future taxable years. If the Company is a PFIC for any taxable year
during which a U.S. Holder (as defined under "Item 10.E. Taxation—U.S. Federal Income Tax
Considerations") holds the Common Shares, it would likely result in adverse U.S. federal income
tax consequences for such U.S. Holder. U.S. holders should carefully read "Item 10.E. Taxation –
U.S. Federal Income Tax Considerations—Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules" for
more information and consult their own tax advisors regarding the likelihood and consequences
of the Company being treated as a PFIC for U.S. federal income tax purposes, including the
advisability of making a "qualified electing fund" election, which may mitigate certain possible
adverse U.S. federal income tax consequences but may result in an inclusion in gross income
without receipt of such income. U.S. Holders are urged to consult their own tax advisers as to
whether the Company may be treated as a PFIC and the tax consequences thereof.
Litigation
Due to the nature of our business, we may become subject to regulatory investigations, claims,
lawsuits and other proceedings in the ordinary course of its business. The results of these legal
proceedings cannot be predicted with certainty due to the uncertainty inherent in litigation,
including the effects of discovery of new evidence or advancement of new legal theories, the
difficulty of predicting decisions of judges and juries and the possibility that decisions may be
reversed on appeal. There can be no assurances that these matters will not have a material
adverse effect on our business.
ITEM 4.INFORMATION ON THE COMPANY
4.A. History and Development of the Company
Introduction
Jet Metal Corp. (formerly Crosshair Energy Corporation) (the "Company" or "Jet Metal") was
incorporated as a specially limited company pursuant to the Company Act (British Columbia)
(replaced by the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) effective March 29, 2004) on
September 2, 1966 under the name Shasta Mines & Oil Ltd. (Non-Personal Liability).  We
converted from a Private Company to a Public Company on February 20, 1967.  On
14
February 4, 1975 we changed our name to International Shasta Resources Ltd. (Non-Personal
Liability) and consolidated our share capital on the basis of one new share for five old shares and
increased our share capital from 600,000 common shares to 3,000,000 common shares.  On
September 14, 1977 we increased our authorized share capital from 3,000,000 common shares
to 5,000,000 common shares.  On April 5, 1982, we increased our authorized share capital from
5,000,000 common shares to 10,000,000 common shares by Special Resolution.  On March 5,
1986 we converted from a Specially Limited Company into a Limited Company under the name
of International Shasta Resources Ltd. and increased our authorized share capital from
10,000,000 common shares to 30,000,000 common shares.  On May 20, 1994, we changed our
name to Consolidated Shasta Resources Inc. and consolidated our share capital on the basis of
one new share for ten old shares and increased our authorized share capital from 3,000,000
common shares to 20,000,000 common shares.  On November 23, 1994 we changed our name
to Lima Gold Corporation and on September 21, 1999 we changed our name to International
Lima Resources Corp. and consolidated our share capital on the basis of one new share for
three old shares and increased our authorized share capital from 6,666,667 common shares to
20,000,000 common shares.  On November 5, 2003 we increased our authorized share capital
from 20,000,000 common shares to 100,000,000 common shares.  On March 1, 2004 we
changed our name to Crosshair Exploration & Mining Corp.  On June 1, 2004 we replaced our
Memorandum with a Notice of Articles as required by the Business Corporations Act (British
Columbia). On March 11, 2005 we changed our authorized capital to an unlimited number of
common shares.  On December 15, 2010, we consolidated our share capital on the basis of one
new share for four old shares.  On October 28, 2011 we changed our name from Crosshair
Exploration & Mining Corp. to Crosshair Energy Corporation.  On September 17, 2013, we
consolidated our share capital on the basis of one new share for ten old shares and changed our
name from Crosshair Energy Corporation to Jet Metal Corp.
Our executive office is located at:
Suite 1240 - 1140 West Pender Street
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada  V6E 4G1
Telephone: (604) 681-8030
Facsimile: (604) 681-8039
Website: www.jetmetalcorp.com
Email: mmorabito@kingandbay.com
The contact person is: Mr. Mark J. Morabito, Chief Executive Officer and President.
Our fiscal year ends April 30th.
Our common shares first began trading on the Vancouver Stock Exchange under the name
Shasta Mines & Oil Ltd. on March 14, 1969.  Our common shares began trading on the TSX
Venture Exchange with the trading symbol "CXX" on March 1, 2004.  On February 10, 2006, we
graduated to Tier 1 on the TSX Venture Exchange.  On May 7, 2007, our common shares began
trading on the American Stock Exchange (now NYSE MKT) with the trading symbol "CXZ."  On
May 12, 2008, our common shares began trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange with the
trading symbol "CXX" and ceased trading on the TSX Venture Exchange. On June 18, 2013 the
Company filed a Form 25 – Notice of Removal from Listing and/or Registration under section
12(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 with the United States Securities and Exchange
Commission ("SEC").  Our common shares were voluntarily delisted from NYSE MKT on July 1,
2013 and began trading on the OTC Market Group's OTCQB Marketplace on July 1, 2013 with
the trading symbol "CRHRF". On October 22, 2013, our trading symbol on OTCQB was changed
to "JETMF" to reflect the Company's name change to Jet Metal Corp. On January 17, 2014, our
common shares were voluntarily delisted from the Toronto Stock Exchange and on January 20,
2014 began trading on the TSX Venture Exchange under the trading symbol "JET".  On February
24 2016, due to the fact that the Company's shares were halted for trading on the TSX Venture
Exchange and the OTCQB for longer than a period of four trading days, the Company's common
shares were removed from trading on the OTCQB.
On January 19, 2015, 20,000,000 warrants ("Warrants") began trading on the TSX Venture
Exchange under the symbol "JET.WT".  The Warrants were issued on September 16, 2014 to
accredited investors pursuant to a non-brokered private placement of units ("Units") for gross
proceeds of $3,000,000.  Each Unit comprised one common
15
share and one Warrant, with each Warrant exercisable to acquire one common share at an
exercise price of $0.25 for a period of five years following closing of the private placement.
On March 29, 2004, the Company Act (British Columbia) (the "Company Act") was replaced by
the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) (the "BCBCA").  Accordingly, we are now
subject to the BCBCA and are no longer governed by the Company Act.  There are a number of
differences under the BCBCA, which differences are designed to provide greater flexibility and
efficiency for British Columbia companies.  
Under the BCBCA, every company incorporated under the Company Act was required to
complete a mandatory transition rollover under the BCBCA to substitute a Notice of Articles for its
Memorandum within two years of March 29, 2004.  On June 1, 2004 we replaced our
Memorandum with a Notice of Articles as is required by the BCBCA.  The only information
contained in the Notice of Articles is the authorized share structure of the Company, the name of
the Company, the address of the registered and records office of the Company, and the names
and addresses of the directors of the Company.
On March 31, 2009, the Company and Target Exploration and Mining Corp. ("Target")
successfully closed a plan of arrangement whereby the Company acquired all the outstanding
common shares of Target and Target has become a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. 
Target shareholders received approximately 14.7 million common shares of the Company (1.2
Company shares for each Target common share outstanding) with an estimated market value of
approximately $2.6 million. In addition, each outstanding Target warrant and stock option which
gave the holder the right to acquire common shares of Target was exchanged for a warrant or
stock option which gave the holder the right to acquire common shares of the Company on the
exchange ratio of 1.2 Company shares for each Target warrant or stock option exercised, with all
other terms of such warrants and options (such as term and expiry) remaining unchanged.  As a
result of the acquisition of Target, the Company acquired an interest in the Bootheel and Sinbad
projects in Wyoming and Utah, USA respectively.  During fiscal 2010, we allowed all 62 mineral
claims on the Sinbad property located in Emery County, Utah, to lapse, and the State Lease with
the State of Utah was not renewed.
Property Acquisitions
Since the beginning of fiscal 2016, we have acquired no additional properties.
Property Terminations
Since the beginning of fiscal 2016, we have dropped no mineral claims from the CMB project.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures, excluding property, plant and equipment, for the last three fiscal years
were as follows:
Fiscal Year Expenditures 
Fiscal 2014 $
Fiscal 2015 $
Fiscal 2016 $
(1) 
(2) 
(3)
--
--
--
(1) These funds were spent as outlined below:
Expense ($)
CMB Moran
Lake
Acquisition
costs
--
CMB
Silver
Spruce
--
Bootheel
Project
Golden
Promise
Juniper
Ridge
Other
Claims
--
--
--
--
16
(2) These funds were spent as outlined below:
Expense ($)
CMB Moran
Lake
Acquisition
costs
--
CMB
Silver
Spruce
--
Bootheel
Project
Golden
Promise
Juniper
Ridge
Other
Claims
--
--
--
--
(3) These funds were spent as outlined below:
Expense ($)
CMB Moran
Lake
Acquisition
costs
--
CMB
Silver
Spruce
--
Bootheel
Project
Golden
Promise
Juniper
Ridge
Other
Claims
--
--
--
--
We do not expect to incur any significant capital expenditures with respect to the Company's
existing properties for fiscal year 2017.  Our capital expenditures are financed through sales of
our common shares.  
Exploration and evaluation expenses
The Company recorded the following exploration and evaluation expenses in relation to its
mineral properties:
Fiscal Year Expenditures 
Fiscal 2014 $ 34,225
Fiscal 2015 $ 21,481
Fiscal 2016 $ 50,857
(1) 
(2) 
(3)
(1)These funds were spent as outlined below:
CMB Moran
 
Lake
$ --
--
  
  
--
--
  
--
  
560
  
  
--
--
Expense ($)
Drilling and
trenching
Geology 
Geophysics 
Geochemistry
Metallurgy
Administration 
Permitting 
Hydrology 
Technical
analysis 
Reclamation
Costs 
Pre-acquisition
cost 
  
JCEAP refunds    
Recovery
--
--
--
--
--
CMB
Silver
  
Spruce
Bootheel
  
Project
Golden
  
Promise
Juniper
  
Ridge
Other
  
Claims
$
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
$ --
    --
    --
    --
    --
    34,673
    --
    --
--
10,921
--
    --
    (11,913
$
)
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
$ --
--
   
   
--
--
   
--
   
(392
   
   
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
$ --
--
   
   
--
--
   
--
   
)  
--
    376
--
--
--
--
--
--
17
(2)These funds were spent as outlined below:
CMB Moran
 
Lake
CMB
Silver
  
Spruce
Bootheel
  
Project
Golden
  
Promise
Juniper
  
Ridge
Other
  
Claims
$
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
$
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
$ --
    --
    --
    --
    --
    27,367
    --
    --
$
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
$
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
$
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
Expense ($)
Drilling and
trenching
Geology 
Geophysics 
Geochemistry
Metallurgy
Administration 
Permitting 
Hydrology 
Technical
analysis 
Reclamation
Costs 
Pre-acquisition
cost
  
JCEAP refunds    
Recovery
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
1,925
--
--
    --
    (7,811
)
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
(3)These funds were spent as outlined below:
CMB Moran
 
Lake
$
Expense ($)
Drilling and
trenching
Geology 
Geophysics 
Geochemistry
Metallurgy
Administration 
Permitting 
Hydrology 
Technical
analysis 
Reclamation
Costs 
Pre-acquisition
cost
  
JCEAP refunds    
  
Recovery
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
CMB
Silver
  
Spruce
Bootheel
  
Project
Golden
  
Promise
Juniper
  
Ridge
Other
  
Claims
$ --
    --
    --
    --
    --
$ --
    --
    --
    --
    --
    17,930     30,033
    --
    --
--
    --
--
--
--
    --
    --
9,980
--
--
    --
    (7,106
$
)
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
$
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
$
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
18
4.B. Business Overview
Corporate Development
We are a mineral exploration company engaged in the acquisition and exploration of mineral
properties (primarily uranium, base and precious metals).  We do not have any producing mineral
properties at this time.  Our business is presently focused on the exploration and evaluation of
various mineral deposits in North America.  See "Item 4.D – Property, Plants and Equipment"
below for a detailed description of the Company's properties.
We are currently focusing our exploration and evaluation activities in the Province of
Newfoundland and Labrador and the State of Wyoming on the following properties:
·CMB property located in Labrador, Canada.
·The Bootheel Project located in Wyoming, U.S.A.
On April 12, 2016, the Company entered into a definitive agreement (the "Amalgamation
Agreement") with Canada Jetlines Ltd. ("Jetlines") with respect to the amalgamation of Jetlines
and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the "Jetlines Transaction").  Jetlines is a start-up
airline aiming to become Canada's first ultra-low cost carrier ("ULCC").
Prior to the closing of the Transaction, the Company has agreed to consolidate its issued and
outstanding common shares on the basis of one post-consolidation common share for every one
and one-half (1.5) pre-consolidation common shares and effect a continuance as a Federal
corporation governed by the Canada Business Corporations Act. Pursuant to the Amalgamation
Agreement one and one-half (1.5) common shares of the Company will be issued in exchange
for every one common share of Jetlines ("Jetlines Share") held, provided that holders of Jetlines
Shares that are not Canadian shall receive variable voting common shares of the Company and
holders of Jetlines Shares that are Canadian shall receive common voting shares of the
Company.
Outstanding warrants of the Company and Jetlines and the outstanding stock options of the
Company and Jetlines will automatically become exercisable for or shall be exchanged for
common shares of the Company, subject to all necessary adjustments to reflect the terms of the
Jetlines Transaction and subject to the terms governing the warrants and options. After the
Jetlines Transaction is complete, all of the tangible and intangible assets of Jetlines will be
owned by and held in the entity formed through amalgamation of Jetlines and a wholly owned
subsidiary of the Company.
The Jetlines Transaction remains subject to the following key conditions:
the Company will complete a private placement (the "Concurrent Financing") of units ("Units")
for gross proceeds of up to $6,000,000. Each Unit will consist of one common share of the
Company and one half of one share purchase warrant. Each whole share purchase warrant
·
shall be exercisable into a common share of the Company for 24 months. Subject to Exchange
approval, the Company may pay commissions or finder's fees in connection with the Concurrent
Financing and may appoint a broker to assist with the Concurrent Financing. The Concurrent
Financing will close immediately prior to or concurrently with the Jetlines Transaction; and
the Jetlines Transaction will have received shareholder approval and the approval of the
Exchange. Subsequent to the year ended April 30, 2016, the shareholders of the Company
·
approved the Jetlines Transaction on July 27, 2016 and conditional approval from the Exchange
was received.
Prior to the closing of the Jetlines Transaction, Jetlines may complete a financing for a maximum
of $250,000 on the same terms as the Concurrent Financing.
For further details regarding the Jetlines Transaction please refer to the Company's Information
Circular dated June 17, 2016.
 
19
Material Effects of Government Regulations
Our current and anticipated future operations, including further exploration activities, require
permits from various Canadian Federal and Provincial and U.S. Federal and State governmental
authorities.  Such operations are subject to various laws governing land use, the protection of the
environment, production, exports, taxes, labor standards, occupational health, waste disposal,
toxic substances, well safety and other matters.  Unfavorable amendments to current laws,
regulations and permits governing operations and activities of resource exploration companies,
or more stringent implementation thereof, could have a materially adverse impact on us and
cause increases in capital expenditures which could result in our ceasing operations.  We have
had no material costs related to compliance and/or permits in recent years, and anticipate no
material costs in the next year.
Field work is prohibited on certain parts of the Bootheel Project due to the presence of sage
grouse mating areas during the period March 15th to June 30th.
Seasonality
We can only carry out exploration when weather is favorable.  Typically, we cannot carry out any
work at a reasonable cost during the months of November and December for winter freeze-up
and March and April for spring break-up on our Canadian properties.  
Dependency upon Patents/Licenses/Contracts/Processes
Not applicable
Sources/Availability of Raw Materials
Not applicable
4.C.Organization Structure
The Company is a corporation subject to the BCBCA.  Jet Metal owns 100% of the issued and
outstanding shares in each of the following subsidiaries:
1.Target Exploration and Mining Corp. ("Target"), a British Columbia corporation.
a.
Target owns all of the issued and outstanding shares in Crosshair Energy USA, Inc. (formerly
448018 Exploration Inc.), a Nevada Corporation.
i.Crosshair Energy USA, Inc. holds an 81% interest in The Bootheel Project LLC.
2.Gemini Metals Corp., a British Columbia corporation.
4.D.Property, Plants and Equipment
Our properties are in the exploration stage and a substantial amount of capital will have to be
spent on each property before we will know if they contain commercially viable mineral deposits.
 Our properties are located in the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada and
Wyoming, USA.  Our properties are without known reserves and the work being done by us is
exploratory in nature.
Our executive offices are located in shared office premises of approximately 10,630 square feet
at Suite 1240, 1140 West Pender Street, Vancouver, British Columbia Canada.  We have
occupied these facilities since 2006.  Beginning on January 1, 2010 (revised on October 1, 2010
and September 16, 2014), we entered into a management services agreement with King & Bay
West Management Corp. ("King & Bay West") under which King & Bay West provides shared
office space for the Company and other companies that King & Bay West
20
provides management services to. As part of this agreement, King & Bay West has assumed the
lease for the office facilities occupied by the Company.
National Instrument 43-101 Compliance
Except as otherwise indicated, C. Stewart Wallis, P.Geo., having a business address at 4923 1st
Avenue, Delta, British Columbia, V4M 1B4, a Director of the Company and a Qualified Person as
defined by NI 43-101, has reviewed and is responsible for the technical information contained in
this Annual Report on Form 20-F.  Mr. Wallis has consented to the inclusion of his name and the
statements attributed to him in this Annual Report on Form 20-F.  Further information about the
Company's mineral properties can be found in the following technical reports which are available
on SEDAR at www.sedar.com:
CMB Uranium Project: The Technical Report titled "Technical Report on the Central Mineral Belt
·
(CMB) Property, Labrador Canada" dated April 16, 2015 (filed as an exhibit to our Form 6-K on
April 17, 2015).
Bootheel Uranium Project: The Technical Report titled "Technical Report on the Bootheel
Project for Jet Metal Corp. and The Bootheel Project, LLC" dated May 20, 2015 (filed as an
·
exhibit to our Form 6-K on June 24, 2015).
Newfoundland
Golden Promise Property and Agreements
The Company entered into the Golden Promise Option and Joint Venture Agreement dated April
8, 2009 between the Company and Paragon, pursuant to which it acquired a 60% interest in the
Golden Promise Gold Project in Central Newfoundland, Canada with an option to acquire up to a
70% interest.  Work completed on the property to date confirmed the exploration prospectivity of
the area, however, the current poor state of the junior resource market renders financing such
early stage projects virtually impossible. As a result, the decision was made to drop this ground
and expend no additional funds. The property has since been returned to the vendor.
South Golden Promise Property and Agreements
The South Golden Promise Property agreement included two separate blocks of licenses, South
Golden Promise and Victoria Lake, which collectively covered 1,975 hectares in 79 map-staked
claims,  each 500 by 500 metres in size.Under the terms of an agreement dated February 14,
2003 with Paragon, the Company earned a 60% interest in the South Golden Promise Property
in consideration for issuing a total of 100,000 common shares and incurring a minimum of
$1,750,000 in exploration expenditures.
As was the case with the Golden Promise project, work completed on the South Golden Promise
project to date confirmed the exploration prospectivity of the area, however, the current poor state
of the junior resource market renders financing such early stage projects virtually impossible. As
a result, the decision was made, in conjunction with our JV partner to expend no additional funds
on this project and to drop the  claims that constitute the South Golden Promise Property.
Victoria Lake Property and Agreements
Paragon acquired an option to earn a 100% interest in the South Golden Promise Property
pursuant to an underlying option agreement, dated January 8, 2003, with Al Keats, Calvin Keats
and Kevin Keats.  The vendors were entitled to a 2.5% Net Smelter Return.  Paragon could
repurchase a 1.5% Net Smelter Return for $1,500,000 and had a right of first refusal with respect
to the remaining 1.0%.  As of September 2005, Paragon completed its obligations under its
option agreement with the vendors and held a 100% interest in the South Golden Promise
Property subject to the 2.5% Net Smelter Return.
As was the case for the Golden Promise and South Golden Promise Properties, the current poor
state of the junior resource market precludes further expenditure on the Victoria Lake Property.
As a result, the decision was made to
21
cease funding this project and the property has since been dropped, as the original vendors did
not want the property returned to them.
Labrador—Central Mineral Belt
The Company has been conducting mineral exploration activities in the Central Mineral Belt of
Newfoundland and Labrador since 2004. The Central Mineral Belt is a geological province
comprising six Proterozoic sequences of volcanic, sedimentary and plutonic rocks ranging in age
from about 2.0 to 1.3 billion years and include, from oldest to youngest, the Post Hill, Moran Lake,
Aillik, Bruce River, Letitia Lake and Seal Lake Groups.  The Central Mineral Belt includes
portions of 4 major tectonic provinces, these being the Nain, Makkovik and Grenville provinces,
and the Hopedale Block of the Archean Nain Province. The Company's initial foray into this area
was through an option agreement with local prospector Lewis Murphy. This first property was
referred to as the CMB property and was a focus of the Company's activities from 2004 until
2012. The option agreement with Mr. Murphy was terminated on October 31, 2013. In addition to
this initial property, during the summer of 2008 an opportunity arose such that the Company was
able to acquire an interest in an adjacent property. This acquired interest was a component of an
existing joint venture (JV) agreement between Expedition Mining Inc. ("Expedition") and Silver
Spruce Resources Inc. ("Silver Spruce"). As it was part of a pre-existing JV, with a separate JV-
specific budget, it was kept separate from the original CMB property and was subsequently
referred to as the CMB-JV property. From 2008 until 2012, the Company actively explored on
both properties and continued to budget and report each separately. As a result of Silver Spruce
exercising their non-participation right during the 2012 field season, their interest in the CMB-JV
property was reduced to a 2% Net Smelter Return Royalty and the Company acquired 100%
ownership of the entire property. With the termination of the JV and acquisition of 100%
ownership of the property, there was no longer any need to budget and report the two properties
separately. From the 2012 field season onward, the two properties were amalgamated under a
single budget and henceforth referred to simply as the CMB project.
22
CMB Property and Agreement
As previously mentioned, in July 2008, the Company acquired a 60% interest in the property from
Expedition by paying CDN $500,000 and issuing 2,500,000 common shares and 1,875,000
warrants to Expedition. The claims were part of a property agreement between Expedition and
Silver Spruce, under which Expedition had earned a 60% interest.  The claims are host to the
Two Time deposit.
Silver Spruce declined to participate in the 2012 exploration program and as a result, had its
interest in the property diluted to a 2% Net Smelter Return Royalty. With the acquisition of 100%
of this property and the dissolution of the JV agreement as a consequence of this dilution, there
was no longer any need to budget and report the CMB and CMB-JV properties separately. From
the 2012 field season onward, the two properties were amalgamated under a single budget and
henceforth referred to simply as the CMB project.
Property Description and Location
The CMB Project comprises a total of 359 map-staked claims in 2 mineral licenses, covering a
total area of 8,975 ha. The property is located in the Central Mineral Belt of Labrador,
approximately 140 km north of the town of Happy Valley-Goose Bay and 85 km southwest of the
coastal community of Postville on Kaipokok Bay. In a direct line, the property is about 75 km from
tidewater to the northeast. The undeveloped Michelin uranium deposit, owned by Paladin Energy
Ltd., is approximately 65 km east-northeast of the Moran Lake Property.  The property area is
within the Naskaupi Electoral District of Labrador.
Accessibility
Helicopter and fixed wing service out of Goose Bay are the most efficient means of access to the
property.  Local infrastructure is confined to the limited facilities of the community of Postville,
which has commercial airline service from Goose Bay and commercial ferry service from St
John's, Newfoundland. Coastal boats are available to convey goods and passengers from Happy
Valley to Postville. Most necessary goods and services, including charter aircraft, can be
obtained in Goose Bay, which has excellent commercial airline connections to St John's, Halifax
and Montreal.
This portion of central Labrador has a sub-Arctic climate, with strong seasonal contrasts marked
by short cool summers and long cold winters. Freeze-up typically begins in late October and lasts
until early to mid-June.  Snow cover is relatively heavy and usually lasts seven to eight months. 
Daytime temperatures during the winter typically range from -15º Celsius to -30º Celsius, while
daytime summer temperatures typically range from 15º Celsius to 25º Celsius.
The topography of the area consists of rolling highlands with maximum relief approaching 300m.
The hilltops can be partly barren while the slopes and valleys are covered in vegetation, mostly
scrubby black spruce and some deciduous trees with a thick intervening growth of alders. Almost
everywhere there is a thick ground cover of moss. The valleys are steep sided at many locations
and are often host to boggy ground with small ponds or lakes.
Property Geology
The CMB Project is situated within the Central Mineral Belt of Labrador which includes portions
of 4 major tectonic provinces, these being the Nain, Makkovik and Grenville provinces, and the
Hopedale Block of the Archean Nain Province.  The easternmost claims lie within the Makkovik
Province, while the westernmost claims generally lie along the boundary between the Nain,
Churchill and Grenville Province. The property is underlain by the Kanairitok Intrusive Suite has
an approximate age of 2800 Ma and consists mainly of Archean gneiss, schistose metavolcanics
and granitoids.  The main types of lithologies observed include monzodiorite (predominant unit),
diorite, amphibolite and mafic dykes, pegmatites as well as more minor granites, monzonites and
granodiorites
23
Exploration
Initial exploration activities executed by Silver Spruce and Expedition included an airborne
magnetic and radiometric survey covering the entire property. Interpretation of the data from this
survey identified a high-priority radiometric anomaly. Much of the subsequent exploration
activities were focused on follow-up investigations of this anomaly and included line cutting,
ground scintillometer surveying, soil, till, lake, and stream sediment sampling, ground radon
(RadonEx) surveying, prospecting, trenching, geological mapping, and diamond drilling.  The
uranium mineralization identified from this concentrated exploration effort is referred to as the
Two Time zone. This zone of mineralization is hosted within brecciated and fractured granitic to
dioritic intrusive rocks of the Kanairiktok Intrusive Suite characterized by hematite, carbonate,
and chlorite alteration.  A number of other showings and prospects have also been discovered on
the property, including the Firestone Showing, Doucette, HF, J, F, and W occurrences.
Drilling
Prior to the Company acquiring Expedition's 60% interest in the property, Silver Spruce and
Expedition completed a total of 11,196 metres of drilling in 44 holes. Highlights include 0.118%
U3O8 over 28.00 metres in hole CMB-07-06, 0.101% U3O8 over 33.00 metres in hole CMB-07-14,
and 0.112% U3O8 over 19.00 metres in hole CMB-07-34.  The Silver Spruce/Expedition work on
the Two Time zone culminated in a NI 43-101 compliant resource estimate of 2.33 million
pounds of U3O8 (1.82 million tonnes grading 0.058% U3O8) in the indicated category and 3.73
million pounds of U3O8 (3.16 million tonnes grading 0.053% U3O8) in the inferred category using
a cut-off grade of 0.03% U3O8. The Two Time zone remains open to depth and along strike to the
south.
Subsequent to the Company acquiring its 60% interest in the property, it spent the 2009 and
2010 field seasons carrying out geological mapping, prospecting and sampling programs to
evaluate priority targets generated from the earlier airborne surveys.  Several new uranium
showings were discovered, with follow-up activity executed in the 2011 and 2012 field seasons.
Drilling on the Two Time zone in 2011 and 2012 successfully intersected mineralization in
several holes, including drill hole CMB-12-49, indicating the mineralization is continuous to the
south along strike and along dip. This hole represents a minimum 50m step out to the south from
previous holes into the deposit. Four shallow holes drilled north of the Two Time zone to
evaluate radon anomalies did not intersect uranium mineralization. Drilling on the Blue Star
prospect tested coincident airborne geophysical and rock geochemical anomalies; four out of the
ten holes drilled intersected uranium mineralization. The best hole was 3 metres of 0.05% U3O8.
Five holes, totalling 740 metres, tested the northeast extension of the Firestone showing failed to
intersect mineralization.
A revised Technical Report dated April 16, 2015, is available on Sedar (www.sedar.com).  The
report confirmed the existing Two Time resource at a cut-off grade of 0.03% U3O8 as an Indicated
Mineral Resource of 1.82 million tonnes grading 0.058% U3O8 containing 2.33 million pounds
U3O8.  In addition, Inferred Mineral Resources are estimated to total 3.16 million tonnes grading
0.053% U3O8 containing 3.73 million pounds U3O8.
Wyoming – Bootheel Project
The Bootheel property is currently controlled by the Bootheel Project LLC and consists of 81
Federal Mining claims and one State lease.  The Company currently has an 81% interest in The
Bootheel Project LLC, subject to certain royalties. Under the terms of an agreement dated June 7,
2007, as amended December 21, 2007 and February 28, 2008, between UR-Energy USA Inc.
("URE"), several of its subsidiaries, Target Exploration and Mining Corp. ("Target"), a wholly
owned subsidiary of the Company, and Crosshair Energy USA, Inc. ("Crosshair USA"), a wholly
owned subsidiary of Target, the Company was able to earn an initial 75% interest in the Bootheel
Project LLC, by completing expenditures totalling US$3 million and issuing 12,500 common
shares on or before June 7, 2011.  All the common shares have been issued and as of July 31,
2009, the Company exceeded US$3 million in expenditures on the property, thereby earning its
initial 75% interest. As URE declined to participate in the fiscal 2012 exploration program, its
participating interest was diluted from 25% to approximately 19%, and the Company's
participating interest increased from 75% to approximately 81%.
24
Property Location
The Bootheel property is located in Albany County on the southeast edge of the Shirley Basin
approximately 60 miles southeast of Casper, Wyoming and 25 miles southeast of Medicine Bow.
The Bootheel property currently comprises 81 Federal lode mining claims and one 640 acre
Wyoming State Mineral Lease, No. 0-040774 totalling approximately 2,013 acres. The lode
mining claims control the subsurface mineral rights and are administered by the U.S. Bureau of
Land Management (BLM).
Accessibility
The Shirley Basin property is readily accessible year-round by an extensive system of county
gravel and unimproved ranch roads extending east from U.S. Highways 30 and 287 and
Wyoming Road 487. The all season maintained gravel County Road Number 61 (Fetterman
Road) crosses the Bootheel property.
History
Uranium was discovered in the Shirley Basin in 1955 by Teton Exploration Drilling Co., who
found ore-grade material by drilling west of the Little Medicine Bow River in the western part of
the Shirley Basin, 30 mi south of Casper.  In the summer of 1957, several thousand claims were
staked over 150 square mi.  By the end of 1959, over 1,000,000 ft of drilling had been completed
through the mineralized Wind River Formation, and into underlying pre-Tertiary rocks.  In 1959,
Utah Mining Corp. later Utah Construction and Mining Co. (Utah) sank a shaft on their property
and the first uranium was produced in March 1960, with ore shipped to the Lucky Mc mill in the
Gas Hills area west of Casper.  Late in 1964, the company stopped underground mining and
commenced an in-situ leach operation using sulphuric acid and ion exchange for recovery. 
Production amounted to approximately 200,000 pounds of U3O8 per year through 1970. In 1970,
the ISR operation was replaced by a conventional mine and mill.
In July 1960, Petrotomics Co. commenced an open-pit operation in the same area and in 1962 a
solvent extraction facility was built on the property.  A second pit commenced operation in 1966. 
By late 1969, there were three operating mines in the Shirley Basin, those of Petrotomics and
Utah, as well as Kerr McGee Corp. ("Kerr-McGee").
Total production from the Basin amounted to about 34 million lbs of uranium. The last mine
closed in 1992 and most of the pits have been reclaimed.  Cogema Mining Inc. retains one pit,
which is used for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste from the ISR operations in the
Powder River Basin.
The Bootheel property specifically, was originally staked in 1958 by Kerr McGee Corp. In the
subsequent decades the property has been explored by a number of different companies
including Kerr McGee, Rocky Mountain Energy Corporation, Cherokee Exploration Inc., Uranium
Resources and Development Company ("URADCO"), Nuclear Assurance Corporation, Cameco
Corporation and Power Resources Inc. Total drilling on the property is estimated to be over
600,000 feet. The known uranium zones on the property remain open for expansion.
Property Geology
The Bootheel Project is located at the south-eastern margin of the Shirley Basin, along the
western flank of the Laramie Mountains.  Tertiary sediments occupy the entire surface area of the
property and unconformably overlie a gently dipping, relatively undisturbed sequence of
Paleozoic and Mesozoic sediments.  A moderate degree of block faulting and some gentle
folding are the main structural features and mostly affect pre-Tertiary rocks.
Uranium mineralization occurs within seven different sandstone beds within the gently dipping
Jurassic and Cretaceous stratigraphy and within the overlying Tertiary Wind River Formation. 
Five horizons host significant mineralization and have the potential to host economic resources:
1) Jurassic Sundance Formation containing the Canyon Springs B and D Beds, 2) Cretaceous
Dakota Sandstone, 3) Cretaceous Rusty Beds Sandstone, 4) Cretaceous Muddy Sandstone and
5) Tertiary Wind River Formation.  Three other Cretaceous horizons (Lakota
25
Sandstone, Fuson Shale and Wall Sandstone) contain scattered weak mineralization, but are not
considered exploration targets at this time.
Two major zones of mineralization are recognized within the Sundance Formation.  The main
zone in Sections 36 and 1 stretches for over 7,000 ft in length and reaches widths of up to 400 ft
and is described as a series of tabular zones.  In Sections 6 and 7 the mineralization shows the
characteristic roll front shape with the main northeast –trending nose extending approximately
1,900 ft in length.  These zones vary from 2 to 60 ft in thickness, averaging from 0.017% to
0.216% eU3O8 occurring at depths of 158 to 585 ft.  Length of the individual bodies ranges from
300 to 1,300 ft.
Three Cretaceous sandstone units host uranium mineralization.  The Dakota Sandstone ranges
from 4 to 47 ft thick and contains abundant pyrite and carbonaceous material.  Uranium
mineralization ranging from 2 to 14 ft thick, grades from 0.026% to 0.23% eU3O8 and occurs from
163 to 325 ft below the surface.  The main zone is about 300 ft wide and 1,000 ft long.  The Rusty
Beds range from 5 to 87 ft thick, and contain abundant pyrite and carbonaceous debris. 
Mineralization is 2 to 18 ft thick, grades from 0.020% to 0.11% eU3O8 and occurs from 232 to 297
ft below the surface.  Mineralization occurs in three small zones, 300 to 400 ft in size.  The Muddy
Sandstone is 18 to 45 ft thick and is the least well mineralized of the Cretaceous units, with only
one zone, about 200 ft by 400 ft in dimension, drilled to date.  This zone ranges from 2 to 6 ft
thick, grades from 0.145% to 0.157% eU3O8 and is relatively shallow at 138 to 149 ft below the
surface.
Tertiary Wind River Formation mineralization is typically thin, high grade, meandering and
somewhat laterally discontinuous.  The Wind River ranges from 25 to 270 ft thick, averaging 150
ft.  The mineralized zones are typically 2 to 24 ft thick, averaging 5 ft, from 0.016% to 0.520%
eU3O8 and occur from 50 to 215 ft below the surface.  The two main zones are up to 700 ft in
width and 1,670 ft in length.
Exploration and Development
The Bootheel Project LLC acquired a database from Power Resources Inc. that includes reports,
gamma logs, drill logs and other data which primarily cover the Federal mining claim but also
include some historic data from the surrounding fee land.  In early 2009, the Bootheel Project
LLC acquired additional data from Cameco which included historical geological and gamma logs
covering 660 drill holes totalling approximately 290,000 feet.  These data were compiled by the
Company's geological team and were combined with the results from over 50,000 feet of drilling
completed by Target at Bootheel during calendar year 2008. This compilation formed the basis
for the Company's 2011 drilling program which saw the completion of 76 bore holes, totaling
35,760 feet (10,900 metres).
A synthesis of all of these data enabled the Company to generate an Indicated Mineral Resource
estimate of 1.12 million pounds of U3O8 (1.570M tons @0.036%) and an Inferred Mineral
Resource of 1.05 million pounds of U3O8 (1.315M tons @ 0.040%) for the 81 Federal lode claims
and single Wyoming State lease that currently comprise the Bootheel Property. Further details
are found in the Technical Report dated May 20, 2015, available on Sedar (www.sedar.com).
While the above stated mineral resource estimates are encouraging, the continuing downward
pressure on the uranium price, in addition to the overall poor state of the junior resource market,
has led the Bootheel Project LLC to put the project on care and maintenance, enabling it to keep
its expenditures to a minimum, while maintaining the integrity of its data and land package. A
reversal in the deflated state of the uranium price, as well as the junior resource market in
general, may afford the Bootheel Project LLC the opportunity to further assess and evaluate its
options for the future.
ITEM 4A.UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
Not applicable
26
ITEM 5. OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW AND PROSPECTS
The following discussion for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2016, 2015 and 2014 should be
read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements for the referenced periods
and the notes thereto.  Our consolidated financial statements for the year ended April 30, 2016
have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued by the International Accounting
Standards Board ("IASB") and interpretations issued by the International Financial Reporting
Interpretations Committee ("IFRIC"). The functional currency of the Company and its subsidiaries
is the Canadian Dollar and therefore our consolidated financial statements are reported in
Canadian dollars.
Overview
The Company is a mineral exploration company engaged in acquiring, exploring and developing
mineral properties and its focus is primarily uranium, base and precious metals.  The Company
does not have any producing mineral properties at this time.  The Company's business is
presently focused on the exploration and evaluation of various mineral deposits in North
America.  The Company's shares trade on TSX Venture Exchange.
The Company is currently focusing on exploration and evaluation activities in the province of
Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada and the State of Wyoming USA on the following
properties:
·CMB property located in Labrador, Canada
·The Bootheel Project located in Wyoming, U.S.A.
For fiscal year ended April 30, 2016, the Company reported a net loss of $3,118,609 or $011 per
common share, compared with a net loss of $357,729 or $0.02 per common share for the prior
fiscal year.   While figures have been prepared using IFRS applicable to a going concern, which
contemplates the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities in the normal course of
business as they come due, certain conditions and events cast significant doubt on the validity of
this assumption.  As of April 30, 2016 the Company had working capital of $1,380,210 and an
accumulated deficit of $110,469,531. The Company's ability to continue as a going concern is
dependent upon its ability to obtain additional funding from loans or equity financings or through
other arrangements. To raise funds for operations, the Company is pursuing merger and
acquisition opportunities, in conjunction with private or institutional financing.  However, there
can be no assurance that these activities will be successful.
Accounting Standards
The Company's significant accounting policies are detailed in Note 3 to the accompanying
annual audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended April 30, 2016.
The following accounting pronouncements have been made, but are not yet effective for the
Company as at April 30, 2016.  The Company is currently evaluating the impact of these
amended standards on its consolidated financial statements.
In November 2009 and October 2010, the IASB issued IFRS 9, Financial Instruments ("IFRS 9"),
which represents the completion of the first part of a three-part project to replace IAS 39,
Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement, with a new standard. Per the new
standard, an entity choosing to measure a liability at fair value will present the portion of the
change in its fair value due to changes in the entity's own credit risk in the other comprehensive
income or loss section of the entity's statement of comprehensive loss, rather than within profit or
loss. Additionally, IFRS 9 includes revised guidance related to the derecognition of financial
instruments. IFRS 9 applies to financial statements for annual periods beginning on or after
January 1, 2018, with early adoption permitted.
27
5.A. Operating Results
Results of Operations for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016 compared to the fiscal year ended
April 30, 2015
For the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company reported a net loss of $3,118,609 or $0.11 per
common share, compared to a net loss of $357,729 or $0.02 per common share for the prior
year.  The increase in net loss of $2,760,880 is discussed in detail below.
Operating Items
Total operating items for the year ended April 30, 2016 totaled $3,061,073, representing an
increase of $2,521,052 compared to the prior year, as discussed in detail below.
The Company incurred business development expenses in the amount of $89,641 during the
year ended April 30, 2016 in connection with the proposed transaction with Jetlines, as
discussed in detail under the heading "Proposed Transaction".  Business development
expenses include amounts relating to due diligence, external consulting and travel.  There were
no business development expenses incurred during the previous year ended April 30, 2015.
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company incurred exploration and evaluation
expenses in the amount of $50,857 (2015 - $21,481) of which $17,950 (2015 - $Nil) related to
claims maintenance for the CMB Project and $32,907 (2015 - $21,481) related to the net costs of
the Bootheel Uranium Project.  The total increase in exploration and evaluation expenses of
$29,376 is due to the Company updating technical reports and renewing property claims during
the year ended April 30, 2016.  Details of exploration and evaluation activities are further
discussed under the heading "Exploration and Evaluation Assets".
The Company earned finance income during the year ended April 30, 2016 in the amount of
$21,373 (2015 - $17,599).  Finance income related primarily to excess cash on hand from equity
financing completed in September 2014 which is held in short-term investments. The increase in
finance income of $3,774 for the year ended April 30, 2016 compared to the prior year is due to
the length of time excess cash on hand was invested in each year.  In addition, the Company
accrued finance income in the amount of $1,113 during the year ended April 30, 2016 related to a
loan receivable from Jetlines.
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company recorded a foreign exchange gain in the
amount of $125 (2015 – loss of $4,059) in relation to transactions and balances denominated in
US dollars and the effects of fluctuations of the US dollar relative to the Canadian dollar.
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company recorded an impairment of exploration and
evaluation assets in the amount of $2,509,791 with respect to the CMB Property.  Refer to
"Exploration and Evaluation Assets" above for further details.  No impairment losses were
recorded during the year ended April 30, 2015.
Investor relations for the year ended April 30, 2016 decreased to $3,642 from $15,058 incurred in
the prior year. Investor relations expenses consist of the cost of news releases, website
maintenance and hosting and printing.  During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company
incurred additional costs in connection with the private placement which closed in September
2014.
Office and administration expenses for the year ended April 30, 2016 in the amount of $114,312
(2015 - $151,403) decreased by $37,091 compared to the prior year and is attributable to
reductions in insurance costs, usage of shared office facilities, offsite storage costs and overall
corporate activities.
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company incurred professional fees in the amount of
$33,656 (2015 - $18,838) which includes accounting and audit fees and legal fees.  The increase
in professional fees of $14,818 is due to a recovery of audit fees recorded during the year ended
April 30, 2015 as previous invoices received by the Company were revised.  The increased audit
fees incurred during the year ended April 30, 2016 were partially offset by reduced legal costs as
a result of reduced corporate activity.
 
28
Transfer agent and filing fees decreased to $80,827 for the year ended April 30, 2016 compared
to $110,088 for the prior year.  The decrease in transfer agent and filing fees of $29,261 is
attributable to decreased overall public company listing fees as the Company voluntarily delisted
from the NYSE MKT Stock Exchange and the Toronto Stock Exchange in prior years.  During the
year ended April 30, 2015, the Company incurred initial costs in listing share purchase warrants
which further explains the decreased transfer agent and filing fees incurred during the year
ended April 30, 2016.
The Company incurred wages and salaries and consulting fees for the year ended April 30, 2016
in the amounts of $194,134 (2015 - $213,310) and $698 (2015 - $3,415), respectively.  The
decrease in personnel costs of $21,893 is a result of decreased overall corporate activities. 
During the year ended April 30, 2015, increased personnel services were required in connection
with the private placement completed in September 2014.
Other Income (Expenses)
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company sold exploration equipment and storage
containers with net book values of $66,091 and $2,682, respectively, for proceeds of $35,000,
resulting in a loss on disposal of $33,773.  The Company also recorded an impairment of
property and equipment in relation to obsolete exploration equipment with a net book value of
$1,802 and recoverable amount of $Nil, resulting in an impairment loss of $1,802.
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company recorded an impairment loss of reclamation
bonds in the amount of $21,961 due to collectability concerns.
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company realized a gain on forgiveness and
settlement of debt in the amount of $184,141 as a result of a debt settlement agreement between
King & Bay West Management Corp. ("King & Bay West"), MJM Consulting Corp. and the
Company.  The details of the debt settlement agreement are summarized in "Related Party
Transactions".
The Company sold property and equipment with a net book value of $Nil for proceeds of $600,
resulting in a gain on disposal of $600 for the year ended April 30, 2015.
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company recorded a loss on marketable securities in
the amount of $2,449 in relation to fair market value adjustments at year end.
Results of operations for the year ended April 30, 2015 compared to the year ended April 30,
2014:
For the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company reported a net loss of $357,729 or $0.02 per
common share, compared to a net loss of $3,967,283 or $0.60 per common share for the
previous year.  The decrease in net loss of $3,609,554 is discussed in detail below.
Operating Items
Total operating items for the year ended April 30, 2015 totaled $540,021, representing a
decrease of $3,356,907 compared to the prior year primarily as a result of an impairment of
exploration and evaluation assets recorded during the year ended April 30, 2014.  In addition, the
Company experienced decreased overall activity during the year ended April 30, 2015 compared
to the previous year.
 Consulting expense of $3,415 (2014 - $142,533) and wages and salaries of $213,310 (2014 -
$252,999) totalled $216,725 for the year ended April 30, 2015 (2014 - $395,532) which
represents a total decrease of $178,807 compared to the prior year as a result of decreased
Company activities and personnel providing services to the Company.  During the year ended
April 30, 2014, a consulting agreement between the Company and the former Chief Executive
Officer and a consulting agreement between the Company and the former Executive Chairman
were both terminated which also contributed to decreased personnel costs for the year ended
April 30, 2015.
29
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company incurred exploration and evaluation
expenses in the amount of $21,481 (2014 - $34,225), including $21,481 (2014 - $33,681) on the
Bootheel Uranium Project, $Nil (2014 - $560) on the CMB Project and $Nil (2014 – recovery of
$16) on other projects.  The decrease in exploration and evaluation expenses of $12,744 for the
year ended April 30, 2015 compared to the prior year is due to the Company pursuing fewer
projects as well as the Bootheel Uranium Project land package being reduced.
During the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company relinquished a number of mineral claims that
had formed a portion of the CMB Project and recorded an impairment of exploration and
evaluation assets in the amount of $3,160,618.  No such impairment losses were recorded during
the year ended April 30, 2015.
The Company earned finance income during the year ended April 30, 2015 in the amount of
$17,599 (2014 - $314).  The increase in finance income of $17,285 for the year ended April 30,
2015 is due the Company completing financing for gross proceeds of $3,000,000 on September
16, 2014 and investing excess cash on hand in short-term investments.
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company recorded a foreign exchange loss in the
amount of $4,059 (2014 – gain of $1,097) in relation to transactions and balances denominated
in US dollars and the effects of fluctuations of the US dollar relative to the Canadian dollar.
Investor relations for the year ended April 30, 2015 increased to $15,058 from $11,122 incurred
in the prior year.  The increase in investor relations of $3,936 for the year ended April 30, 2015
was a result of increased activity related to raising financing.  Investor relations expenses also
include the cost of news releases, website maintenance and hosting, and printing.
Office and administration expenses for the year ended April 30, 2015 in the amount of $151,403
(2014 - $161,251) decreased by $9,848 due to reductions in insurance costs and overall
corporate activities.
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company incurred professional fees in the amount of
$18,838 (2014 - $31,764) which includes accounting and audit fees and legal fees.  The
decrease in professional fees of $12,926 is due to a recovery of audit fees recorded during the
year ended April 30, 2015 as previous invoices received by the Company were revised.  The
decreased audit fees incurred during the year ended April 30, 2015 were partially offset by
increased legal costs in relation to US securities matters and procedures to list the Company's
warrants for trading.  During the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company incurred legal costs in
relation to the Company's transition from the NYSE MKT to the OTC Markets Group's OTCQB
Marketplace.
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company recorded share-based payment expense of
$Nil as all outstanding stock options fully vested during the year ended April 30, 2014 and no
stock options were issued during the year ended April 30, 2015.  During the year ended April 30,
2014, the Company recorded a recovery of share-based payment expense of $45,250 as a result
of forfeitures of unvested stock options during the year.  The recovery of share-based payment
expense had no effect on the Company's cash flows.
Transfer agent and filing fees decreased to $110,088 for the year ended April 30, 2015 compared
to $124,896 for the prior year, a decrease of $14,808. During the year ended April 30, 2014, the
Company incurred increased costs as it transitioned from the NYSE MKT to the OTC Markets
Group's OTCQB Marketplace, changed its name and consolidated its common shares on a 10 for
1 basis.
Other Income (Expenses)
The Company sold property and equipment with a net book value of $Nil for proceeds of $600,
resulting in a gain on disposal of $600 for the year ended April 30, 2015.
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company realized a gain on forgiveness and
settlement of debt in the amount of $184,141 as a result of a debt settlement agreement between
King & Bay West, MJM Consulting Corp. and the Company.  The details of the debt settlement
agreement are summarized in "Related Party Transactions".
30
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company recorded a loss on marketable securities in
the amount of $2,449 (2014 - $28,503) in relation to fair market value adjustments at year end.
During the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company recorded an impairment loss in the amount
of $41,852 due to collectability concerns in relation to reclamation bonds for properties that have
been abandoned.
Results of Operations for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2014 compared to the fiscal year ended
April 30, 2013
For the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company reported a net loss of $3,967,283 or $0.60 per
common share, compared to a net loss of $11,674,061 or $1.77 per common share for the year
ended April 30, 2013.
The Company did not issue any common shares during fiscal 2014 and as such, the weighted
average number of common shares is the same as the total number of common shares
outstanding as of April 30, 2014.  During the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company cancelled
183 common shares due to fractional rounding in connection with a share consolidation on the
basis of one post-consolidated share for every ten pre-consolidated common share.
Expenses
Total operating items for the year ended April 30, 2014 were $3,896,928, representing a
decrease of $7,993,424 compared to the prior year as a direct result of decreased overall
Company activity during fiscal 2014.  All administrative expenses for the year ended April 30,
2014 decreased compared to the prior year with the exception of transfer agent and filing fees
and are discussed below.
Audit and accounting fees of $22,775 (2013 - $124,087) decreased for the year ended April 30,
2014 compared to the prior year due to the Company incurring additional fees in the prior period
in relation to Sarbanes-Oxley ("SOX") compliance and additional tax filings.
Consulting expense of $Nil (2013 - $308,570), management fees of $142,533 (2013 - $411,368)
and wages and salaries of $252,999 (2013 - $705,024) total $395,532 for fiscal 2014 (2013 -
$1,424,962) which represents a total decrease of $1,029,430 compared to the prior year as a
result of decreased Company activities and personnel providing services to the Company. 
During the year ended April 30, 2014, a consulting agreement between the Company and the
former Chief Executive Officer and a consulting agreement between the Company and the former
Executive Chairman were both terminated.
Director fees of $Nil (2013 - $39,467) decreased by $39,467 compared to the prior year as a
result of the Company cancelling its director compensation program in light of financial
conditions faced by the Company during the prior year.
During the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company spent a total of $34,225 (2013 - $2,835,066)
on exploration and evaluation expenditures, including $560 (2013 - $1,910,312) on exploration of
the CMB Project, $33,681 (2013 - $66,619) on the Bootheel Project, $Nil (2013 - $47,265) on the
Golden Promise Project, recovered $392 (2013 - $810,870 expense) on the Juniper Ridge
Project and $376 on other projects (2013 - $Nil).  Exploration and evaluation expenses for the
year ended April 30, 2014 primarily related to minimal administrative costs and recoveries to
maintain claims and insurance policies on the Bootheel Project.  In addition, the Company
incurred reclamation costs to reclaim the land on which the Bootheel Project sits.  The fiscal
2014 decrease in exploration and evaluation expense of $2,800,841 in exploration and
evaluation expenditures compared to the prior year is due to the Company no longer pursuing
the CMB, Golden Promise and Juniper Ridge projects as well as decreased activities on the
Bootheel Project.
During the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company recorded finance income of $314 compared
to $22,158 in the prior year which relates to interest earned on excess cash on hand.  The
decrease in finance income is attributable to the Company's decreased cash and cash
equivalents balance.
31
During the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company recorded an impairment of exploration and
evaluation assets in the amount of $3,160,618 which relates to the CMB Project.  During the year
ended April 30, 2013, the Company recorded an impairment of exploration and evaluation assets
in the amount of $6,043,241 relating to the Bootheel, Golden Promise and Juniper Ridge
projects.
Insurance expense decreased from $51,415 for the year ended April 30, 2013 to $33,036 for the
year ended April 30, 2014 as a result of the Company adjusting its insurance policy to reflect
corporate changes such as property abandonments and the Company's stock exchange listings
as previously discussed.
Interest expense incurred during the year ended April 30, 2014 in the amount of $1,427 (2013 -
$10,402) relates to non-cash accretion of the Company's future reclamation provisions.  The
decrease in interest expense of $8,975 is a result of the balance of future reclamation provisions
decreasing during the year ended April 30, 2014.
Investor relations expense of $11,122 (2013 - $180,786), legal costs of $8,989 (2013 - $35,950),
office and administrative expenses of $87,331 (2013 - $167,188), project development costs of
$Nil (2013 - $66,471), rent of $40,632 (2013 - $123,066) and travel expenses of $252 (2013 -
$48,547) all decreased compared to the prior year as a direct result of decreased overall
Company activities, including fewer marketing initiatives, no new project development and
closure of the Company's office in Colorado during fiscal 2014.
During the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company recorded a recovery of $45,250 related to
share-based compensation as a result of forfeitures of unvested stock options during the year.
During the year ended April 30, 2013, the Company recorded share-based compensation of
$626,364 according to vesting schedules of certain grants issued in 2011 and 2012. This
expense (recovery) had no effect on the Company's cash flows.
Transfer agent and filing fees increased to $124,896 for the year ended April 30, 2014 compared
to $109,625 for the prior year as a result of the Company voluntarily delisting its common shares
from the NYSE MKT, transitioning from the TSX to the TSX Venture Exchange, changing its
name and consolidating its common shares on a 10 for 1 basis during fiscal 2014.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other expenses amounted to $70,355 for the year ended April 30, 2014 compared to other
income of $216,291 for the year ended April 30, 2013.
The Company recorded an impairment loss in the amount of $41,852 due to collectability
concerns in relation to reclamation bonds for properties that have been abandoned.  No such
impairment loss was recorded during the prior year.
During the year ended April 30, 2014 the Company recorded an unrealized loss on marketable
securities of $28,503 (2013 - $173,005) in relation to fair value adjustments for marketable
securities the Company holds.
During the year ended April 30, 2013, the Company recorded a flow through premium in the
amount of $428,712 in relation to flow through shares issued in prior years and attributable to the
qualified exploration expenditures incurred.  The Company also recorded a loss on asset
disposition of $39,416 during the year ended April 30, 2013.  No such transactions occurred
during the year ended April 30, 2014.
Exploration and Evaluation Assets
During the years ended April 30, 2016, 2015 and 2014, the Company did not incur any
acquisition costs in relation to exploration and evaluation assets.  The Company recorded
impairment losses in the amounts of $2,509,791 and $3,160,618 during the years ended April 30,
2016 and 2014, respectively, as discussed above.
32
Working Capital
As at April 30, 2016, the Company had working capital of $1,380,210 compared to working
capital of $2,099,399 as at April 30, 2015. The decrease in working capital of $719,189 is
attributable to cash used in operating activities for the year ended April 30, 2016 and the
classification of a related party term loan as a current liability as of April 30, 2016.
 5.B. Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity – April 30, 2016, April 30, 2015 and April 30, 2014
As of April 30, 2016, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $1,651,472 (April 30, 2015 -
$2,350,202; April 30, 2014 - $78,541) and working capital of $1,380,210 (April 30, 2015 -
$2,099,399; April 30, 2014 – working capital deficit of $716,619).  The decrease in working
capital of $719,189 is primarily attributable to cash used in operating activities for the year ended
April 30, 2016 and the classification of a related party term loan as a current liability as of April
30, 2016.
The Company's cash flows for the years ended April 30, 2016, 2015 and 2014 are summarized
as follows:
Cash used in operating activities
Cash used in investing activities
Cash provided by financing activities
Change in cash and cash equivalents during the
year
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of the year
Cash and cash equivalents, end of the year
April 30,
 
2016
 $(617,330
   (81,400
   -
April 30,
  
2015
) $(405,290
)   (149,690
    2,826,641     -
April 30,
  
2014
) $ (502,716
)   (15,193
)   2,271,661     (517,909
   (698,730
   2,350,202     78,541
    596,450
 $1,651,472   $2,350,202   $ 78,541
)
)
)
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities adjusts loss for the year for non-cash items including, but not
limited to, depreciation of property and equipment, accrued interest, forgiveness of debt,
impairment losses, and unrealized gains and losses.  Cash used in operating activities also
reflects changes in working capital items, such as amounts receivable, prepaid expenses and
amounts payable, which fluctuate in a manner that does not necessarily reflect predictable
patterns for the overall use of cash, the generation of which depends almost entirely on sources
of external financing to fund operations.
Investing Activities
During the year ended April 30, 2016, investing activities consisted of a loan advanced to
Jetlines in the amount of $116,400, net of proceeds received on the sale of property and
equipment in the amount of $35,000.
During the year ended April 30, 2015, investing activities consisted of the acquisition of an
investment in Voleo, Inc. in the amount of $200,000 and the acquisition of property and
equipment in the amount of $3,000.  The asset acquisitions were partially offset by the sale of
marketable securities and property and equipment for proceeds of $52,710 and $600,
respectively.
33
During the year ended April 30, 2014, investing activities consisted of reclamation costs for the
Bootheel Uranium Project in the amount of $17,268, net of proceeds from the sale of marketable
securities in the amount of $2,075.
Financing Activities
There were no financing activities for the year ended April 30, 2016.
Financing activities for the year ended April 30, 2015 consisted of net proceeds in the amount of
$2,965,894 received by the Company upon closing equity financing for gross proceeds of
$3,000,000, net of finders' fees and share issue costs of $6,450 and $27,656, respectively.  Refer
to "Capital Stock" for additional details of the equity financing completed.  The proceeds received
were partially offset by a payment in the amount of $39,253 applied to a term loan payable and
payment of a security deposit in the amount of $100,000 to King & Bay West.
There were no financing activities for the year ended April 30, 2014.
Capital Resources
At present the Company has no producing properties and consequently has no current operating
income or cash flows. Without additional financing the Company will not be able to fund both its
exploration programs and ongoing operations for the next 12 months. The Company intends to
finance its future requirements through a combination of debt and/or equity issuance. There is no
assurance that the Company will be able to obtain such financings or obtain them on favorable
terms.  To date, the Company's operations, exploration and development activities have been
almost entirely financed from equity financings.  The Company will continue to identify financing
opportunities in order to provide additional financial flexibility and to continue the development of
its property portfolio, meet land claim expenditure requirements and other commitments.  While
the Company has been successful raising the necessary funds in the past, there can be no
assurance it can do so in the future. The Company currently does not have any material
commitments for capital expenditures.
The Company currently is not subject to externally imposed capital requirements.
Financial Instruments
The Company's financial assets and liabilities are recorded and measured as follows:
Asset or Liability
Cash and cash equivalents
Marketable securities
Available-for-sale investment Available-for-sale
Loans and receivables
Other receivables
Loans and receivables
Loan receivable
Held to maturity
Reclamation bonds
Payables and accrued liabilitiesOther liabilities
Due to related parties
Other liabilities
Category
Fair value through profit or lossFair value
Fair value through profit or lossFair value
Measurement
Cost
Amortized cost
Amortized cost
Amortized cost
Amortized cost
Amortized cost
The fair value of the Company's loan receivable, other receivables, payables and accrued
liabilities, and amounts due to related parties approximate carrying value, due to their short-term
nature.  The Company's cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities are measured at
fair value under the fair value hierarchy based on level one quoted prices in active markets for
identical assets or liabilities.  The Company's available-for-sale investment is measured at
amortized cost on the basis that the common shares do not have a quoted market price in an
active
 
34
market and the fair value cannot be reliably measured.  The Company's other financial
instruments, being reclamation bonds, are measured at amortized cost.
The Company's financial instruments are exposed to certain financial risks, including currency
risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, interest rate risk and price risk.
Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk of an unexpected loss if a customer or third party to a financial instrument
fails to meet its contractual obligations.
The Company is subject to credit risk on its cash and cash equivalents, loan receivable and other
receivables. The Company limits its exposure to credit loss by placing its cash and cash
equivalents with major financial institutions. The Company has no investments in asset-backed
commercial paper. The Company's other receivables consist mainly of Goods and Services Tax
receivable due from the Government of Canada and accrued interest receivable due from a major
financial institution.  Loan receivable is due from Jetlines in connection with the proposed
transaction and is secured by a general security agreement.  The Company does not believe it is
exposed to significant credit risk.
Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Company will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they
fall due.
The Company manages liquidity risk through its capital management as outlined in the notes to
the accompanying consolidated financial statements. As a result of financing and debt
restructuring completed during the year ended April 30, 2015, management believes the
Company has sufficient funds to support ongoing operating expenditures and meet its liabilities
as they fall due.
Market Risk 
Market risk is the risk of loss that may arise from changes in market factors such as interest rates,
commodity and equity prices, and foreign exchange rates.
(a) Interest rate risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will
fluctuate because of changes in market interest rates.
The risk that the Company will realize a loss as a result of a decline in the fair value of any short-
term investments included in cash and cash equivalents is minimal because these investments
generally have a fixed yield rate.  The principal balance of the loan receivable bears interest at a
fixed yield rate.
(b) Price risk
The Company is exposed to price risk with respect to commodity prices, particularly uranium, and
equity prices, since the Company possesses investments in publicly traded securities.  The
Company closely monitors those prices to determine the appropriate course of action to be taken
by the Company. However, there can be no assurance that the Company can exit these positions
if required, resulting in proceeds approximating the carrying value of these securities.
(c) Currency risk
The Company's expenditures are predominantly in Canadian dollars, and any future equity
raised is expected to be predominantly in Canadian dollars.  As at April 30, 2016, the Company
has accounts payable denominated in
35
US dollars of US$57,156, cash of US$18,361 and reclamation bonds of US$8,300.  A 10%
change in the Canadian dollar versus the US dollar would give rise to a gain/loss of
approximately $3,800.
Material Commitments
As of the most recent fiscal year end, the Company does not have any material outstanding
commitments.
5.C. Research and Development, Patents and Licenses, etc.
We are a mineral exploration company and do not engage in conventional research and
development.  We have not incurred research and development expenses or adopted research
on development policies within the last three fiscal years.
5.D. Trend Information
We are a mineral exploration company.  Consequently, we have no production, sales, or
inventory in the conventional sense.  Our financial success will be dependent upon the extent to
which we can discover mineralization and the economic viability of developing such properties. 
Such development, if initiated, may take years to complete and the amount of resulting income, if
any, is difficult to determine with any certainty.  We have no mineral reserves and to date have
not produced any revenues.  The sales value of any mineralization discovered by us is largely
dependent upon factors beyond our control such as the market value of the metals produced.
In addition to the foregoing, during the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company entered into a
definitive agreement with respect to an amalgamation and change of business to the airline
industry.  The proposed transaction is subject to conditions customary for a transaction of this
nature. See "Item 4.B. – Business Overview – Corporate Development" below for a detailed
description of the proposed transaction. In the event that the transaction is completed, the
Company will be subject to new trends, risks and uncertainties which are disclosed in "Item 3.D.
– Risk Factors".
Other than as disclosed herein, we are not aware of any trends, uncertainties, demands,
commitments or events which are reasonably likely to have a material effect upon our net sales
or revenues, income from continuing operations, profitability, liquidity or capital resources, or that
would cause reported financial information not necessarily to be indicative of future operating
results or financial condition.
The major factors that caused significant variations in net loss were the recording of share-based
payments expense for stock option vesting and impairment of exploration and evaluation assets
based on a periodic review of such assets, both of which have no identifiable trend.
5.E. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Not applicable
5.F. Tabular Disclosure of Contractual Obligations
 
Contractual Obligations
Operating Lease Obligation $ --   $
 $ --   $
Total
Payments due by period
 
 Total  Less than 1 year  1-3 years  3-5 years  more than 5 years
$
  $
--
--
--
--
--
--
$
  $
--
--
$
  $
36
5.G. Safe Harbor
The Company seeks safe harbor for its forward-looking statements contained in Items 5.E and F.
See the heading "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" above.
ITEM 6.DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND EMPLOYEES
6.A. Directors and Senior Management
Name
Position
C. Stewart Wallis 1 2 3Director
Ken Brophy 1 2 3
Director
Jim Crawford 4
Chief Executive Officer, President and Director
Kate-Lynn Genzel
Chief Financial Officer
Mark Lotz 1 2
Director
Chief Executive Officer, President and Director
Mark Morabito 3, 5
1 Member of Audit Committee.
2 Member of Compensation Committee.
3 Member of Corporate Governance Committee.
4 Mr. Crawford resigned as Chief Executive Officer and President on November 27, 2015.
5Mr. Morabito was appointed Chief Executive Officer and President on November 27, 2015, and
elected a Director on December 10, 2015.
We are an exploration stage junior exploration company.  Our needs will be dependent upon our
level of exploration programs and financial condition.  From 2006 to 2009, we entered into
employment agreements with our senior officers and all of our full-time employees.  In August
2009, we began entering into consulting agreements with our senior management and currently
have no consulting agreements or employment agreements in effect with senior management or
full-time employees.  On January 1, 2010, we entered into a management services agreement
with King & Bay West under which King & Bay West provides shared office, administration and
payroll services to the Company and as of January 1, 2010, we do not employ any senior
management or staff full-time.  The management services agreement was amended on October
1, 2010 and September 16, 2014.  See Item 7.B – Related Party Transactions and Exhibit 4.8 for
a description of this agreement.
Set forth below are brief descriptions of recent employment and business experience of our
directors and senior management.
Mark J. Morabito, B.A., J.D.  Mr. Morabito has been a Director of the Company since December
10, 2015 and Chief Executive Officer and President since November 27, 2015.  He also served
as a Director of the Company from November 1998 to August 2013 and as Executive Chairman
of the Company from March 2011 to August 2013.  Mr. Morabito is also the founder, Chief
Executive Officer and director of King & Bay West, a private company which specializes in
identifying, funding, developing and managing resource-based opportunities, with a special
interest in the junior mining sector.  Mr. Morabito has over 15 years' experience in public markets
with a strong focus on junior mining with extensive experience in capital-raising and corporate
development.  Mr. Morabito serves as Chief Executive Officer and a Director of Alderon Iron Ore
Corp. and also serves on the Board of Directors of Excelsior Mining Corp. and Roughrider
Exploration Limited.  Mr. Morabito graduated from Simon Fraser University in Vancouver, British
Columbia with a B.A. in 1990 and completed his J.D. at the University of Western Ontario in
London, Ontario in 1993.
C. Stewart Wallis, P.Geo., was a member of our Board of Directors from June 2003 until July 27,
2008.  Mr. Wallis was re-appointed to our Board of Directors and was appointed President of the
Company on March 31, 2009.  On March 1, 2010 Mr. Wallis was appointed as our CEO.  Mr.
Wallis resigned as President and CEO of the Company on April 30, 2012.  Up to the time of his
resignation as President and CEO of the Company, Mr. Wallis devoted substantially all of his
time during a typical work week to our business.  On February 16, 2015, Mr. Wallis
 
37
was appointed Non-Executive Chairman of the Company.  Mr. Wallis is the President of
Sundance Geological Ltd., a private entity owned and controlled by him, which provides
geological services, including evaluations and prefeasibility studies, for individuals and mining
companies based throughout the world.  Mr. Wallis also serves as President and Director of
Logan Resources Ltd.  He received his Bachelor of Science Degree in Geology from McMaster
University, located in Hamilton, Ontario.  He is a member of the Association of Professional
Engineers and Geoscientists of British Columbia.  Mr. Wallis continues to be a Director of the
Company.
Jim Crawford, until his resignation as President, Chief Executive Officer and a Director on
November 27, 2016, served as President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company from June
7, 2013 and as a Director of the Company from August 29, 2013.  He has also served as our Vice
President, Corporate Development from September 2012 until September 2014.  Prior to his
resignation, Mr. Crawford devoted 50% of his time during a typical work week to our business. 
Mr. Crawford has over 15 years' experience in international mineral exploration and prior to
joining the Company, he held a number of corporate and field-based positions including
Manager, Investor Relations for Peregrine Diamonds; Field Manager for Kennecott Canada
Exploration's Western Canadian Coal Project; and Senior Mineralogist for Golden Star
Resources in their Georgetown, Guyana office.  Mr. Crawford holds an MBA in finance from
Pepperdine University and an M.Sc. in geology from Queen's University.
Kate-Lynn Genzel was appointed our Chief Financial Officer on January 13, 2014.  Ms. Genzel
began her career at a mid-sized accounting firm where she provided accounting, audit, tax and
advisory services to both public and private entities, focussing on junior resource companies
publically listed in Canada and the United States.  Ms. Genzel is a Chartered Professional
Accountant and holds a legacy Chartered Accountant designation.  She is a member of the
Chartered Professional Accountants of British Columbia.  Ms. Genzel received her Bachelor of
Commerce (Honours) degree from the Sauder School of Business at the University of British
Columbia in May 2010.
Mark Lotz joined our Board of Directors on April 1, 2014.  Mr. Lotz is a Chartered Professional
Accountant with 18 years of experience primarily in the minerals industry and related securities
businesses. He has held CFO positions with several well-known mining and exploration
companies including African Queen Mines, Sacre-Coeur Minerals, Ltd., and Prophecy
Resources Corp.  He has also served as a senior executive officer for two Vancouver based
securities firms and a financial compliance officer for the Vancouver Stock Exchange, the
predecessor to the TSX Venture Exchange.  Mr. Lotz holds a legacy Chartered Accountant (CA)
designation and is a member of the Chartered Professional Accountants of British Columbia. Mr.
Lotz received his Bachelor of Business Administration from Simon Fraser University in June
1989.
Ken Brophy joined our Board of Directors on February 16, 2015.  Mr. Brophy has over 18 years of
experience in the mining and energy sectors with a focus on exploration and development stage
projects in Canada. His experience within both the mineral exploration and energy industries
includes Government relations, strategic planning for Environmental Assessments and
sustainability requirements, which include regulatory compliance, Aboriginal, community and
stakeholder engagement.  Mr. Brophy has been directly involved with the Company's exploration
activities for many years, most recently as the Director of Operations. In this role, he was
responsible for all operational related activities including managing procurement obligations (i.e.
diamond drilling, aircraft support, etc.), negotiating contracts and agreements, and all remote
logistical requirements and maintenance programs. Mr. Brophy was actively involved in the
permitting processes, responsible exploration and sustainability stewardship, and the
implementation of the Company's Health, Safety and Environment policies and procedures.
There are no family relationships between any of the Directors or senior management. There are
no arrangements or understandings with major shareholders, customers, suppliers or others,
pursuant to which any person referred to above was selected as a Director or member of senior
management.
38
6.B. Compensation
Compensation of Executive Officers and Directors
The following table sets out the compensation information for the fiscal year ended April 30,
2016, for our directors and executive officers.
Compensation of Executive Officers/Directors in Fiscal 2016
Annual Compensation
Name and
Principal Position
FiscalYear
Salary
($)
Bonus
($)
Other Annual
Compensation
($)
Securities
Under
 
Options
Granted (#)
Option
Exercise
Price
Option
Expiration
Date
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
2016
2016
2016
25,000
Mark J. Morabito1
Chief Executive Officer,
President and Director
Stewart Wallis
Director
Jim Crawford 2
Chief Executive Officer,
President and Director
Kate-Lynn Genzel
Chief Financial Officer
Mark Lotz
Director
Ken Brophy
Director
1Mr. Morabito was appointed Chief Executive Officer and President on November 27, 2015 and
elected a director on December 10, 2015.
2Mr. Crawford resigned as Chief Executive Officer, President and a director on November 27,
2015
2016
2016
2016
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
Director Compensation
From May 1, 2011 until April 30, 2013, the Company had a formal director compensation program
under which non-executive directors of the Company received an annual board retainer of
$20,000 and a fee of $1,500 for each Board meeting attended, the Chair of the Audit Committee
received an annual fee of $6,000 and each of the Chairs of the Compensation and other
Committees of the Board received an annual fee of $2,500.  Each of the aforementioned fees
was paid quarterly. In light of financial conditions faced by the Company, the Company cancelled
its director compensation program in fiscal 2014.
Directors are entitled to reimbursement for reasonable travel and other out-of-pocket expenses
incurred in connection with attendance at meetings of the Board of Directors.  The Board of
Directors may award special remuneration to any director undertaking any special services on
our behalf other than services ordinarily required of a director.  Directors are also eligible to
receive options to purchase Common Shares pursuant to the terms of the Company's Stock
Option Plan.
Employment and Consulting Agreements
Currently, the Company does not have any employment or consulting agreements with executive
officers or directors.
39
Post-Employment Compensation
No funds were set aside or accrued by us during fiscal 2016 to provide pension, retirement or
similar benefits for Directors, Executive Officers or Senior Management.
Other than as described above, we do not have any plans or arrangements in respect of
remuneration received or that may be received by our executive officers to compensate such
officers in the event of termination of employment (as a result of resignation, retirement, change of
control) or a change of responsibilities following a change of control, where the value of such
compensation would exceed US$60,000 per person.
6.C. Board Practices
The Board of Directors presently consists of four directors, all of whom were elected at our
annual general and special meeting of shareholders held on July 29, 2016.  The directors have
served in their respective capacities since their election and/or appointment and will serve until
the next annual general meeting or until a successor is duly elected, unless the office is vacated
in accordance with our Articles. The Board of Directors appoints senior management who serve
at the discretion of the Board of Directors.
The following table indicates the date on which each of our directors was appointed a director of
our company:
Name of Director Director since
Stewart Wallis1 March 31, 2009
Mark J. Morabito2December 10, 2015
Mark Lotz
Ken Brophy
Mr. Wallis served as a director from June 19, 2003 to July 29, 2008.  He was re-appointed as a
director on March 31, 2009.
Mr. Morabito served as a director from November 12, 1998 to August 29, 2013.  He was re-
elected as a director at the Company's annual general meeting held on December 10, 2015
April 1, 2014
February 16, 2015
1
2
There are no service contracts with the Directors providing for benefits upon termination of
employment.
Board of Director Committees
Audit Committee
We have an Audit Committee, which recommends to the Board of Directors the engagement of
our independent auditors and reviews with the independent auditors the scope and results of our
audits, our internal accounting controls, and the professional services furnished to us by our
independent auditors.  The following disclosure is required pursuant to National Instrument 52-
110 ("NI 52-110") adopted by the Canadian Securities Administrators.
The Audit Committee's Charter
Following is a copy of the charter of our audit committee:
Purpose
The Audit Committee (the "Committee") is a committee of and appointed by the Board of
Directors (the "Board") of Jet Metal Corp. (the "Corporation") to assist the Board in fulfilling its
oversight responsibilities relating to financial accounting and reporting process and internal
controls for the Corporation. The Committee's primary duties and responsibilities are to:
conduct such reviews and discussions with management and the external auditors relating to
·
the audit and financial reporting as are deemed appropriate by the Committee;
assess the integrity of internal controls and financial reporting procedures of the Corporation and
·
ensure implementation of such controls and procedures;
40
ensure that there is an appropriate standard of corporate conduct including, if necessary,
·
adopting a corporate code of ethics for senior financial personnel;
review the quarterly and annual financial statements and management's discussion and
·
analysis of the Corporation's financial position and operating results and report thereon to the
Board for approval of same;
select and monitor the independence and performance of the Corporation's external auditors,
·
including attending at private meetings with the external auditors and reviewing and approving
all renewals or dismissals of the external auditors and their remuneration;
establish procedures for the receipt of complaints and submissions relating to accounting
·
matters;
except as set forth below, pre-approve all audit and non-audit services provided by the
·
Corporation's external auditors; and
·provide oversight to related party transactions entered into by the Corporation.
The Committee has the authority to conduct or authorize any investigation appropriate to its
responsibilities, and it may request the external auditors, as well as any officer of the Corporation,
or outside counsel for the Corporation, to attend a meeting of the Committee or to meet with any
members of, or advisors to, the Committee to provide pertinent information as necessary.  The
Committee shall have unrestricted access to the books and records of the Corporation and has
the authority to retain, at the expense of the Corporation, special legal, accounting, or other
consultants or experts to assist in the performance of the Committee's duties.
The Committee shall review and assess the adequacy of this Charter annually and submit any
proposed revisions to the Board for approval.
In fulfilling its responsibilities, the Committee will carry out the specific duties set out in Part IV of
this Charter.
Authority of the Audit Committee
The Committee shall have the authority to:
(a) engage independent counsel and other advisors as it determines necessary to carry out its
duties;
(b) set and pay the compensation for advisors employed by the Committee;
(c) communicate directly with the internal and external auditors.
Composition and Meetings
The Committee and its membership shall meet all applicable legal, regulatory and listing
requirements, including, without limitation, those of the British Columbia Securities
Commission, the TSX Venture Exchange, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission,
OTCQB, the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) and all applicable securities
1.
2.
3.
regulatory authorities.
The Committee shall be composed of three or more directors as shall be designated by the
Board from time to time. The members of the Committee shall appoint from among themselves
a member who shall serve as Chair.
Each member of the Committee shall be "independent" and "financially literate", for the
purposes of Multilateral Instrument 52-110 ("MI 52-110"), as it may be amended from time to
time.  MI 52-110 currently provides that a member is independent if the member has no direct or
independent material relationship with the Corporation.  A "material" relationship is one which
could, in the view of the Board, be reasonably expected to interfere with the exercise of a
member's judgment. There are certain relationships that are, however, deemed to be "material"
under MI 52-110.  In assessing a proposed nominee to the Committee, the Board shall refer to
MI 52-110 and any other requirements or guidelines under applicable securities laws and any
stock exchanges on which the Corporation's securities are listed.
41
4.
5.
6.
7.
The Committee shall meet at least quarterly, at the discretion of the Chair or a majority of its
members, as circumstances dictate or as may be required by applicable legal or listing
requirements. A minimum of two and at least 50% of the members of the Committee present
either in person or by telephone shall constitute a quorum.
If within one hour of the time appointed for a meeting of the Committee, a quorum is not present,
the meeting shall stand adjourned to the same hour on the next business day following the date
of such meeting at the same place. If at the adjourned meeting a quorum as hereinbefore
specified is not present within one hour of the time appointed for such adjourned meeting, such
meeting shall stand adjourned to the same hour on the second business day following the date
of such meeting at the same place. If at the second adjourned meeting a quorum as
hereinbefore specified is not present, the quorum for the adjourned meeting shall consist of the
members then present.
If and whenever a vacancy shall exist, the remaining members of the Committee may exercise
all of its powers and responsibilities so long as a quorum remains in office.
The time and place at which meetings of the Committee shall be held, and procedures at such
meetings, shall be determined from time to time by, the Committee. A meeting of the Committee
may be called by letter, telephone, facsimile, email or other communication equipment, by
giving at least 48 hours notice, provided that no notice of a meeting shall be necessary if all of
the members are present either in person or by means of conference telephone or if those
absent have waived notice or otherwise signified their consent to the holding of such meeting.
Any member of the Committee may participate in the meeting of the Committee by means of
conference telephone or other communication equipment, and the member participating in a
meeting pursuant to this paragraph shall be deemed, for purposes hereof, to be present in
person at the meeting.
The Committee shall keep minutes of its meetings which shall be submitted to the Board. The
Committee may, from time to time, appoint any person who need not be a member, to act as a
secretary at any meeting.
The Committee may invite such officers, directors and employees of the Corporation and its
subsidiaries as the Committee may see fit, from time to time, to attend at meetings of the
Committee.
Any matters to be determined by the Committee shall be decided by a majority of votes cast at
8.
9.
10.
11.
a meeting of the Committee called for such purpose. Actions of the Committee may be taken
by an instrument or instruments in writing signed by all of the members of the Committee, and
such actions shall be effective as though they had been decided by a majority of votes cast at
a meeting of the Committee called for such purpose. All decisions or recommendations of the
Committee shall require the approval of the Board prior to implementation.
The Committee members will be elected annually at the first meeting of the Board following the
annual general meeting of shareholders.
Responsibilities
Financial Accounting and Reporting Process and Internal Controls
1.
The Committee shall review the annual audited financial statements and interim financial
statements of the Corporation to satisfy itself that they are presented in accordance with
applicable generally accepted accounting principles ("IFRS" as required) and report thereon to
the Board and recommend to the Board whether or not same should be approved prior to their
being filed with the appropriate regulatory authorities.  The Committee shall also review the
interim financial statements of the Corporation. With respect to the annual audited financial
statements, the Committee shall discuss significant issues regarding accounting policies,
principles, practices, estimates, reserves and judgments of management with management and
the external auditors, as and when the Committee deems it appropriate to do so, and shall
satisfy itself that the annual audited financial statements are
42
accurate, complete and represent fairly the Corporation's financial position and performance
and that the audit function has been effectively carried out.  If desirable, the Committee may
 
engage the Corporation's external auditors to carry out a review of the interim financial
statements.
The Committee shall review management's discussion and analysis relating to the
Corporation's annual and interim financial statements ("MD&A") MD&A and any other public
disclosure documents, including annual and interim earnings press releases, required to be
reviewed by the Committee under any applicable laws before the Corporation publicly
discloses this information or files this information with securities regulatory authorities.
The Committee shall be satisfied that adequate procedures are in place for the review of the
Corporation's public disclosure of financial information extracted or derived from the
Corporation's annual and interim financial statements, MD&A and annual and interim earnings
press releases, and periodically assess the adequacy of these procedures.
2.
3.
4.The Committee shall review the annual budget.
5.
6.
The Committee shall review any internal control reports prepared by management and the
evaluation of such reports by the external auditors, together with management's response.
The Committee shall evaluate whether management is setting the appropriate "control culture"
by communicating the importance of internal control and the management of risk and ensuring
that all employees have an understanding of their roles and responsibilities.
The Committee shall consider how management is held to account for security of computer
systems and applications, and the contingency plans for processing financial information in the
event of a systems breakdown.
The Committee shall review, in consultation with the external auditors, the integrity of the
Corporation's financial reporting processes, both internal and external.
The Committee shall consider the external auditors' judgments about the quality and
7.
8.
9.
10.
appropriateness, not just the acceptability, of the Corporation's accounting principles and
financial disclosure practices, as applied in its financial reporting, particularly about the degree
of aggressiveness or conservatism of its accounting principles and underlying estimates and
whether those principles are common practices or are minority practices.
The Committee shall meet no less frequently than annually with the external auditors and the
Chief Financial Officer or, in the absence of a Chief Financial Officer, with the officer of the
Corporation in charge of financial matters, to review accounting practices, internal controls
and such other matters as the Committee, Chief Financial Officer or, in the absence of a Chief
Financial Officer, the officer of the Corporation in charge of financial matters, deem
appropriate.
The Committee shall consider and approve, if appropriate, major changes to the Corporation's
accounting principles and practices as suggested by management with the concurrence of the
external auditor and ensure that the management's reasoning is described in determining the
appropriateness of changes in accounting principles and disclosure.
The Committee shall inquire of management and the external auditors about significant risks
or exposures, both internal and external, to which the Corporation may be subject and assess
the steps management has taken to minimize such risks, including by obtaining the external
auditors' opinion of how effectively such risks are being managed or controlled.
The Committee shall review the post-audit or management letter containing the
recommendations of the external auditors and management's response and subsequent
follow-up to any identified weaknesses.
The Committee shall provide oversight to related party transactions entered into by the
Corporation.
11.
12.
13.
14.
43
15.
The Committee shall review policies and procedures with respect to officers' expense
accounts and management perquisites and benefits, including their expenditures related to
executive travel and entertainment, and review the results of the procedures performed in
these areas by the external auditor, based on terms of reference agreed upon by the external
auditor and the Committee.
Independent Auditors
The Committee shall recommend to the Board the external auditors to be nominated, for the
purpose of preparing or issuing an auditor's report or performing other audit, review or attest
services for the Corporation, and the compensation of the external auditors.
The Committee shall instruct the external auditors to report directly to the Committee and
ensure that significant findings and recommendations made by the external auditors are
received and discussed by the Committee on a timely basis.
The Committee shall be directly responsible for overseeing the work of the external auditors,
including the resolution of disagreements between management and the external auditors
regarding financial reporting, and shall review the performance of the external auditors and
approve any proposed discharge of the external auditors when circumstances warrant.
The Committee shall periodically consult the external auditors out of the presence of
management about any matters that the Committee or the external auditors believes should be
discussed privately, including, without limitation, significant risks or exposures, internal controls
and other steps that management has taken to control such risks, and the fullness and
accuracy of the Corporation's financial statements.  Particular emphasis should be given to the
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
adequacy of internal controls to expose any payments, transactions or procedures that might be
deemed illegal or otherwise improper.
Except as otherwise indicated in this Charter, the Committee shall pre-approve all audit and
non-audit services not prohibited by Canadian securities laws and regulations to be provided
by the external auditors and delegate, if desirable, to one or more of its members the authority
to pre-approve any such audit or permitted non-audit services, provided that any such pre-
approval is presented to the Committee at its next scheduled meeting following the pre-
approval.
The Committee shall monitor and assess the relationship between management and the
external auditors, including reviewing any management letters or other reports of the external
auditors and discussing and resolving any material differences of opinion between
management and the external auditors.
The Committee shall monitor, review, confirm and discuss with the external auditors, on an
annual basis, all significant relationships the external auditors have with the Corporation and
the range of services provided to determine the independence and objectivity of the external
auditors.
Prior to the audit, the Committee shall review the external auditors' audit plan, including the
scope, procedures, timing and staffing of the audit, and the Committee may authorize the
external auditors to perform supplemental reviews or audits as the Committee may deem
desirable.
The Committee shall review with the external auditors the results of the annual audit and, if
applicable, the results of the quarterly review, including matters related to the conduct of the
audit and the review, as the case may be.
The Committee shall obtain timely reports from the external auditors describing critical
accounting policies and practices, alternative treatments of information within IFRS that were
discussed with management, their ramifications, and the external auditors' preferred treatment
and material written communications between the Corporation and the external auditors.
The Committee shall review fees paid by the Corporation to the external auditors and other
professionals in respect of audit and non-audit services on an annual basis.
10.
11.
44
12.
The Committee shall review and approve the Corporation's hiring policies regarding partners,
employees and former partners and employees of the present and former external auditors of
the Corporation.
Process Improvement
1.
2.
The Committee shall establish regular and separate systems of reporting to the Committee by
each of management and the external auditors regarding any significant judgments made in
management's preparation of the financial statements and the view of each as to
appropriateness of such judgments.
Following completion of the annual audit and quarterly reviews (if applicable), the Committee
shall review separately with each of management and the external auditors any significant
changes to planned procedures, any difficulties encountered during the course of the audit and
reviews, including any restrictions on the scope of work or access to required information and
the cooperation that the external auditors received during the course of the audit and reviews.
The Committee shall review and resolve any significant disagreements among management
and the external auditors in connection with the preparation of the financial statements and,
3.where there are significant unsettled issues, the Committee shall ensure that there is an agreed
4.
course of action for the resolution of such matters.
The Committee shall review with the external auditor and management significant findings
during the year and the extent to which changes or improvements in financial or accounting
practices, as approved by the Committee, have been implemented. This review should be
conducted at an appropriate time subsequent to implementation of changes or improvements,
as decided by the Committee.
Ethical and Legal Compliance
2.
3.
4.
The Committee shall establish procedures for the receipt, retention and treatment of complaints
received by the Corporation regarding accounting, internal accounting controls or auditing
matters, and the confidential, anonymous submission by employees of the Corporation of
concerns regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters.
The Committee shall review the effectiveness of the system for monitoring compliance with
laws and regulations and the results of management's investigation and follow-up of any non-
compliance.
The Committee shall review management's monitoring of the Corporation's system that is in
place to ensure that the Corporation's financial statements, reports and other financial
information disseminated to governmental organizations and the public satisfy legal
requirements.
The Committee shall ensure that there is an appropriate standard of corporate conduct
including, if necessary, adopting a corporate code of ethics for senior financial personnel.
The Committee shall obtain regular updates from management and others, including internal
and external auditors and legal counsel, concerning the Corporation's compliance with
financial related laws and regulations such as tax and financial reporting laws and regulations,
legal withholding requirements, occupational health and safety laws and personal information
and protection of privacy laws.
The Committee shall be satisfied that all regulatory compliance matters have been considered
in the preparation of financial statements.
1.
5.
6.
7.The Committee shall review the findings of any examination by regulatory agencies.
45
Other Responsibilities
While the Committee has the responsibilities and duties set out in this Charter, it is not the duty of
the Committee to plan or conduct audits, to prepare or audit financial statements or to design or
implement an effective system of internal controls.  Such matters are the responsibility of
management and the internal and external auditors of the Corporation, as the case may be. In
addition to the responsibilities and duties of the Committee set out in this Charter, the Committee
shall perform any other activities consistent with this Charter and all applicable legal, regulatory
and listing requirements (including those of the applicable securities regulatory authorities and
the stock exchanges on which the Corporation's securities are listed), as the Committee or the
Board deems necessary or appropriate.
Procedures for Receipt of Complaints and Submissions
Relating to Accounting Matters
The Corporation shall inform employees on the Corporation's intranet, if there is one, or via a
newsletter or e-mail that is disseminated to all employees at least annually, of the individual
(the "Complaints Officer") designated from time to time by the Committee to whom complaints
1.
and submissions can be made regarding accounting, internal accounting controls or auditing
matters or issues of concern regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters.
The Complaints Officer shall be informed that any complaints or submissions so received must
be kept confidential and that the identity of employee(s) making complaints or submissions
shall be kept confidential and shall only be communicated to the Committee or the Chair of the
Committee.
The Complaints Officer shall be informed that he or she must report to the Committee as
frequently as such Complaints Officer deems appropriate, but in any event no less frequently
than on a quarterly basis prior to the quarterly meeting of the Committee called to approve
interim and annual financial statements of the Corporation.
Upon receipt of a report from the Complaints Officer, the Committee shall discuss the report and
take such steps as the Committee may deem appropriate.
2.
3.
4.
The Complaints Officer shall retain a record of a complaint or submission received for a period of
six years following resolution of the complaint or submission.
Procedures for Approval of Non-Audit Services
1.
(a)
The Corporation's external auditors shall be prohibited from performing for the Corporation the
following categories of non-audit services:
bookkeeping or other services related to the Corporation's accounting records or financial
statements;
(b)financial information systems design and implementation;
(c)appraisal or valuation services, fairness opinion or contributions-in-kind reports;
(d)actuarial services;
(e)internal audit outsourcing services;
(f)management functions;
(g)human resources;
(h)broker or dealer, investment advisor or investment banking services;
(i)legal services;
(j)expert services unrelated to the audit; and
(k)
any other service that the Canadian Public Accountability Board or any other applicable
regulatory authority determines is impermissible.
46
In the event that the Corporation wishes to retain the services of the Corporation's external
auditors for tax compliance, tax advice or tax planning, the Chief Financial Officer of the
Corporation shall consult with the Chair of the Committee, who shall have the authority to
approve or disapprove on behalf of the Committee, such non-audit services in accordance. All
other non-audit services shall be approved or disapproved by the Committee as a whole as set
forth herein.
The Chief Financial Officer of the Corporation shall maintain a record of non-audit services
approved by the Chair of the Committee or the Committee for each fiscal year and provide a
report to the Committee no less frequently than on a quarterly basis.
2.
3.
Composition of the Audit Committee
The current members of our Audit Committee are Ken Brophy, Stewart Wallis and Mark Lotz. 
Each of Mr. Brophy and Mr. Lotz is an independent director and financially literate.  Mr. Wallis is
not considered independent due to his serving as Chief Executive Officer and President of the
Company until his resignation on April 30, 2012.  Mr. Wallis is financially literate.
Relevant Education and Experience
Stewart Wallis.  Mr. Wallis is the President of Sundance Geological Ltd., a private entity owned
and controlled by him, which provides geological services, including evaluations and
prefeasibility studies, for individuals and mining companies based throughout the world.  Mr.
Wallis also serves as a Director and as a member of the audit committees of Logan Resources
Ltd.  He received his Bachelor of Science Degree in Geology from McMaster University, located
in Hamilton, Ontario.  His is a member of the Association of Professional Engineers and
Geoscientists of British Columbia.
Mark Lotz.  Mr. Lotz is a Chartered Professional Accountant with 18 years of experience primarily
in the minerals industry and related securities businesses. He has held CFO positions with
several well-known mining and exploration companies including African Queen Mines, Sacre-
Coeur Minerals, Ltd., and Prophecy Resources Corp.  He has also served as a senior executive
officer for two Vancouver based securities firms and a financial compliance officer for the
Vancouver Stock Exchange, the predecessor to the TSX Venture Exchange.  Mr. Lotz holds a
legacy Chartered Accountant (CA) designation and is a member of the Chartered Professional
Accountants of British Columbia. Mr. Lotz received his Bachelor of Business Administration from
Simon Fraser University in June 1989.
Ken Brophy. Mr. Brophy is the President of Accession Management and Consulting Ltd., a
private entity owned and controlled by him, which provides operational and sustainable
development services, for mining companies predominately based in North America.  Mr. Brophy
also serves on the board of directors and audit committee of Golden Raven Resources Ltd.  He is
currently Vice President, Sustainable Development for Ram River Coal Corp., a private entity
based in Vancouver.  From April 2004 to September 2009, Mr. Brophy also served as Director of
Operations for the Company.
Reliance on Certain Exemptions
At no time since the commencement of the Company's most recently completed financial year,
has the Company relied on any of the exemptions contained in the followings sections of NI 52-
110: section 2.4 (De Minimis Non-audit Services), section 3.2 (Initial Public Offerings), section
3.4 (Events Outside Control of Member), section 3.5 (Death, Disability or Resignation of Audit
Committee Member) or an exemption from NI 52-110, in whole or in part, granted under Part 8
(Exemptions) of NI 52-110.
Reliance on Exemption in Subsection 3.3(2) or Section 3.6
At no time since the commencement of the Company's most recently completed financial year,
has the Company relied on any of the exemptions contained in the followings sections of NI 52-
110: subsection 3.3(2) (Controlled Companies) or section 3.6 (Temporary Exemption for Limited
and Exceptional Circumstances).
 
47
Reliance on Section 3.8
At no time since the commencement of the Company's most recently completed financial year,
has the Company relied on section 3.8 (Acquisition of Financial Literacy) of NI 52-110.
Audit Committee Oversight
At no time since the commencement of the Company's most recently completed financial year,
has the Company's Board of Directors failed to adopt a recommendation of the Audit Committee
to nominate or compensate an external auditor.
Pre-Approval Policies and Procedures
All services to be performed by our auditor must be approved in advance by the Audit Committee.
The Audit Committee has considered whether the provision of services other than audit services
is compatible with maintaining the auditors' independence and has adopted a policy governing
the provision of these services. This policy requires the pre-approval by the Audit Committee of
all audit and non-audit services provided by the external auditor, other than any de minimis non-
audit services allowed by applicable law or regulation.
Pre-approval from the Audit Committee can be sought for planned engagements based on
budgeted or committed fees. No further approval is required to pay pre-approved fees. Additional
pre-approval is required for any increase in scope or in final fees.
External Auditor Service Fees
See Item 16.C. Principal Accountant Fees and Services.
Compensation Committee
We have established a Compensation Committee, which currently consists of Stewart Wallis,
Mark Lotz and Ken Brophy.  The Compensation Committee does not operate pursuant to a
written charter.
The mandate established for the Compensation Committee is for the purposes of:
1.
considering appropriate levels of compensation for our directors and officers and making
recommendations to the Board as to the remuneration and other compensation to be provided
to our Directors, the President and our other officers; and
2.carrying out periodic performance assessments of the President and CEO.
6.D. Employees
The following table sets out the number of full-time employees who worked for us at the end of
the last three completed fiscal years as well as the maximum number of temporary workers who
worked for us during each fiscal year:
Fiscal year
ended
April 30,
2016
April 30,
2015
April 30,
2014
Maximum number of Temporary Workers
during the fiscal year
0(1)
Number of Full Time Employees at the
end of the fiscal year
0(1)
0(1)
0(1)
0(1)
0(1)
48
1
Pursuant to the Management Services Agreement with King & Bay West dated September 16,
2014, King & Bay West provides shared office, administration and payroll services to the
Company. See Item 7.B – Related Party Transactions and Exhibit 4.8 for a description of this
agreement. As such, the Company no longer employs any full-time staff or temporary staff.
6.E. Share Ownership
The following table presents the beneficial ownership of the directors and those persons named
in Item 6.B Compensation above as of April 30, 2016.  As of August 19, 2016, we had 28,218,451
common shares issued and outstanding.  The number of common shares beneficially owned by
the persons listed below includes those securities exercisable into common shares within 60
days of August 19, 2016.
Number of
Percent of Outstanding Common
Name
Stewart Wallis 
Mark J. Morabito 2 
Jim Crawford 4 
Kate-Lynn Genzel 
Mark Lotz 
Ken Brophy 
Directors and Executive Officers as a
group
Common
Shares
203,1501
4,313,3063
N/A
0
0
200,630 5
414,780
Shares
*
15.29%
*
*
*
*
*
* Indicates less than one percent.
1Includes warrants to purchase 100,000 common shares exercisable within 60 days of August
19, 2016.
2Mr. Morabito was appointed Chief Executive Officer and President on November 27, 2015 and
elected a director on December 10, 2015.
3 Includes warrants to purchase 1,333,335 common shares exercisable within 60 days of August
19, 2016.
4Mr. Crawford resigned as Chief Executive Officer, President and a director on November 27,
2015..
5Includes warrants to purchase 100,000 common shares exercisable within 60 days of August
19, 2016.
0
The following table presents the stock options granted to the aforementioned persons and
unexercised as of August 19, 2016.  The stock options are for common shares.
Exercise
Price
Number of Underlying Common
Shares
0
Vested
1
0
Date of
Grant
Expiration
Date
Name
Stewart Wallis   
Mark J.
Morabito 2 
Jim Crawford 
Kate-Lynn
Genzel 
Mark Lotz 
Ken Brophy 3 
 
1Includes those options that are exercisable within 60 days of August 19, 2016.
2Mr. Morabito was appointed Chief Executive Officer and President on November 27, 2015 and
elected as a director on December 10, 2015.
2Mr. Crawford resigned as Chief Executive Officer, President and a director on November 27,
2015 and held no options at the time of his resignation.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
We do not have any arrangements for involving our employees in our capital.  We do not have a
share purchase plan or dividend reinvestment plan for our directors, officers and employees. 
However, we will, from time to time,
49
grant individual stock options to our directors, officers or employees as an incentive pursuant to
our stock option plan.  As at August 19, 2016, there were no stock options granted to any
directors, officers or employees.
Stock Option Plan
We may grant stock options to directors, senior management and employees pursuant to our
stock option plan dated January 2, 2014 (the "Plan").  Under the Plan, we may grant stock
options to purchase up to a maximum of 10% of the common shares issued and outstanding from
time to time.  As at May 1, 2015, the beginning of the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016, there were
2,795,845 common shares available for grant and 2,821,845 common shares available for grant
under the Plan as at April 30, 2016. During the fiscal year ended April 30, 2015, no stock options
were granted.  During the fiscal year ended April 30, 2015, no stock options to purchase common
shares were exercised and stock options to purchase an aggregate of 26,000 common shares
were cancelled or expired.
ITEM 7.  MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
7.A. Major Shareholders
Other than as set forth below, to the knowledge of the directors and senior officers of the
Company, as at August 19, 2016 no person beneficially owns or controls, directly or indirectly,
5% or more of the Company's issued and outstanding common shares:
Mark J. Morabito ("Morabito") is the beneficial owner, directly and indirectly, of 2,979,971
·
common Shares representing approximately 10.56% of the issued and outstanding common
shares.
KCR, LLC ("KCR") is the beneficial owner of 2,665,000 common shares representing
·
approximately 9.41% of the issued and outstanding common shares.
Morabito Family Trust ("MFT") is the beneficial owner of 2,000,000 Common Shares
·
representing approximately 7.09% of the issued and outstanding common shares.
At May 1, 2012, Morabito or entities controlled by him held 135,480 common shares or 2.1% of
the then issued and outstanding common shares.  From May 1, 2012 to April 30, 2014, Morabito
or entities controlled by him acquired and disposed of common shares over the public market. 
As at April 30, 2014, Morabito or entities controlled by him held 6,220 common shares or less
than one-tenth of one percent of the then issued and outstanding common shares.   The issuance
in fiscal 2015 of 2,973,751 common shares to Morabito or entities controlled by him, resulted in a
significant change to the percentage ownership held by Morabito during the past three years.
Other than the issuance in fiscal 2015 of the above-noted common Shares to KCR and MFT,
respectively, there have been no significant changes to the percentage ownership held by either
KCR or MFT during the past three years.
All of our Common Shares, both, issued and unissued, are common shares of the same class
and rank equally as to dividends, voting powers and participation of powers.  Accordingly, there
are no special voting powers held by our major shareholders.
On August 19, 2016, we had 28,218,451 common shares issued and outstanding to
approximately 276 shareholders of record.  We believe that the number of beneficial owners is
substantially greater than the number of record holders because a large portion of our
outstanding common shares are held in broker "street" names for the benefit of individual
investors or other nominees.  Management believes that there are 85 shareholders of record
located in the U.S., who own an aggregate of approximately 17.34% of our outstanding common
shares.  In addition to these record holders there may be more persons located in the U.S.
holding our common shares in "street" name.
50
We are a publicly owned Canadian corporation, with shareholders in Canada, the United States
and other foreign jurisdictions.  We are not controlled by any foreign government or other person. 
We are not aware of any arrangements that would result in a change of control of our company.
7.B. Related Party Transactions
Other than as disclosed below, for the year ended April 30, 2016 and the period from May 1,
2016 to the date of this annual report, we have not entered into any transactions or loans
between us and any: (a) enterprises that directly or indirectly through one or more intermediaries,
control or are controlled by, or are under common control with, us; (b) associates; (c) individuals
owning, directly or indirectly, an interest in the voting power of us that gives them significant
influence over us, and close members of any such individuals' family; (d) key management
personnel and close members of such individuals' families; or (e) enterprises in which a
substantial interest in the voting power is owned, directly or indirectly, by any person described in
(c) or (d) or over which such a person is able to exercise significant influence.
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company had the following transactions with related
parties:
In January 2010, the Company entered into a contract with King & Bay West (which was
amended on October 1, 2010 and September 16, 2014) with a director and officer (Mark
Morabito) in common, whereby the management company will provide shared office and payroll
services to the Company.  During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company incurred
·
administrative/office costs of $243,393 included in office and administration, wages and salaries,
rent, travel, consulting, and investor relations to this management company for such services. In
addition, the Company incurred key management personnel wages and salaries of $44,050
provided by King & Bay West.  At April 30, 2016, $254,123 was still owing to this company
included in due to related parties.
Commencing on December 1, 2015, the Board of Directors ratified the payment of $5,000 per
month to MJM Consulting Corp., a company controlled by Mark J. Morabito, for the services of
·
Mr. Morabito acting as Chief Executive Officer of the Company.  During the year ended April 30,
2016, the Company paid a MJM Consulting Corp. total of $25,000 for such services.
The amounts due to the related parties are non-interest bearing.  With the exception of the term
loan payable to King & Bay West, the amounts due to related parties have no fixed terms of
repayment. The fair value of the amounts due to related parties approximate fair carrying value
due to the short-term nature.
7.C. Interests of Experts and Counsel
Not applicable
ITEM 8.  FINANCIAL INFORMATION
8.A. Consolidated Statements and Other Financial Information
Financial Statements
Our financial statements are stated in Canadian Dollars and are prepared in accordance with
International Financial Reporting Standards ("IFRS") as adopted by the Company on May 1,
2010.
See our audited financial statements for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2016 and April 30, 2015
included under Item 18 of this annual report.
Dividend Policy
We have not declared or paid any cash dividends on our capital stock.  We do not currently
expect to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future as we anticipate that all available funds
will be invested to finance the growth of
51
our business.  The Board of Directors will determine if and when dividends should be declared
and paid in the future based upon our financial position at the relevant time.
Legal/Arbitration Proceedings
The Company is not subject to any legal or arbitration proceedings, which may have, or have had
in the recent past, significant effects on the Company's financial position or profitability.
8.B. Significant Changes
Since April 30, 2016, the date of our most recent financial statements, no significant changes
have occurred.
ITEM 9.  THE OFFER AND LISTING
9.A. Offer and Listing Details
Common Shares
The following table lists the high and low prices for our common shares on the TSX Venture
Exchange for the last six months, fiscal quarters for the last two completed fiscal years, and the
last five fiscal year ends.  Our common shares have traded on the TSX Venture Exchange since
January 20, 2014 and were traded on the Toronto Stock Exchange before that date.
 High    Low  
Period
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
August 1-19, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Month ended July 31, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Month ended June 30, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Month ended May 31, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Month ended April 30, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Month ended March 31, 2016 
 $0.10 2  $0.0752 
Month ended February 28, 2016 
    
 
 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Fiscal quarter ended April 30, 2016 
Fiscal quarter ended January 31, 2016  $0.145   $0.07  
Fiscal quarter ended October 31, 2015  $0.135   $0.065 
Fiscal quarter ended July 31, 2015 
 $0.155   $0.085 
Fiscal quarter ended April 30, 2015 
 $0.16    $0.10  
Fiscal quarter ended January 31, 2015  $0.25    $0.12  
Fiscal quarter ended October 31, 2014  $0.31    $0.15  
Fiscal quarter ended July 31, 2014 
 $0.37    $0.15  
    
 
 
 $0.16 3  $0.04 3 
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2016 
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2015 
 $0.37    $0.10  
 $0.60    $0.02  
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2014 
 $0.45    $0.05  
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2013 
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2012 
 $0.99    $0.35  
Trading in the Company's shares was halted on the TSX Venture Exchange on February 17,
2016 and as at August 19, 2016, the shares remain halted.  Therefore, no shares have traded
on the TSX Venture Exchange since February 16, 2016.
These numbers representing the high/low prices for the period February 1, 2016 to February 16,
1
2201s prior to the halt of trading of the Company's shares on the TSX Venture Exchange.
These numbers representing the high/low prices for the period May 1, 2016 to February 16,
2016 prior to the halt of trading of the Company's shares on the TSX Venture Exchange.
3
52
The following table lists the high and low prices for our common shares on OTCQB for the last
six months, fiscal quarters for the last two completed fiscal years, and the last five fiscal years.  
Our common shares have traded on OTCQB since July 1, 2013 and were traded on NYSE MKT
from May 7, 2007 to July 1, 2013.
 High    Low  
Period
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
August 1-19, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Month ended July 31, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Month ended June 30, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Month ended May 31, 2016 
   N/A 1  $0.07 
Month ended April 30, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Month ended March 31, 2016 
 $0.08   $0.05 
Month ended February 28, 2016 
    
 
 
   N/A 1    N/A 1 
Fiscal quarter ended April 30, 2016 
Fiscal quarter ended January 31, 2016  $0.11   $0.04 
Fiscal quarter ended October 31, 2015  $0.12   $0.03 
Fiscal quarter ended January 31, 2015  $0.13   $0.06 
Fiscal quarter ended April 30, 2015 
 $0.13   $0.07 
Fiscal quarter ended January 31, 2015  $0.22   $0.10 
Fiscal quarter ended October 31, 2014  $0.25   $0.15 
 $0.37   $0.19 
Fiscal quarter ended July 31, 2014 
 
    
 
 $0.133  $0.033 
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2016 
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2015 
 $0.37   $0.07 
 $0.70   $0.02 
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2014 
 $0.46   $0.05 
Fiscal Year ended April 30, 2013 
Fiscal Year ended April 30, 2012 
 $0.95   $0.33 
Trading in the Company's shares was halted on the OTCQB on February 17, 2016 and
removed from trading on OTCQB on February 24, 2016.  Therefore, no shares have traded on
the OTCQB since February 16, 2016.
These numbers representing the high/low prices for the period February 1, 2016 to February 16,
2016 prior to the halt of trading of the Company's shares on the OTCQB.
These numbers representing the high/low prices for the period May 1, 2016 to February 16,
2016 prior to the halt of trading of the Company's shares on the OTCQB.
Warrants
Our Warrants commenced trading on the TSX Venture Exchange on January 19, 2015.  The
following table lists the high and low prices for our Warrants on the TSX Venture Exchange for
the last six months, the last six fiscal quarters and the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016 and April
1
2
3
30, 2015.  See "Item 4.A. History and Development of the Company – Introduction" and "Item
10.C. Material Contracts" for a description of the Warrants.
 High   Low
Period
 N/A 1 N/A 1 
August 1-18, 2016 
Month ended July 31, 2016   N/A 1 N/A 1 
Month ended June 30, 2016  N/A 1 N/A 1 
Month ended May 31, 2016   N/A 1 N/A 1 
 
53
$0.05    $0.05    
 $0.05    $0.05
High     Low    
Period
   N/A 1    N/A 1  
Month ended April 30, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1  
Month ended March 31, 2016 
   N/A 1    N/A 1  
Month ended February 28, 2016 
    
 
   N/A 1    N/A 1  
Fiscal quarter ended April 30, 2016 
Fiscal quarter ended January 31, 2016  $0.01   $ 0.01    
Fiscal quarter ended October 31, 2015    N/A 1    N/A 1  
Fiscal quarter ended January 31, 2015  $0.05   $ 0.05    
Fiscal quarter ended April 30, 2015 
 $0.05   $ 0.05    
Fiscal quarter ended January 31, 2015    N/A 1    N/A 1  
 
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2016 
Fiscal year ended April 30, 2015 
 
1 No Warrants traded during these periods.
 
9.B. Plan of Distribution
Not applicable
9.C. Markets
Our common shares are listed on the TSX Venture Exchange under the trading symbol "JET".  
Until February 24, 2016, our common shares also traded on OTCQB under the trading symbol
"JETMF".  On February 24, 2016, pursuant to the rules of OTCQB, our common shares became
ineligible to be traded on OTCQB due to the fact that trading of the shares had been halted for
longer than four days. On January 19, 2015, our Warrants began trading on the TSX Venture
Exchange under the trading symbol "JET.WT".  There are currently no restrictions on the
transferability of the common shares or Warrants under Canadian securities laws.  
9.D. Selling Shareholders
Not applicable
9.E. Dilution
Not applicable
9.F. Expenses of the Issue
Not applicable
ITEM 10.  ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
10.A. Share Capital
Not applicable
10.B. Memorandum and Articles of Association
This information is incorporated by reference to our Form 20-F Registration Statement, "Item 10. 
Additional Information—Memorandum and Articles of Association" as filed on April 25, 2006.
 
54
10.C. Material Contracts
We have entered into the following material contracts during the two years immediately
preceding the date of this annual report and which are currently in effect:
On September 16, 2014, we entered into a Warrant Indenture with Computershare Trust
Company of Canada pursuant to which Computershare Trust Company of Canada agreed to
act as Warrant Agent with respect to 20,000,000 Warrants issued to accredited investors
pursuant to a non-brokered private placement of units ("Units") for gross proceeds of
$3,000,000.  Each Unit comprised one common share and one Warrant, with each Warrant
exercisable to acquire one common share at an exercise price of $0.25 for a period of five
years following closing of the private placement.  The Warrant Indenture is referenced as
Exhibit 4.10 hereto.
On April 12, 2016, we entered into an Amalgamation Agreement with Canada Jetlines Ltd.
providing for the amalgamation of Jetlines and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. The
Amalgamation Agreement is in connection with a change of business transaction pursuant to
which the Company will move into the airline industry. For additional details regarding the
Amalgamation Agreement please see "Item 4.B. – Business Overview – Corporate
Development".  The Amalgamation Agreement is referenced as Exhibit 4.11 hereto.
1.
2.
10.D. Exchange Controls
Canada has no system of exchange controls.  There are no Canadian restrictions on the
repatriation of capital or earnings of a Canadian public company to non-resident investors.  There
are no laws in Canada or exchange restrictions affecting the remittance of dividends, profits,
interest, royalties and other payments to non-resident holders of our securities, except as
discussed in "10.E. Taxation" below.
There are no limitations under the laws of Canada or in our organizing documents on the right of
foreigners to hold or vote our securities, except that the Investment Canada Act may require
review and approval by the Minister of Industry (Canada) of certain acquisitions of "control" of us
by a "non-Canadian". The threshold for acquisitions of control is generally defined as being one-
third or more of the voting shares of our company. "Non-Canadian" generally means an
individual who is not a Canadian citizen, or a corporation, partnership, trust or joint venture that is
ultimately controlled by non-Canadians.
10.E. Taxation
Certain Canadian Federal Income Tax Consequences
The discussion under this heading summarizes the principal Canadian federal income tax
consequences of acquiring, holding and disposing of shares of the Company's common stock for
a shareholder who at all relevant times, (i) is resident in the U.S., is not resident or deemed to be
resident in Canada and has not been or been deemed to be resident in Canada for the purposes
of the Income Tax Act (Canada) (the "Canadian Tax Act") and the Canada-United States Tax
Convention (1980), as amended (the "Convention"), (ii) is a "qualifying person" and is the
beneficial owner of all dividends paid on the common shares for the purposes of the Convention,
(iii) deals at arm's length and is not affiliated with the Company for the purposes of the Canadian
Tax Act, and (iv) will acquire and hold the Company's common shares as capital property for the
purposes of the Canadian Tax Act.  Generally, the Company's common shares will be
considered to be capital property to the shareholder provided the shareholder does not hold the
common shares in the course of carrying on a business of trading or dealing in securities and has
not acquired them in one or more transactions considered to be an adventure or concern in the
nature of trade.
This summary does not apply to a shareholder who uses or holds, or is deemed to use or hold, its
shares in the Company in connection with carrying on a business in Canada, or to a shareholder
that is either an insurer carrying on business in Canada and elsewhere or an "authorized foreign
bank" as defined in the Canadian Tax Act.  This summary is based on the current provisions of
the Canadian Tax Act, the regulations thereunder in force as of the
 
55
date hereof (the "Regulations"), all proposals to amend the Canadian Tax Act or the Regulations
publicly announced by the federal Minister of Finance (Canada) prior to the date hereof (the "Tax
Proposals"), and an understanding of the current published administrative practices of the
Canada Revenue Agency.
This summary is not exhaustive of all Canadian federal income tax considerations applicable to
a shareholder of the Company and, except for the Tax Proposals, this summary does not take
into account or anticipate any changes in the Canadian Tax Act, the Regulations or the
administrative or assessing policies of the Canada Revenue Agency, whether by legislative,
governmental or judicial decisions or action, nor does this summary take into account provincial,
territorial or other foreign tax legislation or considerations, which may differ significantly from
those discussed herein.  There can be no assurance that the Tax Proposals will be enacted in
the form proposed, or at all.
This summary is of a general nature only and is not intended to be, nor should it be considered to
be, legal or tax advice to any particular shareholder.  The tax consequences to any particular
shareholder will depend on a variety of factors including the shareholder's own particular
circumstances.  Therefore, all shareholders should consult their own tax advisors with respect to
their own particular circumstances.
The provisions of the Canadian Tax Act are subject to income tax treaties to which Canada is a
party, including the Convention.
Dividends on Common Shares
Under the Canadian Tax Act, a non-resident of Canada is generally subject to Canadian
withholding tax at the rate of 25% on dividends paid (including dividends deemed to have been
paid) or credited to him or her by a corporation resident in Canada.  The Company is responsible
for withholding and remitting this tax. The Convention generally limits the rate of withholding tax
on dividends to 15% of the gross amount of such dividends paid to shareholders or, if the
shareholder is a company that beneficially owns at least 10% of the voting stock of the payor
corporation, 5% of the gross amount of the dividends.
The Convention generally exempts from Canadian income tax dividends paid to a religious,
scientific, literary, educational or charitable organization or to an organization constituted and
operated exclusively to administer a pension, retirement or employee benefit fund or plan, if the
organization is a resident of the U.S. and is exempt from income tax under the laws of the U.S.
Dispositions of Common Shares
Under the Canadian Tax Act, a taxpayer's capital gain or capital loss from a disposition of a
common share of the Company is the amount, if any, by which his or her proceeds of disposition
exceed (or are exceeded by, respectively) the aggregate of his or her adjusted cost base of the
share and any reasonable expenses of disposition.  The capital gain or loss must be computed in
Canadian currency using a weighted average adjusted cost base for identical properties.  One
half of the amount, if any, by which capital gains exceed capital losses in a year (a "taxable
capital gain") is included in income for that year.  Where capital losses exceed capital gains in a
year, one half of the excess may be deducted from a taxable capital gain realized by the
shareholder in the three previous years or in any subsequent year, subject to certain restrictions
in the case of a corporate shareholder.
Under the Canadian Tax Act, a non-resident of Canada is subject to Canadian tax on taxable
capital gains, and may deduct allowable capital losses, realized on a disposition of "taxable
Canadian property".  Common shares of the Company will be taxable Canadian property of a
shareholder at any particular time the common shares are listed on a "designated stock
exchange" (which includes the TSX-V) if, at that time or at any time in the five years immediately
preceding that time, (i)  25% or more of the issued shares of any class or series in the Company's
capital stock were owned by one or any combination of the shareholder, persons with whom the
shareholder did not deal at arm's length, and partnerships in which the shareholder or persons
with whom the shareholder did not deal at arm's length hold a membership interest directly or
indirectly through one or more partnerships, and (ii) more than 50% of the fair market value of the
common shares was derived, directly or indirectly, from one or any combination of real or
immovable property situated in Canada,  Canadian resource properties, timber resource
properties or
 
56
options in respect of, or interests in, or for civil law rights in, such properties.  Common shares
used in carrying on business in Canada and acquired in certain circumstances will also
constitute taxable Canadian property.
The Convention generally relieves U.S. residents who qualify for benefit thereunder from liability
for Canadian tax on capital gains derived on a disposition of shares unless the value of the
shares is derived principally from real property situated in Canada, including the right to explore
for or exploit natural resources and rights to amounts computed by reference to production.
Shareholders should consult their own advisors with respect to the application of the Convention.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Considerations
The following is a summary of the anticipated U.S. federal income tax consequences generally
applicable to U.S. Holders (as defined below) of the ownership and disposition of Common
Shares. This summary addresses only holders who acquire and hold Common Shares as
"capital assets" (generally, assets held for investment purposes).
The following summary does not purport to address all U.S. federal income tax consequences
that may be relevant to a U.S. Holder as a result of the acquisition, ownership and disposition of
Common Shares, nor does it take into account the specific circumstances of any particular
holder, some of which may be subject to special tax rules (including, but not limited to, brokers,
dealers in securities or currencies, traders in securities that elect to use a mark-to-market method
of accounting for securities holdings, tax-exempt organizations, insurance companies, banks,
thrifts and other financial institutions, persons liable for alternative minimum tax, persons that
hold an interest in an entity that holds the Common Shares, persons that will own, or will have
owned, directly, indirectly or constructively 10% or more (by vote or value) of the Common
Shares, persons that hold the Common Shares as part of a hedging, integration, conversion or
constructive sale transaction or a straddle, or persons whose functional currency is not the U.S.
dollar).
This summary is based on the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code"),
U.S. Treasury regulations, administrative pronouncements and rulings of the United States
Internal Revenue Service (the "IRS") and judicial decisions, all as in effect on the date hereof,
and all of which are subject to change (possibly with retroactive effect) and to differing
interpretations. Except as specifically set forth below, this summary does not discuss applicable
income tax reporting requirements. This summary does not describe any state, local or foreign
tax law considerations, or any aspect of U.S. federal tax law other than income taxation (e.g.,
estate or gift tax or the Medicare contribution tax). U.S. Holders should consult their own tax
advisers regarding such matters.
No legal opinion from U.S. legal counsel or ruling from the IRS has been requested, or will be
obtained, regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the acquisition, ownership or
disposition of Common Shares. This summary is not binding on the IRS, and the IRS is not
precluded from taking a position that is different from, and contrary to, the positions taken in this
summary. In addition, because the authorities on which this summary is based are subject to
various interpretations, the IRS and U.S. courts could disagree with one or more of the positions
taken in this summary.
As used in this summary, a "U.S. Holder" is a beneficial owner of Common Shares who, for U.S.
federal income tax purposes, is (i) a citizen or individual resident of the United States, (ii) a
corporation (or other entity that is classified as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax
purposes) that is created or organized in or under the laws of the United States, any State thereof
or the District of Columbia, (iii) an estate whose income is subject to U.S. federal income tax
regardless of its source, or (iv) a trust if (A) a U.S. court can exercise primary supervision over the
trust's administration and one or more U.S. persons are authorized to control all substantial
decisions of the trust, or (B) the trust has a valid election in effect to be treated as a U.S. person
for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
The tax treatment of a partner in a partnership (or other entity or arrangement classified as a
partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes) may depend on both the partnership's and the
partner's status and the activities of the
57
partnership. Partnerships (or other entities or arrangements classified as a partnership for U.S.
federal income tax purposes) that are beneficial owners of Common Shares, and their partners
and other owners, should consult their own tax advisers regarding the tax consequences of the
acquisition, ownership and disposition of Common Shares.
Passive Foreign Investment Company Rules
A foreign corporation will be considered a passive foreign investment company ("PFIC") for any
taxable year in which (1) 75% or more of its gross income is "passive income" under the PFIC
rules or (2) 50% or more of the average quarterly value of its assets produce (or are held for the
production of) "passive income." For this purpose, "passive income" generally includes interest,
dividends, rents, royalties, certain gains from the sale of commodities and certain other gains.
Interest, dividends, rents and royalties received from a related person (within the meaning of the
PFIC rules) are excluded from passive income to the extent such payments are properly
allocable to the active income of such related person. Moreover, for purposes of determining if
the foreign corporation is a PFIC, if the foreign corporation owns, directly or indirectly, at least
25%, by value, of the shares of another corporation, it will be treated as if it holds directly its
proportionate share of the assets and receives directly its proportionate share of the income of
such other corporation. If a corporation is treated as a PFIC with respect to a U.S. Holder for any
taxable year, the corporation will continue to be treated as a PFIC with respect to that U.S. Holder
in all succeeding taxable years, regardless of whether the corporation continues to meet the
PFIC requirements in such years, unless certain elections are made.
The determination as to whether a foreign corporation is a PFIC is based on the application of
complex U.S. federal income tax rules, which are subject to differing interpretations, and the
determination will depend on the composition of the income, expenses and assets of the foreign
corporation from time to time and the nature of the activities performed by its officers and
employees. The Company believes that it may have been classified as a PFIC for the taxable
year ending April 30, 2016, and, based on current business plans and financial expectations, the
Company expects that it may be classified as a PFIC for the current taxable year and in future
taxable years. However, the Company's actual PFIC status for the current or any future taxable
year is uncertain and cannot be determined until after the end of such taxable year.
If the Company is classified as a PFIC, a U.S. Holder that does not make one of the elections
described below would be required to report any gain on the disposition of Common Shares as
ordinary income, rather than as capital gain, and to compute the tax liability on such gain and any
"Excess Distribution" (as defined below) received in respect of Common Shares as if such items
had been earned ratably over the U.S. Holder's holding period for the Common Shares. The
amounts allocated to the taxable year during which the gain is realized or distribution is made,
and to any taxable years in such U.S. Holder's holding period that are before the first taxable year
in which the Company is treated as a PFIC with respect to the U.S. Holder, would be included in
the U.S. Holder's gross income as ordinary income for the taxable year of the gain or distribution.
The amount allocated to each other taxable year in such U.S. Holder's holding period would be
taxed as ordinary income in the taxable year during which the gain is realized or distribution is
made at the highest tax rate in effect for the U.S. Holder in that other taxable year and would be
subject to an interest charge as if the income tax liabilities had been due with respect to each
such prior year. For purposes of these rules, gifts, exchanges pursuant to corporate
reorganizations and use of Common Shares as security for a loan may be treated as a taxable
disposition of the Common Shares. An "Excess Distribution" is the amount by which distributions
during a taxable year in respect of a Common Share exceed 125% of the average amount of
distributions in respect thereof during the three preceding taxable years (or, if shorter, the U.S.
Holder's holding period for the Common Shares).
Certain additional adverse tax rules will apply to a U.S. Holder for any taxable year in which the
Company is treated as a PFIC with respect to such U.S. Holder and any of our subsidiaries is
also treated as a PFIC (a "Subsidiary PFIC"). In such a case, the U.S. Holder will generally be
deemed to own its proportionate interest (by value) in any Subsidiary PFIC and be subject to the
PFIC rules described above with respect to the Subsidiary PFIC regardless of such U.S. Holder's
percentage ownership in the Company.
The adverse tax consequences described above may be mitigated if a U.S. Holder makes a
timely "qualified electing fund" election (a "QEF election") with respect to its interest in the PFIC.
Consequently, if the Company is
58
classified as a PFIC, it would likely be advantageous for a U.S. Holder to elect to treat the
Company as a qualified electing fund (a "QEF") with respect to such U.S. Holder for the first year
in which it holds Common Shares. If a U.S. Holder makes a timely QEF election with respect to
the Company, the electing U.S. Holder would be required in each taxable year that the Company
is considered a PFIC to include in gross income (i) as ordinary income, the U.S. Holder's pro rata
share of the ordinary earnings of the Company and (ii) as capital gain, the U.S. Holder's pro rata
share of the net capital gain (if any) of the Company, whether or not the ordinary earnings or net
capital gain are distributed. An electing U.S. Holder's basis in Common Shares will be increased
to reflect the amount of any taxed but undistributed income. Distributions of income that had
previously been taxed will result in a corresponding reduction of basis in the Common Shares
and will not be taxed again as distributions to the U.S. Holder.
A QEF election made with respect to the Company will not apply to any Subsidiary PFIC; a QEF
election must be made separately for each Subsidiary PFIC (in which case the treatment
described above would apply to such Subsidiary PFIC). If a U.S. Holder makes a timely QEF
election with respect to a Subsidiary PFIC, it would be required in each taxable year to include in
gross income its pro rata share of the ordinary earnings and net capital gain of such Subsidiary
PFIC, but may not receive a distribution of such income. Such a U.S. Holder may, subject to
certain limitations, elect to defer payment of current U.S. federal income tax on such amounts,
subject to an interest charge (which would not be deductible for U.S. federal income tax purposes
if the U.S. Holder were an individual).
If the Company determines that it, and any subsidiary in which the Company owns, directly or
indirectly, more than 50% of such subsidiary's total aggregate voting power, is likely a PFIC in
any taxable year, the Company intends to make available to U.S. Holders, upon request and in
accordance with applicable procedures, a "PFIC Annual Information Statement" with respect to
the Company and any such subsidiary for such taxable year. The PFIC Annual Information
Statement may be used by U.S. Holders for purposes of complying with the reporting
requirements applicable to a QEF election with respect to the Company and any Subsidiary
PFIC.
The U.S. federal income tax on any gain from the disposition of Common Shares or from the
receipt of Excess Distributions may be greater than the tax if a timely QEF election is made. It is
recommended that, if the Company were to be classified as a PFIC, a U.S. Holder make a QEF
election with respect to the Company and any Subsidiary PFIC.
Alternatively, if the Company were to be classified as a PFIC, a U.S. Holder could also avoid
certain of the rules described above by making a mark-to-market election (instead of a QEF
election), provided the Common Shares are treated as regularly traded on a qualified exchange
or other market within the meaning of the applicable Treasury regulations. However, a U.S.
Holder will not be permitted to make a mark-to-market election with respect to a Subsidiary PFIC.
U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisers regarding the potential availability and
consequences of a mark-to-market election, as well as the advisability of making a protective
QEF election in case the Company is classified as a PFIC in any taxable year.
During any taxable year in which the Company or any Subsidiary PFIC is treated as a PFIC with
respect to a U.S. Holder, that U.S. Holder must file IRS Form 8621. U.S. Holders should consult
their own tax advisers concerning annual filing requirements.
Taxation of Common Shares
Distributions on Common Shares
In general, subject to the PFIC rules discussed above, the gross amount of any distribution
received by a U.S. Holder with respect to the Common Shares (including amounts withheld to
pay Canadian withholding taxes) will be included in the gross income of the U.S. Holder as a
dividend to the extent attributable to the Company's current and accumulated earnings and
profits, as determined under U.S. federal income tax principles. The Company does not intend to
calculate its earnings and profits under U.S. federal income tax rules. Accordingly, U.S. Holders
should expect that a distribution generally will be treated as a dividend for U.S. federal income
tax purposes.
 
59
Subject to the PFIC rules discussed above, distributions on Common Shares to certain non-
corporate U.S. Holders that are treated as dividends may be taxed at preferential rates. Such
dividends will not be eligible for the "dividends received" deduction ordinarily allowed to
corporate shareholders with respect to dividends received from U.S. corporations.
The amount of any dividend paid in Canadian dollars (including amounts withheld to pay
Canadian withholding taxes) will equal the U.S. dollar value of the Canadian dollars calculated
by reference to the exchange rate in effect on the date the dividend is received by the U.S.
Holder, regardless of whether the Canadian dollars are converted into U.S. dollars. A U.S.
Holder will have a tax basis in the Canadian dollars equal to their U.S. dollar value on the date of
receipt. If the Canadian dollars received are converted into U.S. dollars on the date of receipt, the
U.S. Holder should generally not be required to recognize foreign currency gain or loss in respect
of the distribution. If the Canadian dollars received are not converted into U.S. dollars on the date
of receipt, a U.S. Holder may recognize foreign currency gain or loss on a subsequent
conversion or other disposition of the Canadian dollars. Such gain or loss will be treated as U.S.
source ordinary income or loss.
Distributions on Common Shares that are treated as dividends generally will constitute income
from sources outside the United States and generally will be categorized for U.S. foreign tax
credit purposes as "passive category income." A U.S. Holder may be eligible to elect to claim a
U.S. foreign tax credit against its U.S. federal income tax liability, subject to applicable limitations
and holding period requirements, for Canadian tax withheld, if any, from distributions received in
respect of the Common Shares. A U.S. Holder that does not elect to claim a U.S. foreign tax
credit may instead claim a deduction for Canadian tax withheld, but only for a taxable year in
which the U.S. Holder elects to do so with respect to all foreign income taxes paid or accrued in
such taxable year. The rules relating to U.S. foreign tax credits are complex, and each U.S.
Holder should consult its own tax adviser regarding the application of such rules.
Sale, Exchange or Other Taxable Disposition of Common Shares
A U.S. Holder generally will recognize gain or loss on the sale, exchange or other taxable
disposition of Common Shares in an amount equal to the difference, if any, between the amount
realized on the sale, exchange or other taxable disposition and the U.S. Holder's adjusted tax
basis in the Common Shares exchanged therefor. Subject to the PFIC rules discussed above,
such gain or loss will be capital gain or loss and will be long-term capital gain (currently taxable
at a reduced rate for non-corporate U.S. Holders) or loss if, on the date of the sale, exchange or
other taxable disposition, the Common Shares have been held by such U.S. Holder for more than
one year. The deductibility of capital losses is subject to limitations. Such gain or loss generally
will be sourced within the United States for U.S. foreign tax credit purposes.
Required Disclosure with Respect to Foreign Financial Assets
Certain U.S. Holders are required to report information relating to an interest in Common Shares,
subject to certain exceptions (including an exception for Common Shares held in accounts
maintained by certain financial institutions) by attaching a completed IRS Form 8938, Statement
of Specified Foreign Financial Assets, with their tax return for each year in which they hold an
interest in Common Shares. U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisers regarding
information reporting requirements relating to their ownership of Common Shares.
10.F. Dividends and Paying Agents
Not applicable
10.G. Statement by Experts
Not applicable
60
10.H. Documents on Display
The Company is subject to the informational requirements of the Exchange Act and file reports
and other information with the SEC.  You may read and copy any of the Company's reports and
other information at, and obtain copies upon payment of prescribed fees from, the Public
Reference Room maintained by the SEC at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549.  In
addition, the SEC maintains a Website that contains reports, proxy and information statements
and other information regarding registrants that file electronically with the SEC at
http://www.sec.gov. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference
Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. In addition, all documents referred to in this
Annual Report on Form 20-F are available for inspection at the office of the Company, listed
below, during normal office hours.
Jet Metal Corp.
1240-1140 West Pender Street
Vancouver, British Columbia
V6E 4G1 Canada
The Company is required to file reports and other information with the securities commissions in
Canada. You are invited to read and copy any reports, statements or other information, other than
confidential filings, that the Company files with the provincial securities commissions. These
filings are also electronically available from the Canadian System for Electronic Document
Analysis and Retrieval ("SEDAR") (www.sedar.com), the Canadian equivalent of the SEC's
electronic document gathering and retrieval system.
The Company "incorporates by reference" information that it files with the SEC, which means that
it can disclose important information to you by referring you to those documents. The information
incorporated by reference is an important part of this Form 20-F and more recent information
automatically updates and supersedes more dated information contained or incorporated by
reference in this Form 20-F.
As a foreign private issuer, the Company is exempt from the rules under the Exchange Act
prescribing the furnishing and content of proxy statements to shareholders.
10.I. Subsidiary Information
Not applicable
ITEM 11.  QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
Currency Exchange Rate Sensitivity
The Company's expenditures are predominantly in Canadian dollars, and any future equity
raised is expected to be predominantly in Canadian dollars.  As at April 30, 2016, the Company
has accounts payable denominated in US dollars of US$57,256, cash of US$18,361 and
reclamation bonds of US$8,300.  A 10% change in the Canadian dollar versus the US dollar
would give rise to a gain/loss of approximately $3,800.
Interest Rate Sensitivity
Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will
fluctuate because of changes in market interest rates.
The risk that the Company will realize a loss as a result of a decline in the fair value of any short-
term investments included in cash and cash equivalents is minimal because these investments
generally have a fixed yield rate.
Commodity Price Sensitivity
Our future revenue and profitability will be dependent, to a significant extent, upon prevailing spot
market prices for metals. In the past, metal prices have been volatile. Prices are subject to wide
fluctuations in response to
 
61
changes in supply of and demand for metals, market uncertainty and a variety of additional
factors that are beyond our control. Our mineral properties are in the exploration phase and
accordingly we are not generating any operating revenues and are therefore not subject to any
short term volatility in the prices of metals. As we are in the exploration phase, the above factors
have had no material impact on operations or income. We have not entered into any futures or
forward contracts.
ITEM 12.DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES OTHER THAN EQUITY SECURITIES
Not applicable
62
PART II
MATERIAL MODIFICATIONS TO THE RIGHTS OF SECURITY HOLDERS AND USE
OF PROCEEDS
ITEM 13.DEFAULTS, DIVIDEND ARREARAGES AND DELINQUENCIES
Not applicable
ITEM
14.
Not applicable
ITEM 15.CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
At the end of the period covered by this report, an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design
and operations of our "disclosure controls and procedures" (as such term is defined in Rule 13a-
15(e) of the Exchange Act) was carried out by our principal executive officer and principal
financial officer. Based upon that evaluation, our principal executive officer and principal financial
officer have concluded as of the end of the period covered by this report that the design and
operation of our disclosure controls and procedures are effective at the reasonable assurance
level to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in reports that we file or submit
under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time
periods specified in SEC rules and forms, and is accumulated and communicated to
management, including our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, to allow
timely decisions regarding required disclosures.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no
evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that our disclosure controls and
procedures will detect or uncover every situation involving the failure of persons within our
company and our subsidiaries to disclose material information otherwise required to be set forth
in our periodic reports.  Our disclosure controls and procedures are designed to provide
reasonable assurance of achieving their objective of ensuring that information required to be
disclosed in the reports that we file or submit under the Exchange Act is communicated to
management to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Management Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
The management of the Company is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate
internal control over financial reporting. The Company's internal control over financial reporting is
designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles.
Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of company level internal controls
over financial reporting on a risk based approach using elements of the framework in Internal
Control - Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
Treadway Commission. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Therefore, even those systems determined to
be effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial statement
preparation and presentation. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Based on management's assessment and those criteria, management believes that the internal
control over financial reporting as of April 30, 2016 was effective.
63
Management's internal control report was not subject to attestation by the Company's
independent registered public accounting firm pursuant to temporary rules of the Securities and
Exchange Commission that permit the Company to provide only management's report.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Other than those described elsewhere in this Form 20-F, there was no change in our internal
control over financial reporting that occurred during our most recently completed fiscal year
ended April 30, 2016 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our
internal control over financial reporting.  Nor were there any significant deficiencies or material
weaknesses in our internal controls requiring corrective actions.
ITEM 16A. AUDIT COMMITTEE FINANCIAL EXPERT
Our Board of Directors has determined that Mark Lotz, a member of the Company's Audit
Committee, qualifies as an "audit committee financial expert" as defined in Item 16A(b) of Form
20-F.  Mr. Lotz's relevant education and experience is disclosed above in Items 6A and 6C
above.  The Company's Board of Directors has determined that Mr. Lotz is an independent
director in accordance with the requirements of applicable Canadian securities laws.
ITEM 16B. CODE OF ETHICS
We have adopted a code of ethics that applies to our chief executive officer, the chief financial
officer, and other members of senior management. As adopted, the Code of Ethics sets forth
standards that are designed to prevent wrongdoing and to promote:
honesty and integrity, including the ethical handling of actual or apparent conflicts of interest
·
between personal and professional relationships;
full, fair, accurate, timely and understandable disclosure in reports and documents that we file
·
with, or submit to, the SEC and in other public communications made by us;
·compliance with applicable governmental laws, rules and regulations;
·protection of and respect for the confidentiality of information acquired in the course of work;
·responsible use of and control over assets and resources;
the prompt internal reporting of violations of the Code of Ethics to an appropriate person or
·
persons identified in the Code of Ethics; and
·accountability for adherence to the Code of Ethics.
ITEM 16C. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
Our Board of Directors appointed Davidson & Company as independent auditors to audit our
financial statements for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2016. The aggregate fees billed for
professional services rendered by the aforementioned independent auditor in their capacity as
our principal accountant during the last two fiscal years is set forth below. Our Audit Committee
pre-approved all of the following amounts billed to us prior to incurring the expenses associated
therewith.
Financial Year Ending Audit Fees1  Audit Related Fees2  Tax Fees3  All Other Fees4 
 
2016/04/30
2015/04/30
 
 
64
$ 21,420
 $ 22,500
$
  $
--
--
$ 5,250
  $ 7,750
$
  $
--
--
1The aggregate fees billed for professional services rendered by our principal accountants for the
audit of our annual financial statements and other fees that are normally provided by our principal
accountant in connection with our audits.
2The aggregate fees billed for assurance and related services by our principal accountant that
are reasonably related to the performance of the audit or review of our financial statements.
3The aggregate fees billed for professional services rendered by our principal accountant for tax
compliance, tax advice and tax planning.
4Other fees billed by our principal accountant included general review of certain company
documentation, such as our Form 20-F registration filing.
Pre-Approval Policies and Procedures:
All services to be performed by our auditor must be approved in advance by the Audit Committee.
The Audit Committee has considered whether the provision of services other than audit services
is compatible with maintaining the auditors' independence and has adopted a policy governing
the provision of these services. This policy requires the pre-approval by the Audit Committee of
all audit and non-audit services provided by the external auditor, other than any de minimis non-
audit services allowed by applicable law or regulation.
Pre-approval from the Audit Committee can be sought for planned engagements based on
budgeted or committed fees. No further approval is required to pay pre-approved fees. Additional
pre-approval is required for any increase in scope or in final fees.
Of the total aggregate fees paid by the Company to its accountants during the fiscal year ended
April 30, 2014, $nil, or 0% of the aggregate fees, were approved by the Audit Committee pursuant
to the de minimis exception provided by Section (c)(7)(i)(C) of Rule 2-01 of Regulation S-X.
ITEM 16D.EXEMPTIONS FROM THE LISTING STANDARDS FOR AUDIT COMMITTEES
PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES BY THE ISSUER AND AFFILIATED
PURCHASERS
Not applicable
ITEM
16E.
Not applicable
ITEM 16F.CHANGES IN REGISTRANT'S CERTIFYING ACCOUNTANT
Not applicable
ITEM 16G.CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Not applicable.
ITEM 16H.MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURE
The Company is not currently required to disclose the information required by Section 1503(a) of
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
65
PART III
ITEM 17.  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
See "Item 18 – Financial Statements".
ITEM 18.  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Our financial statements are stated in Canadian Dollars and are prepared in accordance with
International Financial Reporting Standards ("IFRS").
Auditors' Report dated August 25, 2016
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position at April 30, 2016 and 2015
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the years ended
April 30, 2016, 2015and 2014
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended
April 30, 2016, 2015 and 2014
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity for the years ended
April 30, 2016, 2015 and 2014
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended
April 30, 2016
66
JET METAL CORP.
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
67
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Shareholders and Directors of
Jet Metal Corp.
We have audited the accompanying consolidated financial statements of Jet Metal Corp., which
comprise the consolidated statements of financial position as of April 30, 2016 and April 30,
2015, and the related consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, cash flows
and changes in equity for the years ended April 30, 2016, April 30, 2015, and April 30, 2014 and
a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory information.
Management's Responsibility for the Consolidated Financial Statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these consolidated
financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by
the International Accounting Standards Board, and for such internal control as management
determines is necessary to enable the preparation of consolidated financial statements that are
free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Auditors' Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on
our audits.  We conducted our audits in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing
standards and the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States).  Those standards require that we comply with ethical requirements and plan and perform
the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements
are free from material misstatement.
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and
disclosures in the consolidated financial statements.  The procedures selected depend on the
auditors' judgment, including the assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the
consolidated financial statements, whether due to fraud or error.  In making those risk
assessments, the auditor considers internal control relevant to the entity's preparation and fair
presentation of the consolidated financial statements in order to design audit procedures that are
appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the entity's internal control.  An audit also includes evaluating the
appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated
financial statements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained in our audits is sufficient and appropriate to
provide a basis for our audit opinion.
Opinion
In our opinion, these consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of Jet Metal Corp. as at April 30, 2016 and April 30, 2015 and its financial
performance and its cash flows for the years ended April 30, 2016, April 30, 2015 and April 30,
2014 in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the
International Accounting Standards Board.
"DAVIDSON & COMPANY LLP"
Vancouver, CanadaChartered Professional Accountants
 
August 25, 2016
1200 - 609 Granville Street, P.O. 10372, Pacific Centre, Vancouver, B.C., Canada V7Y 1G6
Telephone (604) 687-0947  Davidson-co.com
68
JET METAL CORP.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL POSITION
AS AT
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
APRIL 30, 2016  APRIL 30, 2015 
 
 
  
 
  
 
ASSETS
 
  
 
 
  
Current assets
 $1,651,472
 
Cash and cash equivalents
 
   117,513
Loan receivable (Note 11)
 
   24,263
Other receivables
   41,893
 
Prepaid expenses
 
   1,835,141
 
 
    
 
   200,000
 
Available-for-sale investment (Note 5)
 
    
 
 
   100,000
Deposit (Note 10)
    
 
 
 
   -
Exploration and evaluation assets (Note 7)
 
    
 
 
   -
Property and equipment (Note 6)
    
 
 
 
   10,416
Reclamation bonds (Note 7)
 
    
 
 $2,145,557
 
 
 
 
    
 
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY    
 
    
 
 
    
Current liabilities
 
 $199,687
Payables and accrued liabilities
Due to related parties (Note 10)
   255,244
 
 
   454,931
 
 
    
 
Due to related party (Note 10)
   -
 
 
    
 
 
   20,807
Future reclamation provisions (Note 8)
 
   475,738
 
 
    
Equity
 
   90,663,999
Capital stock (Note 9)
Reserves
   21,475,351
 
   (110,469,531 )   (107,350,922 )
Deficit
$2,350,202
    -
    26,070
    32,258
    2,408,530
     
    200,000
     
    100,000
     
    2,509,791
     
    75,588
     
    31,267
     
  $5,325,176
     
     
     
     
  $203,055
    106,076
    309,131
     
    206,810
     
    20,807
    536,748
     
    90,663,999
    21,475,351
Nature of operations and going concern (Note 1)
Subsequent events (Note 17)
1,669,819
    
 $2,145,557
4,788,428
     
  $5,325,176
Approved on August 25, 2016 on behalf of the Board of Directors:
"Ken Brophy"Director"Stewart Wallis"Director
Ken Brophy
Stewart Wallis
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
69
JET METAL CORP.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS AND COMPREHENSIVE LOSS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED APRIL 30,
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
OPERATING ITEMS
Business development
Consulting
Depreciation (Note 6)
     Exploration and evaluation (Note 7)
     Finance income
     Foreign exchange loss (gain)
     Impairment of exploration and evaluation assets
(Note 7)
Interest (Note 8)
Investor relations
Office and administration
Professional fees
Share-based payment expense (recovery) (Note 9)
Transfer agent and filing fees
Wages and salaries
 
 
 
Gain (loss) on sale of property and equipment (Note 6)
Gain on forgiveness and settlement of related party debt
(Notes 9, 10 and 12)
1,540
    15,058
    151,403
    18,838
    -
    110,088
    213,310
3,160,618  
   2,509,791     -
 
    1,427
   -
 
    11,122
   3,642
    161,251
 
   114,312
 
    31,764
   33,656
)
    (45,250
   -
    124,896
 
   80,827
   194,134
 
    252,999
   (3,061,073 )   (540,021 )   (3,896,928)
    
 
 
    
   (33,773
)   600
-
2016
  
  
 $89,641
   698
   5,013
   50,857
   (21,373
   (125
2015
   
   
  $-
    3,415
    18,428
    21,481
)   (17,599
)   4,059
2014
   
   
  $-
    142,533
    22,754
    34,225
)   (314
    (1,097
)
)
-
184,141
-
Impairment of property and equipment (Note 6)
Impairment of reclamation bonds (Note 7)
Loss on marketable securities (Note 4)
 
Net loss and comprehensive loss for the year
 
Basic and diluted loss per common share
 
Weighted average number of common shares
outstanding
(1,802
   (21,961
   -
)   -
)   -
    (2,449
-
    (41,852
)   (28,503
)
)
$(3,118,609 ) $(357,729 ) $(3,967,283)
 
    
 $(0.11
)
) $(0.02
) $(0.60
28,218,451    19,659,075    6,578,035
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
70
JET METAL CORP.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
FOR THE YEARS ENDED APRIL 30,
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net loss for the year
Items not affecting cash:
           Changes in future reclamation estimates
           Depreciation
           Finance income
           Forgiveness and settlement of related party debt
           Impairment of exploration and evaluation assets
           Impairment of property and equipment
           Impairment of reclamation bonds
           Interest
           Loss on marketable securities
           Loss (gain) on sale of property and equipment
           Share-based payment expense (recovery)
           Unrealized gain on foreign exchange
Non-cash working capital item changes:
Other receivables
Prepaid expenses
Payables and accrued liabilities
2014
2015
-
    (2,053
    18,428
    22,754
)   -
    -
    (184,141 )   -
2016
 
  
  
 
 $(3,118,609) $(357,729 ) $(3,967,283)
    
 
)
   -
 
   5,013
   (1,113
 
   -
 
    3,160,618  
   2,509,791     -
   1,802
    -
    -
 
 
    41,852
    -
   21,961
 
    1,427
    1,540
   -
   -
    2,449
    28,503
 
 
)   -
    (600
   33,773
)
    (45,250
    -
   -
   (1,110
)   (2,998
)   (5,669
)
 
     
    
     
 
    (21,909 )   16,669
   1,807
   (9,635
)   2,212
    49,498
 
)
)   (53,146 )   (68,697
   (3,368
)   190,604     264,915
(200,000 )   -
)   -
    (3,000
    -
    52,710
    2,075
    600
    -
    -
    (17,268
)   (149,690 )   (15,193
     
     
     
     
    (100,000 )   -
    3,000,000    -
    (39,253 )   -
    (34,106 )   -
    2,826,641    -
Due to related parties
   (57,642
 
Net cash used in operating activities
   (617,330 )   (405,290 )   (502,716 )
 
    
 
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
 
    
Acquisition of available-for-sale investment
 
   -
Acquisition of property and equipment
 
   -
Loan receivable
   (116,400 )   -
 
Proceeds from sale of marketable securities
 
   -
Proceeds from sale of property and equipment
 
   35,000
Reclamation costs incurred
   -
)
Net cash used in investing activities
)
   (81,400
 
 
    
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
    
 
Deposit
 
   -
Proceeds from private placement
 
   -
Repayment of related party term loan
   -
 
Share issue costs
 
   -
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
   -
 
    
 
Net change in cash and cash equivalents during the year   (698,730 )   2,271,661    (517,909 )
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of the year
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of the year
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash
Liquid short term investments
 
Cash (paid) received for
Interest
Taxes
2,350,202     78,541
596,450
$1,651,472   $2,350,202  $78,541
     
    
 $128,472
  $127,202   $55,541
   1,523,000     2,223,000    23,000
 $1,651,472   $2,350,202  $78,541
    
 $29,121
 $-
$991
  $-
$-
  $-
Supplemental disclosures with respect to cash flows (Note 12)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
71
JET METAL CORP.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
 (Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
Capital Stock
Number of
 
Shares
Amount
Reserves
Deficit
Total
-
  -
Balance, April 30, 2013  6,578,218
Common shares
cancelled due
 to fractional rounding   (183
Share based payment
expense
(recovery)
Loss for the year
 
Balance, April 30, 2014  6,578,035
Private placement
  20,000,000
Share issue costs –
cash
Common shares
issued for debt
Loss for the year
 
Balance, April 30, 2015  28,218,451
Loss for the year
 
Balance, April 30, 2016  28,218,451
1,640,416
  -
-
-
$87,411,032  $21,520,601  $(103,025,910) $5,905,723
)   -
-
-
-
(45,250
    -
(45,250
)
    -
)   (3,967,283)
    -
     
     
 
    87,411,032    21,475,351    (106,993,193)   1,893,190  
    3,000,000  
    3,000,000     -
)   -
    (3,967,283
-
(34,106
)   -
-
(34,106
)
-
    -
-
    (357,729
287,073
 
    287,073
)   (357,729 )
    -
     
 
     
    90,663,999    21,475,351    (107,350,922)   4,788,428  
    -
)   (3,118,609)
     
 
     
  $90,663,999  $21,475,351  $(110,469,531) $1,669,819
(3,118,609
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
72
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
1.   NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND GOING CONCERN
Jet Metal Corp. (the "Company" or "Jet Metal") is an exploration stage company whose common
shares trade on the TSX Venture Exchange (the "Exchange").  The Company is in the business
of acquiring, exploring and evaluating mineral resource properties, and either joint venturing or
developing these properties further or disposing of them when the evaluation is completed. 
There has been no determination whether properties held contain mineral reserves which are
economically recoverable.
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company entered into a definitive agreement with
respect to an amalgamation and change of business to the airline industry (Note 11).  The
proposed transaction is subject to conditions customary for a transaction of this nature.
The Company is incorporated under the laws of British Columbia. All of the Company's resource
properties are currently located in North America. The address of the Company's registered office
is #1240 – 1140 West Pender Street, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6E 4G1.
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared using International Financial
Reporting Standards ("IFRS") on a going concern basis which assumes that the Company will
be able to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the normal course of business for the
foreseeable future. At present, the Company has no producing properties and consequently has
no current operating income or cash flows.  The continuing operations of the Company are
dependent upon the Company's ability to continue to raise adequate financing and to commence
profitable operations in the future.  The Company intends to finance its future requirements
through a combination of debt and/or equity issuance. There is no assurance that the Company
will be able to obtain such financings or obtain them on favorable terms.
As at April 30, 2016, the Company had working capital of $1,380,210 (April 30, 2015 –
$2,099,399) and a deficit of $110,469,531 (April 30, 2015 – $107,350,922).  Management has
assessed that this working capital is sufficient for the Company to maintain its operations and
activities for the upcoming fiscal year.
These consolidated financial statements do not reflect the adjustments to the carrying values of
assets and liabilities and the reported expenses and statement of financial position
classifications that would be necessary were the going concern assumption deemed to be
inappropriate.  These adjustments could be material.
2.   BASIS OF PRESENTATION
a)Significant accounting judgements and estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires
management to make estimates and assumptions.  These estimates and assumptions affect the
reported amounts of assets, liabilities, shareholders' equity, and the disclosure of contingent
assets and liabilities, as at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and expenses for
the years reported.
Critical Judgements
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make
judgements regarding the going concern of the Company, as previously discussed in Note 1, as
well as the determination of functional currency. The functional currency is the currency of the
primary economic environment in which an entity operates, and has been determined for each
entity within the Company. The functional currency for the Company and its subsidiaries has
been determined to be the Canadian dollar.
73
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
2.   BASIS OF PRESENTATION (continued)
a)Significant accounting judgements and estimates (continued)
Key Sources of Estimation Uncertainty
Because a precise determination of many assets and liabilities is dependent upon future events,
the preparation of financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the
disclosure of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported
amounts of expenses during the reporting years. Actual results could differ from those estimates
and such differences could be significant.
Significant estimates made by management affecting these consolidated financial statements
include:
Share-based Payments
Estimating fair value for granted stock options and compensatory warrants requires determining
the most appropriate valuation model which is dependent on the terms and conditions of the
grant. This estimate also requires determining the most appropriate inputs to the valuation model
including the expected life of the option or warrant, volatility, dividend yield, and rate of forfeitures
and making assumptions about them.
Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities
The estimation of income taxes includes evaluating the recoverability of deferred tax assets and
liabilities based on an assessment of the Company's ability to utilize the underlying future tax
deductions against future taxable income prior to expiry of those deductions. Management
assesses whether it is probable that some or all of the deferred income tax assets and liabilities
will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets and liabilities is dependent
upon the generation of future taxable income, which in turn is dependent upon the successful
discovery, extraction, development and commercialization of mineral reserves. To the extent that
management's assessment of the Company's ability to utilize future tax deductions changes, the
Company would be required to recognize more or fewer deferred tax assets or liabilities, and
deferred income tax provisions or recoveries could be affected.
Recoverability of Exploration and Evaluation Assets
The Company has not yet determined whether its exploration and evaluation assets contain
mineral reserves that are economically recoverable.  The recoverability of the amounts shown for
exploration and evaluation assets are dependent upon the existence of economically
recoverable mineral reserves, the ability of the Company to obtain necessary financing to
complete the development of those mineral reserves and upon future production or proceeds
from the disposition thereof.
Useful Life of Property and Equipment
Property and equipment is depreciated over its estimated useful life. Estimated useful lives are
determined based on current facts and past experience, and take into consideration the
anticipated physical life of the asset, the potential for technological obsolescence, and
regulations.
74
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
2.   BASIS OF PRESENTATION (continued)
a)Significant accounting judgements and estimates (continued)
Key Sources of Estimation Uncertainty (continued)
Future Reclamation Provision
The Company assesses its provision for reclamation related to its exploration and evaluation
activities at each reporting period or when new material information becomes available.
Accounting for reclamation obligations requires management to make estimates of the future
costs that will be incurred to complete the reclamation to comply with existing laws and
regulations. Actual future costs that will be incurred may differ from those amounts estimated as a
result of changes to environmental laws and regulations, timing of future cash flows, changes to
future costs, technical advances, and other factors. In addition, the actual work required may
prove to be more extensive than estimated because of unexpected geological or other technical
factors. The measurement of the present value of the future obligation is dependent on the
selection of a suitable discount rate and the estimate of future cash outflows. Changes to either of
these estimates may materially affect the present value calculation of the obligation.
b)   Approval of the consolidated financial statements
The consolidated financial statements of the Company for the year ended April 30, 2016 were
reviewed by the Audit Committee and approved and authorized for issue by the Board of
Directors on August 25, 2016.
c)   Basis of presentation
These consolidated financial statements are presented in Canadian dollars, which is the
functional currency of the Company and its subsidiaries, and have been prepared on a historical
cost basis, except for certain financial instruments classified as fair value through profit or loss,
and available-for-sale, which are stated at their fair value. In addition, these consolidated
financial statements have been prepared using the accrual basis of accounting, except for certain
cash flow information.
d)   Statement of compliance
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as issued
by the International Accounting Standards Boards ("IASB") and interpretations issued by the
International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee ("IFRIC").
e)   Basis of consolidation
These consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company, and its wholly
owned subsidiaries, Target Exploration and Mining Corp. ("Target"), Crosshair Energy USA, Inc.
("Crosshair USA"), Gemini Metals Corp. ("Gemini") as well as The Bootheel Project LLC ("BHP
LLC") in which the Company has a 81% interest. A wholly owned subsidiary is an entity in which
the Company has control, directly or indirectly, where control is defined as the power to govern
the financial and operating policies of an enterprise so as to obtain benefits from its activities. All
intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated on consolidation.
75
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
2.   BASIS OF PRESENTATION (continued)
e)   Basis of consolidation (continued)
Details of the Company's subsidiaries are as follows:
Name
Target Exploration and
Mining Corp.
Crosshair Energy USA,
Inc.
Bootheel Project LLC
Gemini Metals Corp.
Place of
incorporation
British Columbia,
Canada
Nevada, United
States
Colorado, United
States
British Columbia,
Canada
Interest %
100% ownership by
the Company
100% ownership by
Target
81% ownership by
Crosshair USA
100% ownership by
the Company
Principal activity
Exploration and evaluation of
mineral properties
Exploration and evaluation of
mineral properties
Exploration and evaluation of
mineral properties
Inactive subsidiary
3.   SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include cash, demand deposits and highly liquid interest bearing
investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and subject to insignificant
risk of changes in value.
Financial Instruments
All financial instruments are initially recognized at fair value on the statement of financial
position. The Company has classified each financial instrument into one of the following
categories: (1) financial assets or liabilities at fair value through profit or loss ("FVTPL"), (2) loans
and receivables, (3) financial assets available-for-sale, (4) financial assets held-to maturity, and
(5) other financial liabilities. Subsequent measurement of financial instruments is based on their
classification.
Financial assets and liabilities at FVTPL are subsequently measured at fair value with changes
in those fair values recognized in net earnings. Financial assets "available-for-sale" are
subsequently measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in other
comprehensive income (loss), net of tax.  If fair value is not reliably measurable, available-for-
sale financial assets are measured at cost.
Financial assets "held-to-maturity", "loans and receivables", and "other financial liabilities" are
subsequently measured at amortized cost using the effective interest method. The Company's
financial assets and liabilities are recorded and measured as follows:
Category
FVTPL
FVTPL
Loans and receivablesAmortized cost
Loans and receivablesAmortized cost
Measurement
Fair value
Fair value
Asset or Liability
Cash and cash equivalents
Marketable securities
Loan receivable
Other receivables
Available-for-sale investment Available-for-sale
Held to maturity
Reclamation bonds
Payables and accrued liabilitiesOther liabilities
Due to related parties
Other liabilities
Cost
Amortized cost
Amortized cost
Amortized cost
The Company determines the fair value of financial instruments according to the following
hierarchy based on the amount of observable inputs used to value the instrument.
Level 1 – Quoted prices are available in active markets for identical assets or liabilities as of the
reporting date. Active markets are those in which transactions occur in sufficient frequency and
volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis.
 
76
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
3.   SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued)
Financial Instruments (continued)
Level 2 – Pricing inputs are other than quoted prices in active markets included in Level 1. Prices
in Level 2 are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reporting date. Level 2 valuations
are based on inputs, including quoted forward prices for commodities, time value and volatility
factors, which can be substantially observed or corroborated in the marketplace.
Level 3 – Valuations in this level are those with inputs for the asset or liability that are not based
on observable market data.
Cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities have been measured at fair value using
Level 1 inputs.
Exploration and Evaluation Assets
Costs incurred before the Company has obtained the legal rights to explore an area are
expensed. Costs to acquire exploration and evaluation assets are capitalized as incurred. Costs
related to the exploration and evaluation of exploration and evaluation assets are expensed as
incurred. The Company considers mineral rights to be assets and accordingly, the Company
capitalizes certain costs related to the acquisition of mineral rights. The Company considers each
exploration and evaluation asset to be a separate cash generating unit.
Any option payments received by the Company from third parties or tax credits refunded to the
Company are credited to the capitalized cost of the exploration and evaluation asset or shown as
an expense recovery depending on the nature of the activity generating the refund. If payments
received exceed the capitalized cost of the exploration and evaluation asset, the excess is
recognized as income in the year received. The amounts shown for exploration and evaluation
assets do not necessarily represent present or future values. Their recoverability is dependent
upon the discovery of economically recoverable reserves, the ability of the Company to obtain
the necessary financing to complete the development, and future profitable production or
proceeds from the disposition thereof.
Future Reclamation Provisions
The Company recognizes liabilities for statutory, contractual, constructive or legal obligations
associated with the retirement of reclamation of mineral interests (exploration and evaluation
assets). The net present value of future rehabilitation cost estimates is capitalized to the related
assets along with a corresponding increase in the reclamation provision in the period incurred.
Discount rates using a pre-tax rate that reflects the time value of money are used to calculate the
net present value.
The Company's estimates of reclamation costs could change as a result of changes in regulatory
requirements, discount rates and assumptions regarding the amount and timing of the future
expenditures. These changes are recorded directly to the related assets with a corresponding
entry to the reclamation provision. The Company's estimates are reviewed annually for changes
in regulatory requirements, discount rates, effects of inflation and changes in estimates.
Changes in the net present value, excluding changes in the Company's estimates of reclamation
costs, are charged to profit or loss for the period.
77
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
3.   SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued)
Equipment
Equipment is carried at cost, less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses.
The cost of an item of equipment consists of the purchase price, any costs directly attributable to
bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for its intended use and an initial
estimate of the costs of dismantling and removing the item and restoring the site on which it is
located. Depreciation is provided at rates calculated to amortize the cost of equipment, less its
estimated residual value, using the declining balance method at the following rates per annum:
Exploration equipment20%
Storage containers
10%
Impairment
At each financial position reporting date the carrying amounts of the Company's long-lived assets
are reviewed to determine whether there is any indication that those assets are impaired. If any
such indication exists, the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the
extent of the impairment, if any. The recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to
sell and value in use, which is the present value of future cash flows expected to be derived from
the asset. If the recoverable amount of an asset is estimated to be less than its carrying amount,
the carrying amount of the asset is reduced to its recoverable amount and the impairment loss is
recognized in the profit or loss for the period.
For the purposes of impairment testing, exploration and evaluation assets are allocated to cash-
generating units to which the exploration activity relates. For an asset that does not generate
largely independent cash inflows, the recoverable amount is determined for the cash-generating
unit to which the asset belongs. Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses, the carrying
amount of the asset (or cash-generating unit) is increased to the revised estimate of its
recoverable amount, but so that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying
amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognized for the asset
(or cash-generating unit) in prior years. A reversal of an impairment loss is recognized
immediately in profit or loss.
Flow-Through Shares
Canadian income tax legislation permits an enterprise to issue securities referred to as flow-
through shares, whereby the investor can claim the tax deductions arising from the renunciation
of the related resource expenditures. The Company accounts for flow-through shares whereby
the premium, if any, paid for the flow-through shares in excess of the market value of the shares
without flow-through features at the time of issue is initially recorded to other liability and then
included in income at the same time the qualifying expenditures are made.
Loss Per Share
Basic loss per share is computed by dividing the loss for the period by the weighted average
number of common shares outstanding during the period.
For diluted per share computations, assumptions are made regarding potential common shares
outstanding during the period. The weighted average number of common shares is increased to
include the number of additional common shares that would be outstanding if, at the beginning of
the period, or at time of issuance, if later, all options and warrants are exercised. Proceeds from
exercise are used to purchase the Company's common shares at their average market price
during the period, thereby reducing the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding. If these computations prove to be anti-dilutive, diluted loss per share is the same as
basic loss per share.
78
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
3.    SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued)
Share-Based Payments
The Company grants stock options to buy common shares of the Company to directors, officers,
employees and service providers. The Company recognizes share-based payment expense
based on the estimated fair value of the options. A fair value measurement is made for each
vesting instalment within each option grant and is determined using the Black-Scholes Option-
Pricing Model. The fair value of the options is recognized over the vesting period of the options
granted as both share-based payment expense and reserves. This includes a forfeiture estimate,
which is revised for actual forfeitures in subsequent periods. The reserves account is
subsequently reduced if the options are exercised and the amount initially recorded is then
credited to capital stock.
In situations where equity instruments are issued to non-employees and some or all of the goods
or services received by the entity as consideration cannot be specifically identified, they are
measured at the fair value of the share-based payment. Otherwise, share-based payments are
measured at the fair value of the goods or services received.
Income Taxes
Income tax on profit or loss for the year comprises current and deferred tax. Current tax is the
expected tax paid or payable on the taxable income for the year, using tax rates enacted or
substantively enacted at the statement of financial position date, and any adjustment to tax paid
or payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax is recorded by providing for temporary differences between the carrying amounts of
assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.
A deferred tax asset is recognized only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits
will be available against which the asset can be utilized. Deferred tax assets are reduced to the
extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realized. The effect on
deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in income tax rates is recognized in the period that
includes the date of the enactment or substantive enactment of the change. Deferred tax assets
and liabilities are presented separately except where there is a right of set-off within fiscal
jurisdictions.
Foreign Currency Translation
The functional currency of the Company and its subsidiaries is the Canadian dollar. The
reporting currency of the Company is the Canadian dollar. Transactions denominated in foreign
currency are translated into Canadian dollars at the rate of exchange in effect at the date of the
transaction. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies have been
translated into Canadian dollars at the rate of exchange in effect at the statement of financial
position date, while non-monetary assets and liabilities are translated at historical rates.
Revenue and expenses are translated at the exchange rates approximating those in effect on the
date of the transactions. Any gains or losses resulting from translation have been included in the
statement of operations and comprehensive loss.
New Accounting Pronouncement
The following accounting pronouncement has been made, but is not yet effective for the
Company as at April 30, 2016.  The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the amended
standards on its consolidated financial statements.
In November 2009 and October 2010, the IASB issued IFRS 9, Financial Instruments ("IFRS 9"),
which represents the completion of the first part of a three-part project to replace IAS 39,
Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement, with a new standard. Per the new
standard, an entity choosing to measure a liability at fair value will present the portion of the
change in its fair value due to changes in the entity's own credit risk in the other comprehensive
income or loss section of the entity's statement of comprehensive loss, rather than within profit or
loss. Additionally, IFRS 9 includes revised guidance related to the derecognition of financial
instruments. IFRS 9 applies to financial statements for annual periods beginning on or after
January 1, 2018, with early adoption permitted.
 
79
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
4.   MARKETABLE SECURITIES
Canadian Zinc
Corp.
 
(TSE: CZN)
Cost
 
Balance at April 30, 2014 $ 2,458,336
Disposals
   (2,458,336
Balance at April 30, 2015
and 2016
 
Adjustments to Fair
Value
 
Balance at April 30, 2014   (2,436,510
Adjustment for the year
   2,436,510
Balance at April 30, 2015
and 2016
 
Fair Value
 
At April 30, 2015
At April 30, 2016
-
    
    
    
 $ -
 $ -
-
Ausroc
Expedition Mining Inc.
Metals Ltd.
(ASX: ARK)   
  
(CVE: EXU)
   
   
   
   
   
   
  $ 97,024
  $ 1,000,000
(1,000,000
   
)   -
97,024
-
)   (97,024
    -
(97,024
     
     
     
  $ -
  $ -
)  
(966,667
    966,667
-
)  
 
   
 
   
   
 
  $ -
  $ -
Total
 
   
 
   
   
 
  $3,555,360  
)   (3,458,336)
97,024
)   (3,500,201)
    3,403,177
(97,024
     
     
     
  $-
  $-
)
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company sold 54,565 common shares of Canadian
Zinc Corporation and 2,222,222 common shares of Expedition Mining Inc. for net proceeds of
$21,543 and $31,167, respectively.
5.   AVAILABLE-FOR-SALE INVESTMENT
On February 27, 2015, the Company purchased 1,000,000 common shares of Voleo, Inc.
("Voleo") at a price of $0.20 per common share for an aggregate purchase price of $200,000. 
Voleo is developing mobile applications and software platforms to meet the investment
expectations of millennial investors.  It has built a functional prototype and designed a consumer
version which is in development.
The President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company is also a director of Voleo.
80
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
6.   PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
Storage
Exploration
Equipment   
 
Containers  Total
18,203
4,920
   (222,995 )   (318
   (7,698
-
Cost
 
Balance at April 30, 2014  $298,586   $ -
Additions
    3,000
Balance at April 30, 2015    298,586     3,000
   (289,086 )   (3,000
Disposals
Impairment
   (9,500
)   -
Balance at April 30, 2016    -
    -
 
    
     
Accumulated Depreciation    
     
 
    
     
Balance at April 30, 2014    207,570     -
Depreciation
    225
Balance at April 30, 2015    225,773     225
Depreciation
    93
Disposals
Impairment
Balance at April 30, 2016    -
    
 
Net Book Value
    
    
 
 $72,813
At April 30, 2015
At April 30, 2016
 $-
)   -
    -
     
     
     
  $ 2,775
  $ -
$298,586  
    3,000
 
    301,586  
)   (292,086)
)
    (9,500
    -
 
 
     
     
 
     
 
    207,570  
    18,428  
    225,998  
    5,013
 
)   (223,313)
    (7,698
)
 
    -
 
     
     
 
     
 
  $75,588  
  $-
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company sold exploration equipment and storage
containers located in Newfoundland and Labrador with net book values of $66,091 and $2,682,
respectively, for proceeds of $35,000, resulting in a loss on disposal of $33,773.
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company recorded an impairment of property and
equipment in relation to obsolete exploration equipment with a net book value of $1,802 and
recoverable amount of $Nil, resulting in an impairment loss of $1,802.  The exploration
equipment was previously used in the Company's operations in the United States.
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company sold property and equipment with a net book
value of $Nil for proceeds of $600, resulting in a gain on disposal of $600.
81
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
7.   EXPLORATION AND EVALUATION ASSETS
Exploration and Evaluation Assets
The following table illustrates acquisition costs:
Balance at April 30, 2014 and 2015 $ 2,509,791
Impairment
(2,509,791
Balance at April 30, 2016
Central Mineral Belt ("CMB") 
 
 Silver Spruce
  
 
 
)
$ -
Exploration and Evaluation Expenditures
The following table illustrates the exploration and evaluation expenditures incurred during the
year ended April 30, 2016:
Administration
Reporting
Recovery – JV Partner
CMB
Silver Spruce  Total
 Bootheel Project  
   
  
  $ 17,950
 $ 30,033
   9,980
    -
)   -
(7,106
 $ 32,907
  $ 17,950
$47,983 
    9,980  
    (7,106 )
  $50,857
The following table illustrates the exploration and evaluation expenditures incurred during the
year ended April 30, 2015:
Administration
Reporting
Recovery – JV Partner
Bootheel Project 
  
 
 
 $ 27,367
 
   1,925
(7,811
)
 
 $ 21,481
The following table illustrates the exploration and evaluation expenditures incurred during the
year ended April 30, 2014:
CMB
 
Moran Lake  Bootheel Project  Other  Total
Administration (recovery) $ 560
Reclamation costs
Recovery – JV Partner
$ 560
-
-
$ 34,673
    10,921
   
(11,913
  $ 33,681
$(16 ) $35,217  
    10,921  
    -
)   -
    (11,913)
  $(16 ) $34,225
82
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
7.   EXPLORATION AND EVALUATION ASSETS (continued)
Central Mineral Belt ("CMB")
Moran Lake Property
Pursuant to an agreement dated October 14, 2004, the Company acquired an option to earn a
90% interest, subject to a 2% net smelter royalty ("NSR") and a 10% carried interest to the
vendor, in the Moran Lake Property, a uranium prospect located in Central Labrador,
Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada.  The agreement was amended on March 1, 2005 to
include additional claims adjacent to the Moran Lake Property, known as Moran Heights.
On November 1, 2013, the Company exercised its right to abandon those mineral claims that
form the Moran Lake Property and terminated the related agreement to discharge the Company
from any further obligations with respect to the Moran Lake Property.  As a result, the Company
recorded an impairment of $2,484,868 to operations during the year ended April 30, 2014.
The Company has recorded a provision for future reclamation costs in relation to the Moran Lake
Property (Note 8).
Otter/Portage Lake Property
Pursuant to an agreement dated December 2, 2005, the Company acquired a 100% interest,
subject to a 1.5% NSR, in the Otter and Portage Lake Properties located in the Central Mineral
Belt of Labrador.
During the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company abandoned these properties and recorded
an impairment of $675,750 to operations in relation to the Otter and Portage Lake Properties.
Silver Spruce Property Amalgamation
In July 2008, the Company entered into an agreement with Expedition Mining Inc. ("Expedition"),
formerly known as Universal Uranium Ltd., and acquired all of Expedition's interest (60%) in its
joint venture project with Silver Spruce Resources Inc. in Labrador. Currently the Company has a
100% interest in the property subject to a 2% net smelter royalty payable to Silver Spruce and a
2% net smelter royalty payable to Expedition Mining Inc. on 60% of any production from the
Silver Spruce Property.
On the basis that the Company has no immediate plans to advance the Silver Spruce Property,
the Company recorded an impairment loss in the amount of $2,509,791 during the year ended
April 30, 2016.
Bootheel Project
On March 31, 2009, the Company acquired an interest in the Bootheel Property in Wyoming,
USA through the acquisition of Target. Under a series of agreements between UR-Energy USA
Inc. ("URE"), several of its subsidiaries, Target and Crosshair USA, a wholly owned subsidiary of
Target, the Company could earn a 75% interest in BHP LLC, subject to certain royalties, by
completing expenditures totalling US$3,000,000 on or before June 7, 2011. The Company made
these expenditures, and additional expenditures, which increased its holdings to 81%. The
Company, through Target, has earned an 81% interest in BHP LLC, representing an 81% interest
in the underlying Bootheel Property.
Reclamation Bonds
As at April 30, 2016, the balance of reclamation bonds consists of a bond in the amount of
US$8,300 (April 30, 2015 – US$25,800) related to the Bootheel Property and registered with the
Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality and State Office of Lands and Investment.
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company recorded an impairment loss of reclamation
bonds in the amount of $21,961 (April 30, 2015 - $Nil; April 30, 2014 - $41,852) due to
collectability concerns.
83
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
8.   FUTURE RECLAMATION PROVISIONS
Beginning balance $ 20,807
Interest
Ending balance
April 30, 2016  April 30, 2015
$ 19,267
    1,540
  $ 20,807
-
$ 20,807
As of April 30, 2015 and 2016, the balance of future reclamation provisions relates to the Moran
Lake Property which the Company abandoned during the year ended April 30, 2014 (Note 7). 
Although the Company no longer has title to the Moran Lake Property, it anticipates incurring
cleanup costs in the future.  The timing of the cleanup costs is uncertain.
The total undiscounted amount of estimated cash flows required to settle the obligations is
approximately $20,000, which was adjusted for inflation at the rate of 2% and discounted at 8% to
April 30, 2015.
9.  CAPITAL STOCK AND RESERVES
Authorized
Unlimited number of common shares without par value
Common share and share purchase warrant issuances
There were no common share or share purchase warrant issuances during the year ended April
30, 2016.
The Company issued the following common shares and share purchase warrants during the year
ended April 30, 2015:
On December 9, 2014, the Company issued 612,500 common shares valued at $107,188 to
settle amounts payable to MJM Consulting Corp. totaling $91,875 (Notes 10 and 12).  This
resulted in a loss on settlement of debt in the amount of $15,313.
On December 9, 2014, the Company issued 1,027,916 common shares valued at $179,885 to
settle amounts payable to King & Bay West Management Corp. totaling $154,187 (Notes 10 and
12).  This resulted in a loss on settlement of debt in the amount of $25,698.
On September 16, 2014, the Company closed a non-brokered private placement and issued
20,000,000 units at a price of $0.15 per unit for gross proceeds of $3,000,000. Each unit consists
of one common share and one common share purchase warrant.  Each common share purchase
warrant is exercisable to acquire one common share for a period of 5 years at an exercise price
of $0.25.  The Company paid cash commission to certain arm's length parties in the amount of
$6,450 and cash share issue costs in the amount of $27,656.
There were no common share or share purchase warrant issuances during the year ended April
30, 2014.
During the year ended April 30, 2014, the Company consolidated its common shares on the
basis of one post-consolidated share for every ten pre-consolidated common shares held. All
references to share and per share amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect this share
consolidation.
84
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
9.  CAPITAL STOCK AND RESERVES (continued)
Share purchase warrants
The following is a summary of share purchase warrant activities during the years ended April 30,
2014, 2015 and 2016:
Number of Warrants  Weighted Average Exercise Price 
 
  
 
 
 
  917,246
Outstanding, April 30, 2013
 
  (917,246
Expired
  -
 
Outstanding, April 30, 2014
 
Issued
  20,000,000
Outstanding, April 30, 2015 and 2016  20,000,000
6.79
6.79
-
0.25
0.25
$
) $
   
  $
  $
As at April 30, 2016, the Company had the following share purchase warrants outstanding:
Outstanding  Exercise Price  Remaining Life (Years) Expiry Date
 
 20,000,000   $ 0.25
3.39
September 16, 2019
Stock options
The Company's Stock Option Plan is a 10% rolling plan that allows a maximum 10% of the
issued common shares to be reserved for issuance under the plan. Options granted under the
plan may not have a term exceeding 10 years and vesting provisions are at the discretion of the
Board of Directors.
The following is a summary of stock option activities during the years ended April 30, 2014, 2015
and 2016:
Outstanding, April 30, 2013   599,963
   (187,250
Forfeited
Expired
   (70,500
Outstanding, April 30, 2014   342,213
   (232,750
Forfeited
Expired
   (83,463
Outstanding, April 30, 2015   26,000
   (6,000
Forfeited
Expired
   (20,000
Outstanding, April 30, 2016   -
Number of Stock Options  Weighted Average Exercise Price
$
) $
) $
  $
) $
) $
  $
) $
) $
10.43
6.75
12.55
12.01
12.70
10.10
11.95
3.80
14.40
-
Share-based payment expense (recovery)
The Company recognizes share-based payment expense for all stock options granted using the
fair value based method of accounting.  The Company recorded $Nil share-based payment
expense for the years ended April 30, 2015 and 2016.  During the year ended April 30, 2014, the
Company recorded a recovery of share-based payment expense in the amount of $45,250.
No stock options were granted during the years ended April 30, 2014, 2015 or 2016.
85
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
10.  RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Related parties and related party transactions impacting the consolidated financial statements
not disclosed elsewhere in these consolidated financial statements are summarized below and
include transactions with the following individuals or entities:
Key management personnel
Key management personnel include those persons having authority and responsibility for
planning, directing and controlling the activities of the Company as a whole. The Company has
determined that key management personnel consists of members of the Company's Board of
Directors, corporate officers, including the Company's Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial
Officer, and Vice Presidents.
Remuneration attributed to key management personnel for the years ended April 30, 2014, 2015
and 2016 is summarized as follows:
Share-based payments $ -
Short-term benefits(1)
April 30, 2016  April 30, 2015  April 30, 2014
$ 27,463
    207,723
  $ 235,186
$ -
    50,751
  $ 50,751
69,050
 $ 69,050
(1)
include base salaries and directors' fees, pursuant to contractual employment or consultancy
arrangements, management and consulting fees
Other related party transactions and balances
King & Bay West Management Corp. ("King & Bay West"): King & Bay West is an entity owned
by Mark Morabito, the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Company, and provides
administrative, management, finance, legal, geological, regulatory, tax, business development
and corporate communications services to the Company.
Transactions entered into with related parties other than key management personnel during the
years ended April 30, 2014, 2015 and 2016 include the following:
King & Bay West $ 243,393
April 30, 2016  April 30, 2015  April 30, 2014
$ 299,470
$ 303,832
Deposit as at April 30, 2015 and 2016 consists of a security deposit in the amount of $100,000
paid to King & Bay West in accordance with the management services agreement between King
& Bay West and the Company (the "Management Services Agreement").  Upon termination of the
Management Services Agreement, the security deposit will be applied to the final invoice
rendered by King & Bay West to the Company.
Amounts due to related parties as at April 30, 2016 include the following:
King & Bay West - $254,123 (April 30, 2015 - $312,886).  The amount due to King & Bay West
·
includes a term loan in the amount of $206,810 (April 30, 2015 - $206,810) which becomes due
on September 16, 2016.
MJM Consulting Corp., an entity owned by Mark Morabito, the President and Chief Executive
·Officer of the Company - $1,121 (April 30, 2015 - $Nil).
The amounts due to related parties are non-interest bearing.
 
86
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
10.  RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS (continued)
Debt settlement
On September 16, 2014, the Company entered into a debt settlement agreement with King & Bay
West and MJM Consulting Corp. (the "Debt Settlement Agreement").  As of the date of the Debt
Settlement Agreement, Mark Morabito was not the President and Chief Executive Office of the
Company.  Under the terms of the Debt Settlement Agreement, King & Bay West agreed to
forgive $246,063, including Goods and Services Tax of $20,911, payable by the Company,
restructure $246,063 payable by the Company into a non-interest bearing two year term loan,
and convert $154,187 payable by the Company into 1,027,916 fully paid and non-assessable
common shares of the Company.  These common shares were valued at $179,885 and resulted
in a loss on settlement of debt in the amount of $25,698.  In addition, MJM Consulting Corp.
agreed to convert $91,875 payable by the Company into 612,500 fully paid and non-assessable
common shares of the Company.  These common shares were valued at $107,188 and resulted
in a loss on settlement of debt in the amount of $15,313.  The common shares were issued on
December 9, 2014 (Notes 9 and 12).
During the year ended April 30, 2015, the Company applied payments in the amount of $39,253
to the non-interest bearing two year term loan due to King & Bay West.  No additional payments
were applied during the year ended April 30, 2016.
11.   AMALGAMATION AND CHANGE OF BUSINESS
Amalgamation Agreement
On April 12, 2016, the Company entered into a definitive agreement (the "Amalgamation
Agreement") with Canada Jetlines Ltd. ("Jetlines") with respect to the amalgamation of Jetlines
and a wholly owned subsidiary of Jet Metal (the "Transaction").  Jetlines is a start-up airline
aiming to become Canada's first ultra-low cost carrier ("ULCC").
Prior to the closing of the Transaction, Jet Metal has agreed to consolidate its issued and
outstanding common shares on the basis of one post-consolidation common share for every one
and one-half (1.5) pre-consolidation common shares and effect a continuance as a Federal
corporation governed by the Canada Business Corporations Act. Pursuant to the Amalgamation
Agreement one and one-half (1.5) common shares of Jet Metal will be issued in exchange for
every one common share of Jetlines ("Jetlines Share") held, provided that holders of Jetlines
Shares that are not Canadian shall receive variable voting common shares of Jet Metal and
holders of Jetlines Shares that are Canadian shall receive common voting shares of Jet Metal.
Outstanding warrants of Jet Metal and Jetlines and the outstanding stock options of Jet Metal and
Jetlines will automatically become exercisable for or shall be exchanged for common shares of
Jet Metal, subject to all necessary adjustments to reflect the terms of the Transaction and subject
to the terms governing the warrants and options. After the Transaction is complete, all of the
tangible and intangible assets of Jetlines will be owned by and held in the entity formed through
the amalgamation of Jetlines and a wholly owned subsidiary of Jet Metal.
The Transaction remains subject to the following key conditions:
Jet Metal will complete a private placement (the "Concurrent Financing") of units ("Units") for
gross proceeds of up to $6,000,000. Each Unit will consist of one common share of Jet Metal
and one half of one share purchase warrant. Each whole share purchase warrant shall be
·
exercisable into a common share of Jet Metal for 24 months. Subject to Exchange approval, Jet
Metal may pay commissions or finder's fees in connection with the Concurrent Financing and
may appoint a broker to assist with the Concurrent Financing. The Concurrent Financing will
close immediately prior to or concurrently with the Transaction; and
The Transaction will have received shareholder approval and the approval of the Exchange. 
Subsequent to the year ended April 30, 2016, the shareholders of the Company approved the
·
Transaction on July 27, 2016 (Note 17) and conditional approval from the Exchange was
received.
87
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
11.   AMALGAMATION AND CHANGE OF BUSINESS (continued)
Amalgamation Agreement (continued)
Prior to the closing of the Transaction, Jetlines may complete a financing for a maximum of
$250,000 on the same terms as the Concurrent Financing.
The Company filed an Information Circular dated June 17, 2016 on SEDAR which contains
further details of the Transaction.
Loan Receivable
On February 24, 2016, the Company entered into a loan agreement with Jetlines (the "Loan
Agreement") to lend the principal amount of up to $150,000 (the "Loan").  The Loan Agreement
provides for advances in tranches based on agreed upon budgeted expenditures of Jetlines (the
"Budget").  The Loan is secured by a general security agreement.  The proceeds of the Loan are
to be used solely to fund the expenditures of Jetlines set forth in the Budget.
The Loan bears interest on the principal amount outstanding at the rate of ten percent (10%) per
annum from the date of advance of the Loan until the principal amount of the Loan is repaid in
full, and shall be payable in cash on the earlier to occur of (a) the closing of the Transaction, and
(b) the date that is 60 days following the termination of the Amalgamation Agreement in
accordance with its terms (except where the termination of the definitive agreement is based on a
default by the Company, in which case the amounts advanced to Jetlines under the Loan shall
no longer be due and payable by Jetlines to the Company).
All amounts owed by Jetlines to the Company which are not paid when due shall bear interest
from the date on which such amount is due until such amount is paid in full, payable on demand
and compounded monthly at the interest rate of ten percent (10%).
During the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company advanced Jetlines $116,400 (April 30, 2015
- $Nil) and accrued interest in the amount of $1,113 (April 30, 2015 - $Nil).
As of April 30, 2016, the balance of loan receivable consists of the principal amount of $116,400
(April 30, 2015 -$Nil) and accrued interest receivable in the amount of $1,113 (April 30, 2015 -
$Nil) due from Jetlines.
Subsequent to the year ended April 30, 2016, the Company and Jetlines amended the Loan
Agreement to increase the principal amount to up to $200,000 (Note 17).
12.   SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURES WITH RESPECT TO CASH FLOWS
There were no significant non-cash transactions affecting cash flows from investing or financing
activities during the year ended April 30, 2016.
The Company had the following significant non-cash transactions affecting cash flows from
investing or financing during the year ended April 30, 2015:
On December 9, 2014, the Company issued 612,500 common shares valued at $107,188 to
·
settle amounts payable to MJM Consulting Corp. totaling $91,875 (Notes 9 and 10).
On December 9, 2014, the Company issued 1,027,916 common shares valued at $179,885 to
·
settle amounts payable to King & Bay West totaling $154,187 (Notes 9 and 10).
On September 16, 2014, the Company realized a gain on forgiveness and settlement of related
·
party debt in the amount of $184,141 pursuant to the Debt Settlement Agreement (Note 10).
There were no significant non-cash transactions affecting cash flows from investing or financing
activities during the year ended April 30, 2014.
 
88
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
13.   INCOME TAXES
The following is a reconciliation of income taxes attributable to operations computed at the
statutory tax rates to income tax recovery.
Loss for the year
 
Expected income tax recoverable at statutory rate
Permanent differences
Share issuance costs
Impact of different subsidiary tax rates and other
Change in unrecognized deductible temporary
differences
Losses expired
Adjustment to prior years provision versus statutory tax
rates
Total income tax recovery
April 30,
  
2015
April 30,
 
2016
  
 $(3,118,609 ) $ (357,729
    
   (811,000
   17,000
   -
   16,000
)   (93,000
    (47,000
    (9,000
    49,000
April 30,
 
  
2014
   
 
) $(3,967,283)
     
 
)   (1,002,000)
)
)   (8,000
)   -
 
    (614,000 )
1,034,000     125,000
    19,000
   222,000
1,565,000  
 
    -
(478,000
 $-
)   (44,000
  $ -
)   59,000
  $-
The significant components of the Company's unrecognized temporary differences and tax
losses are as follows:
Temporary Differences
 
Exploration and evaluation assets
Investment tax credit
Equipment
Canadian eligible capital (CEC)
Share issue costs
Future reclamation provision
Marketable securities
Allowable capital losses
Non-capital losses available for future period –
Canada
Non-capital losses available for future period –
United States
April 30,
  
2015
Expiry Date
  
Range
April 30,
 
 
2016
 
  
 
  
  
 
 $47,008,000  No expiry date   $44,447,000 
   1,152,000    2028
    1,151,000  
 
   360,000
 
   1,000
   30,000
 
 
   21,000
   97,000
 
   1,837,000   No expiry date     1,703,000
No expiry date     579,000
  No expiry date     1,000
   2029 - 2039
    137,000
  No expiry date     21,000
  No expiry date     97,000
22,190,000   2017 - 2036
22,444,000
3,447,000    2027 - 2036
2,035,000
Tax attributes are subject to review and potential adjustment by tax authorities.
89
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
14.   SEGMENTED INFORMATION
As of April 30, 2015 and 2016, the Company operated in one reportable operating segment,
being the acquisition, exploration and evaluation of mineral properties in North America.
April 30, 2016  April 30, 2015 
 
 
 
  
   
 
Exploration and evaluation assets  
   
 
  
 
   
  $ 2,509,791  
 $ -
Canada
 
     
 
  
 
Property and equipment
  
 
     
 
 
     
  
 
 
 
  $ 2,002
 $ -
    United States
 
    73,586
  
    Canada
-
 
 $ -
  $ 75,588
 
 
     
 
  
 
 
     
 
  
Reclamation bonds
 
  
 
     
 
 
  $ 31,267
 $ 10,416
    United States
15.   CAPITAL MANAGEMENT
The Company's objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Company's ability to
continue as a going concern in order to advance exploration and evaluation assets or pursue
other strategic investments, and to maintain a flexible capital structure which optimizes the costs
of capital at an acceptable risk. In the management of capital, the Company includes its
components of equity.
The Company manages the capital structure and makes adjustments to it in light of changes in
economic conditions and the risk characteristics of the underlying assets.  To maintain or adjust
the capital structure, the Company may attempt to issue new shares, issue debt, acquire assets
or dispose of assets. In order to maximize ongoing development efforts, the Company does not
pay out dividends.  Management reviews its capital management approach on an ongoing basis
and believes that this approach is reasonable given the relative size of the Company.
The Company currently is not subject to externally imposed capital requirements. There were no
changes in the Company's approach to capital management during the year ended April 30,
2016.
16.   RISK MANAGEMENT AND FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The fair value of the Company's loan receivable, other receivables, payables and accrued
liabilities, and amounts due to related parties approximate carrying value, due to their short-term
nature.  The Company's cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities are measured at
fair value under the fair value hierarchy based on level one quoted prices in active markets for
identical assets or liabilities.  The Company's available-for-sale investment is measured at cost
on the basis that the common shares do not have a quoted market price in an active market and
the fair value cannot be reliably measured.  The Company's other financial instruments, being
reclamation bonds, are measured at amortized cost.
The Company's financial instruments are exposed to certain financial risks, including currency
risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, interest rate risk and price risk.
90
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
16.   RISK MANAGEMENT AND FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS (continued)
Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk of an unexpected loss if a customer or third party to a financial instrument
fails to meet its contractual obligations.
The Company is subject to credit risk on its cash and cash equivalents, loan receivable and other
receivables. The Company limits its exposure to credit loss by placing its cash and cash
equivalents with major financial institutions. The Company has no investments in asset-backed
commercial paper. The Company's other receivables consist mainly of Goods and Services Tax
receivable due from the Government of Canada and accrued interest receivable due from a major
financial institution.  Loan receivable is due from Jetlines in connection with the Transaction and
is secured by a general security agreement (Note 11).  The Company does not believe it is
exposed to significant credit risk.
Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Company will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they
fall due.
The Company manages liquidity risk through its capital management as outlined in Note 15.  As
a result of financing and debt restructuring completed during the year ended April 30, 2015,
management believes the Company has sufficient funds to support ongoing operating
expenditures and meet its liabilities as they fall due.
Market Risk
Market risk is the risk of loss that may arise from changes in market factors such as interest rates,
commodity and equity prices, and foreign exchange rates.
(a)Interest rate risk
Interest rate risk is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will
fluctuate because of changes in market interest rates.
The risk that the Company will realize a loss as a result of a decline in the fair value of any short-
term investments included in cash and cash equivalents is minimal because these investments
generally have a fixed yield rate.  The principal balance of the loan receivable bears interest at a
fixed yield rate.
(b)Price risk
The Company is exposed to price risk with respect to commodity prices and equity prices, since
the Company possesses investments in publicly traded securities.  The Company closely
monitors those prices to determine the appropriate course of action to be taken by the Company.
However, there can be no assurance that the Company can exit these positions if required,
resulting in proceeds approximating the carrying value of these securities.
(c)Currency risk
The Company's expenditures are predominantly in Canadian dollars, and any future equity
raised is expected to be predominantly in Canadian dollars.  As at April 30, 2016, the Company
has accounts payable denominated in US dollars of US$57,156, cash of US$18,361 and
reclamation bonds of US$8,300.  A 10% change in the Canadian dollar versus the US dollar
would give rise to a gain/loss of approximately $3,800.
91
JET METAL CORP.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
APRIL 30, 2016
(Expressed in Canadian Dollars)
17.  SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The following reportable events occurred subsequent to the year ended April 30, 2016:
On May 13, 2016, the Company provided Jetlines with an additional advance in the amount of
·
$33,600 in accordance with the Loan Agreement between the Company and Jetlines (Note 11).
On June 23, 2016, the Company amended the Loan Agreement to increase the principal amount
to up to $200,000 to Jetlines (Note 11).  Subsequently on June 28, 2016, the Company provided
·
Jetlines with an additional advance in the amount of $50,000, resulting in a total principal
balance of the Loan, as amended, in the amount of $200,000.
On July 27, 2016, the shareholders of the Company approved the Transaction and related
·
matters (Note 11).
92
Shasta Resources Inc dated May 20, 1994
ITEM 19.  EXHIBITS
1.1(1)Certificate of Incorporation dated September 2, 1966
1.2(1)Memorandum dated August 31, 1966
1.3(1)Certificate of Conversion to Public Company dated February 20, 1967
1.4(1)Certificate of Name Change from Shasta Mines & Oil Ltd. (NPL) to International Shasta
1.5(1)Certificate of Name Change from International Shasta Resources Ltd. to Consolidated
1.6(1)Certificate of Name Change from Consolidated Shasta Resources Inc. to Lima Gold
1.7(1)Certificate of Name Change from Lima Gold Corporation to International Lima Resources
1.8(1)Certificate of Name Change from International Lima Resources Corp. to Crosshair
1.9(1)Transition Application and Notice of Articles transitioning from the former Company Act
(British Columbia) to the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia) dated June 1, 2004
1.10(1)Notice of Alteration removing the Pre-Existing Company Provisions filed September 30,
Exploration & Mining Corp. dated March 1, 2004
Resources Ltd dated February 4, 1975
Corporation dated November 23, 1994
Corp. dated September 21, 1999
2004
shares to an unlimited number of common shares filed March 11, 2005
1.11(1)Notice of Alteration increasing the authorized share capital from 100,000,000 common
1.12(1)New Articles – 2004
1.13(9)Certificate of Name Change from Crosshair Exploration & Mining Corp. to Crosshair
1.14(10)Certificate of Name Change from Crosshair Energy Corporation to Jet Metal Corp. dated
2.1(10)Specimen Common Share certificate
2.2(1)Sample of Warrant Terms and Conditions
Energy Corporation dated October 28, 2011.
September 17, 2013
4.1(1)
Victoria Lake Property Agreement between Rubicon Minerals Corp. and the Company
dated February 14, 2003.  (This agreement is in relation to the South Golden Promise
Property)
dated April 29, 2004. (This agreement relates to the South Golden Promise Property)
4.2(1)1st Amended Agreement with Rubicon Minerals Corp. regarding Victoria Lake Property
4.3(1)2nd Amended Agreement with Rubicon Minerals Corp. regarding Victoria Lake Property
dated November 16, 2004. (This agreement relates to the South Golden Promise Property)
4.4(2)Golden Promise Agreement between Rubicon Minerals Corp. and the Company dated May
1, 2006
93
dated March 1, 2005
4.5(1)Amended and Restated Moran Lake Agreement between Lewis Murphy and the Company
4.6(10)Stock Option Plan dated as of January 2, 2014
4.7(10)Sample Stock Option Agreement
4.811)Management Services Agreement with King & Bay West Management Corp. dated
4.9(4)Amended and Restated Shareholder Rights Plan Agreement with Computershare Investor
4.1011)Warrant Indenture between the Company and Computershare Trust Company of Canada
Amalgamation Agreement between the Company and Canada Jetlines Ltd. dated April 12,
2016.
Services Inc. dated as of November 19, 2007, as amended and restated March 31, 2008
dated September 16, 2014
September 16, 2014
4.11
Company dated July 29, 2008
4.12(6)Purchase and Sale Agreement between the Company and Expedition dated July 29, 2008
4.13(6)Settlement and Release Agreement made among Expedition, Silver Spruce and the
4.14(6)Combination Agreement made among the Company, 0843540 B.C. Ltd. and Target dated
4.15(6)Golden Promise Option and Joint Venture Agreement between the Company and Paragon
4.16(6)List of Jet Subsidiaries
dated April 8, 2009
January 28, 2009
The Bootheel Project, LLC Exploration, Development & Mine Operating Agreement
among 448018 Exploration, Inc., NFUR Bootheel, LLC, Target Exploration and Mining
4.17(6)
Corp., Ur-Energy USA Inc. and NFU Wyoming LLC dated June 7, 2007
Operating Agreement dated December 21, 2007
and M J Ranches dated February 5, 2008
Exploration, Inc. and The Bootheel Project, LLC dated April 11, 2008
4.18(7)Amendment No. 1 to The Bootheel Project, LLC Exploration, Development & Mine
4.19(6)Uranium Lease and Surface and Damage Agreement between 448018 Exploration, Inc.
4.20(6)Assignment of Uranium Lease and Surface and Damage Agreement between 448018
4.21(6)Surface Impact Agreement between 448018 Exploration, Inc. and M J Ranches dated
4.22(6)Assignment of Surface Impact Agreement between 448018 Exploration, Inc. and The
4.23(8)Juniper Ridge Agreement between Strathmore Resources (US) Ltd., Strathmore Minerals
4.24(9)Moran Lake Co-Ownership Agreement between the Company and Lewis Murphy dated
 
 
 
 
94
Corp., the Company and 448018 Exploration, Inc. dated October 29, 2010
February 5, 2008
Bootheel Project, LLC dated April 11, 2008
December 5, 2011
11.1(3)Code of Ethics
12.1Section 302 CEO Certification
12.2Section 302 CFO Certification
13.1Section 906 CEO Certification
13.2Section 906 CFO Certification
_________________
(1)Filed as an exhibit to our Registration Statement on Form 20-F filed April 25, 2006.
(2)Filed as an exhibit to our Registration Statement on Form 20-F filed July 21, 2006.
(3)Filed as an exhibit to our Form 6-K filed April 8, 2009.
(4)Filed as an exhibit to our Form 6-K filed April 16, 2008.
(5)Filed as an exhibit to our Form 6-K filed January 29, 2009.
(6)Filed as an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 20-F filed June 25, 2009.
(7)Filed as an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 20-F filed July 29, 2010.
(8)Filed as an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 20-F filed July 29, 2011.
(9)Filed as an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 20-F filed July 24, 2012.
(10)Filed as an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 20-F filed August 25, 2014.
(11)Filed as an exhibit to our Annual Report on Form 20-F filed August 25, 2015.
95
GLOSSARY OF GEOLOGICAL TERMS
The following is a glossary of certain geological terms used in this Form 20-F Annual Report:
Anomalous means having a geochemical or geophysical character which deviates from
regularity.
Anticline means a fold with strata sloping downward on both sides from a common crest.
Archean means of or relating to the oldest known rocks, those of the Precambrian Eon, Basalt
means a hard, dense, dark volcanic rock composed chiefly of plagioclase, pyroxene, and olivine,
and often having a glassy appearance.
Breccia means fragmental rock whose components are angular and, therefore, as distinguished
from conglomerates, are not water worn. May be sedimentary or formed by crushing or grinding
along faults.
Chert means variety of silica containing microcrystalline quartz.
Claim means the area that confers mineral exploration/exploitation rights to the registered
(mineral/mining) holder under the laws of the governing jurisdiction.
Clastic means a sedimentary rock composed of fragments from pre-existing rock.
Conglomerate means a composite rock made up of particles of varying size.
Contiguous means adjacent.
Diamond Drill means a type of rotary drill in which the cutting is done by abrasion rather than
percussion.  The cutting bit is set with diamonds and is attached to the end of long hollow rods
through which water is pumped to the cutting face.  The drill cuts a core of rock which is
recovered in long cylindrical sections, an inch or more in diametre.
Dolostone means a sedimentary rock composed primarily of dolomite, a mineral made up of
calcium, magnesium, carbon, and oxygen.
eU3O8 means equivalent uranium as determined from a gamma log measured by a downhole
probe.  Expressing the uranium content in this manner is standard industry practice for uranium
exploration in the USA.
Fault means a fracture in a rock along which there has been relative movement between the two
sides either vertically or horizontally.
Foliation means the layered structure common to metamorphic rocks.
Fracture means breaks in rocks due to intensive folding or faulting.
Galena means a soft blue-gray mineral; a major source of lead.
Geological means pertaining to geology, the study of the planet earth – the materials of which it is
made, the processes that act on these materials, the products formed, and the history of the
planet and its life forms since its origin.
Geochemical means the chemistry of the composition and alterations of the solid matter of the
earth or a celestial body.
96
Geophysics means the study of the earth by quantitative physical methods.
Gneisses means a banded or foliated metamorphic rock, usually of the same composition as
granite.
Granite means plutonic igneous rock having visibly crystalline texture; generally composed of
feldspar and mica and quartz.
Graphitic means pertaining to, containing, derived from, or resembling, graphite.
Greywacke means a variety of sandstone generally characterized by its hardness, dark color,
and poorly-sorted, angular grains of quartz, feldspar, and small rock fragments set in a compact,
clay-fine matrix.
Hematite means an iron ore that is a natural iron oxide that is reddish or brown in colour.
Host means a rock or mineral that is older than rocks or minerals introduced into it.
Indicated Mineral Resource - is that part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity, grade or
quality, densities, shape and physical characteristics, can be estimated with a level of confidence
sufficient to allow the appropriate application of technical and economic parameters, to support
mine planning and evaluation of the economic viability of the deposit. The estimate is based on
detailed and reliable exploration and testing information gathered through appropriate
techniques from locations such as outcrops, trenches, pits, workings and drill holes that are
spaced closely enough for geological and grade continuity to be reasonably assumed.  This
definition is from the Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum Standards on
Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves adopted on December 11, 2005.
Inferred Mineral Resource - is that part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity and grade or
quality can be estimated on the basis of geological evidence and limited sampling and
reasonably assumed, but not verified, geological and grade continuity. The estimate is based on
limited information and sampling gathered through appropriate techniques from locations such as
outcrops, trenches, pits, workings and drill holes.  This definition is from the Canadian Institute of
Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum Standards on Mineral Resources and Mineral Reserves
adopted on December 11, 2005.
Intrusion means a rock formed by having moved while in a molten state into pre-existing rocks.
Limestone means a sedimentary rock consisting mainly of calcium that was deposited by the
remains of marine animals.
Mafic means relating to or being a dark-coloured igneous group of minerals that have high
magnesium and iron content.
Mineral Resource means a concentration or occurrence of natural, solid, inorganic or fossilized
organic material in or on the Earth's crust in such form and quantity and of such a grade or quality
that it has reasonable prospects for economic extraction. The location, quantity, grade, geological
characteristics and continuity of a mineral resource are known, estimated or interpreted from
specific geological evidence and knowledge.
Mineralization means the concentration of metals and their chemical compounds within a body of
rock.
Mudstone means a detrital sedimentary rock composed of clay-sized particles.
Net Smelter Return and NSR means the amount of the excess, if any, of Revenue, less Costs.
 All or any exploration, development and mine construction costs and interest thereon are not to
be charged or deducted from the NSR.
NI 43-101 means National Instrument 43-101 Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects, as
adopted by the Canadian Securities Administrators effective December 30, 2005.
 
97
Paleoproterozoic means adjective implying conditions between 1.6 billon years ago and 2.5
billion years ago.
Pyrite means a cubic iron sulfide mineral with a brassy metallic luster that is used as an iron ore,
as a source of sulfur, and in the production of sulfuric acid.
Quartz means a mineral composed of silicon dioxide.
Sandstone means a type of sedimentary rock made up of particles of sand, mostly quartz, bound
together with a mineral cement, along with some feldspar, mica and rock debris.
Shale means a fine-grained detrital sedimentary rock, formed by the compaction of clay, silt, or
mud
Siltstone means a form of fine-grained sandstone consisting of compressed silt.
Soil sampling means the systematic collection of soil samples at a series of different locations in
order to study the distribution of soil geochemical values.
Stratigraphy means Cultural remains and natural sediments become buried over time, forming
strata.
Striae means grooves on a rock surface caused by the movement of a glacier over the rock. 
Provides a direction for tracing boulders to their source.
Strike means the direction or trend of a geologic structure.
Syncline means a fold in rocks in which the rock layers dip inward from both sides toward the
axis.
Tuff means hard volcanic rock composed of compacted volcanic ash.
UTM grid means Universal Transverse Mercator grid.
Vein means a thin sheet-like intrusion into a fissure or crack, commonly quartz-bearing.
Volcanic means a description of rocks originating from volcanic activity.
98
SIGNATURES
The registrant hereby certifies that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form 20-F and that
it has duly caused and authorized the undersigned to sign this annual report on its behalf.
JET METAL CORP.
/s/ Mark J. Morabito
By: Mark J. Morabito
 Chief Executive Officer
Date: August 26, 2016
99

