
EX-99.5 6 exhibit99-5.htm FORM 52-109F2 CERTIFICATE OF INTERIM FILINGS- FULL
CERTIFICATE- CEO Exhibit 99.5
Exhibit 99.5
Form 52-109F2
Certification of interim filings - full certificate
I, Rui Feng, Chief Executive Officer of Silvercorp Metals Inc. certify the following:
1.     Review: I  have  reviewed  the  interim  financial  report  and  interim  MD&A  (together,  the
“interim  filings”)  of Silvercorp  Metals  Inc. (the “issuer”) for the interim period ended June
30, 2016.
2.     No misrepresentations: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence,
the interim filings do not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a
material fact required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading in
light of the circumstances under which it was made, with respect to the period covered by
the interim filings.
3.     Fair  presentation: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the
interim financial report together with the other financial information included in the interim
filings  fairly  present  in  all  material  respects  the  financial  condition,  financial  performance
and cash flows of the issuer, as of the date of and for the periods presented in the interim
filings.
4.     Responsibility: The issuer’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing
and  maintaining  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  (DC&P)  and  internal  control  over
financial  reporting  (ICFR),  as  those  terms  are  defined  in  National  Instrument  52-109
Certification of Disclosure in Issuers’ Annual and Interim Filings, for the issuer.
5.     Design: Subject to the limitations, if any, described in paragraphs 5.2 and 5.3, the issuer’s
other certifying officer(s) and I have, as at the end of the period covered by the interim filings
 
(a)     designed  DC&P,  or  caused  it  to  be  designed  under  our  supervision,  to  provide
reasonable assurance that
(i)      material  information  relating  to  the  issuer  is  made  known  to  us  by  others,
particularly during the period in which the interim filings are being prepared; and
(ii)     information required to be disclosed by the issuer in its annual filings, interim filings
or  other  reports  filed  or  submitted  by  it  under  securities  legislation  is  recorded,
processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in securities
legislation; and
(b)     designed  ICFR,  or  caused  it  to  be  designed  under  our  supervision,  to  provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation
of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with the issuer’s GAAP.
5.1     Control  framework: The  control  framework  the  issuer’s  other  certifying  officer(s)  and  I
used to design the issuer’s ICFR is the Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued
by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
5.2     ICFR  –  material  weakness  relating  to  design: The  issuer  has  disclosed  in  its  interim
MD&A  for  each  material  weakness  relating  to  design  existing  at  the  end  of  the  interim
period
(a)     a description of the material weakness;
(b)     the impact of the material weakness on the issuer’s financial reporting and its ICFR;
and
(c)     the issuer’s current plans, if any, or any actions already undertaken, for remediating the
material weakness.
 
5.3     N/A
6.      Reporting changes in ICFR: The issuer has disclosed in its interim MD&A any change in
the issuer’s ICFR that occurred during the period beginning on April 1, 2016 and ended on
June 30, 2016 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the
issuer’s ICFR.
Date: August 11, 2016
“Rui Feng”
Rui Feng 
Chief Executive Officer
2