
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
UNITED STATES
Washington, D.C. 20549
SCHEDULE 14A
Proxy Statement Pursuant to Section 14(a)
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
(Amendment No. )
Filed by the Registrant (cid:0)
Filed by a Party other than the Registrant 
Check the appropriate box:  
 
 Preliminary Proxy Statement 
 Definitive Proxy Statement 
(cid:0) Definitive Additional Materials 
 Soliciting Material Pursuant to §240.14a-12
  Confidential, for Use of the Commission 
      Only (as permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2))
Newmont Mining Corporation
(Name of Registrant as Specified In Its Charter)
(Name of Person(s) Filing Proxy Statement, if other than the Registrant)
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
(cid:0)   No fee required.
 
   Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(4) and 0-11.
(1)   Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
(2)   Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
(3)   Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 0-11 (set forth the amount on
which the filing fee is calculated and state how it was determined):
(4)   Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
(5)   Total fee paid:
   Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
 
   Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and identify the filing for which the offsetting fee
was paid previously. Identify the previous filing by registration statement number, or the Form or Schedule and the date of its filing.
(1)   Amount Previously Paid:
(2)   Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
(3)   Filing Party:
(4)   Date Filed:
Newmont Minin Corporation
upon-n None. liq-ulna n- AmI-hlw m mey nun-uh let an anna-au- Mug
b3. mamrmumlnmo
Tho Proxy Shhml'll, Amunl Report and alllor proxy mhﬂﬂ III awhblo at:
ﬁlmy/www.mxyvollngmomlnun
mmmmmmymmmdwmnmwmymmnwamymnnnmn
Mmawuh mmmudmmmbmmmnmwwmmwm.
"you an lone-M "gamma: cage! than awn-nu,
mama-mom. ram- mmnpummmg-
_ . I wﬂ.~um‘aywrnWbram-hllusdbduonw
Newmont Mining Corporatlon bib-Ml u m In run my mm
W
au- lab-u: ,w 1 new maul nmmn w‘bu malt-z
eyes-re mun magnum-nun. yalrmlalml puny
mu be balm cu k
TWA-“JIM
mnunus-uCn-aummmn
Emu: “ma-n
Mumlmpw "ﬂaming-mm”
Mon-l: w/momwamm
TO VOTE VOW SHAR SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REM SIDE
Th‘s is not a proxy 12rd. You cannot use this name to vote your shares
Dear Nawmom M'ning Stomach:
TheZDlD Annual Meel'ng olsmholders 01 NEWMONT MNING COWWHON (the WWW) wil be held 'I\ the at (he Hotel du
Pom, 11m and Mum saws, Wln'ngmn, Dehwale. on Friday, um 23. 2010. a ‘1 :00 am (local line).
Pmposah to be oons'deled a! me Ann“! Meeting
(l) babclmmmomemsaveunllhezoll mmal mmdsmmmmmm;
(2) to rally the appoimnem of Prioewalemmseoaopa: LLP as me Carpany‘s ‘ndependem mm: lot 2010.
(3) lo vole on a nomads! K1000“! realms: special meetings: and
(4) lo vole on a memolde' woposal lo mpma ma'prlly voting lorlhe eleclion of Dream 'I\ a newcomest decﬁom
my: noon-numb IVOlI “BIB” Mme I and 2.
Mailman! noon-none: aven- “AW wit: leaped!» Ihms a and 4.
The Board of Diemors has ﬁxed the dose of budness on Fabruzuy 22. 2010 u the mound dale (me “Record [mm luv the
Muslim of stockholders willed to leech/a nolioe of and lo vole at the Animal Meeting or any stimulus) Imreol.
CONTROL NUIIER
YOU HIST RERWE YOUR Il-ﬂGﬂ CONTRO‘. "um W9! 1
YOU EWESTAPAPERCWVW 1115mm mmonfo
VOTE VWR PM" BECTNNDCNLV.
$8956


smeared“ ol recud :1 the Record Date as encouraged and cadialy invited to attend the AmuaI Meet'ngt
medians lo mend Ihe annual meen'ng More you may van in person can be bmd at htth/wwwholeldrpomeom
mm

Holel du Porn

11:: and Make! Streets

\Mlmhgton, DE 29801
WW;
- me Company‘s 2010 Proxy seamen! (rmlrdhg dl attachment: hereto):
0 he Cunpmye Annud Report lor he year ended December 31, 2009 (mm is not (harried to be pm at the

amoral proxy soioitr’ng matsrﬂs); and
0 wry armaments to the foregan mareride that we requied to be hrnl'shed to sbdmuders.
Term-Emmyoﬂhem mmh:

(you must reﬁnance your 11-dgt control number Iocemd on the reverse e‘do alt/1i: form)

Telephone: 1-m310-0‘M {amide 0' the US ltd Canada cdl 201-680-ﬁ88)

Emit WWW (you must reference your 1 1-digit control number i1 your one”)

Imarnet mun/[wwwmxyvohgcomlmm

The Proxy mhrmmmmcomorMnnlvdlﬂem mm:
http://www.proxyvoting.ooml nem
Have this netioe available when you request a PAPER copy or the Proxy Nhterids.
whe'r you war! to view you proxy materials odlne,
OR WPEN YOU WANT TO VOTE VOUR PROXV ELECTRONICALLY
HOW TO VOTE BY INTERNET
We encourage you to review the proxy mater-his online before voting.
Use he Imemat to vote your Sheree On the Imding page of the move website in the box labeled 'To Vote
Your Shares by mane!“ did on “Vote Now" I: annex the electronic proxy and and
vote your eha'ee. Have th's letter in hard when you seem the website
You will need to retare'rce the 11-digit conrol rumba Iomted on the reverse size
68956

