
EX-99.1 2 egy-20160812xex99_1.htm EX-99.1 Exhibit 991
VAALCO ENERGY RECEIVES CONTINUED LISTING STANDARD NOTICE FROM NYSE
HOUSTON – AUGUST 12, 2016 – VAALCO Energy, Inc. (NYSE: EGY) announced today that it
had received notification on August 9, 2016, from the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) that
the price of the Company’s common stock has fallen below the NYSE’s continued listing
standard.  The NYSE requires that the average closing price of a listed company’s common stock
not be less than $1.00 per share for a period of over 30 consecutive trading days.
Under NYSE rules, the Company can avoid delisting if, during the six month period following
receipt of the NYSE notice and on the last trading day of any calendar month, the Company’s
common stock price per share and 30 trading-day average share price is at least $1.00.  During
this period, the Company’s common stock will continue to be traded on the NYSE, subject to
compliance with other continued listing requirements.
The NYSE notification does not affect the Company’s business operations or its SEC reporting
requirements and does not conflict with or cause an event of default under any of the Company’s
material debt or other agreements.
The Company will be notifying the NYSE of its intent to regain compliance with the NYSE
continued listing standards within the six-month period.    The Company is committed to working
with the NYSE to regain compliance and maintain the listing of its common stock.
Other Information
Certain statements in this news release regarding future expectations and plans for future
activities may be regarded as “forward looking statements” within the meaning of the Securities
Litigation Reform Act. They are subject to various risks, such as financial market conditions,
changes in commodities prices and costs of drilling and completion, operating hazards, drilling
risks, and the inherent uncertainties in interpreting engineering data relating to underground
accumulations of oil and gas, as well as other risks discussed in detail in the Company’s Annual
Report on Form 10-K and other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Although
the Company believes that the expectations
reflected in such forward-looking statements are reasonable, it can give no assurance that such
expectations will prove to be correct.
VAALCO Energy, Inc. is a Houston-based independent energy company principally engaged in
the acquisition, exploration, development and production of crude oil. The Company's properties
and exploration acreage are located primarily in Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and Angola in West
Africa.
Investor Contact
Al Petrie
Investor Relations Coordinator
713-543-3422