
S-4/A 1 v417233_lre-s4a.htm S-4/A
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 6, 2015
Registration No. 333-204696
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
AMENDMENT NO. 3
TO
FORM S-4
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
VANGUARD NATURAL RESOURCES, LLC
(Exact Name of Registrant as Specified in its Charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction of
Incorporation or Organization)
1311
 (Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
61-1521161
 (I.R.S. Employer
Identification Number)
5847 San Felipe, Suite 3000
Houston, Texas 77057
(832) 327-2255
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number,
including area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)
Scott W. Smith
5847 San Felipe, Suite 3000
Houston, Texas 77057
(832) 327-2255
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number,
including area code, of agent for service)
Copies to:
Douglas V. Getten
James E. Vallee
Paul Hastings LLP
600 Travis Street, Suite 5800
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 860-7300
Eric D. Mullins
LRE GP, LLC
Heritage Plaza
 
1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 292-9510
Jon W. Daly
Henry Havre
Andrews Kurth LLP
 
600 Travis Street, Suite 4200
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 220-4200
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale of the securities to the public: As soon as practicable after the effectiveness of this
registration statement and the satisfaction or waiver of all other conditions to the closing of the merger described herein.
If the securities being registered on this form are being offered in connection with the formation of a holding company and there is
compliance with General Instruction G, check the following box. o
If this form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box
and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. o
If this form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the
Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. o
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller
reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer  x
Non-accelerated filer  o (Do not check if a smaller reporting
company)
Accelerated filer           o
Smaller reporting company o
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its effective date
until the Registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter
become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 or until the Registration Statement shall become
effective on such date as the Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The information in this document is not complete and may be changed. Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC may not issue the securities
described herein until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is effective. This document is not an
offer to sell these securities and is not soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted.
PRELIMINARY — SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED AUGUST
6, 2015
LRR Energy, L.P.
MERGER PROPOSAL — YOUR VOTE IS VERY IMPORTANT
Dear Unitholders of LRR Energy, L.P.:
On April 20, 2015, LRR Energy, L.P. (“LRE”) and Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC (“Vanguard”) entered into a merger agreement (the
“merger agreement”), pursuant to which a subsidiary of Vanguard will merge with and into LRE, with LRE continuing as the surviving
entity (the “merger”), and, at the same time, Vanguard will purchase all of the limited liability company interests in LRE GP, LLC, the
general partner of LRE (“LRE GP”), resulting in both LRE and LRE GP becoming wholly owned subsidiaries of Vanguard. The LRE GP
conflicts committee has determined that the merger agreement is advisable to and in the best interests of LRE and its unitholders who are
not affiliates of LRE GP and has approved the merger agreement and recommended that the board of directors of LRE GP approve the
merger agreement. Based upon, among other things, the recommendation of the LRE GP conflicts committee, the board of directors of
LRE GP has determined that the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger,
are in the best interests of LRE and its unitholders, and has unanimously approved the merger agreement, the merger and the other
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement and the board of directors of LRE GP has recommended that unitholders vote to
approve the merger agreement.
Under the terms of the merger agreement, holders of LRE common units will receive 0.550 common units of Vanguard for each LRE
common unit held (the “merger consideration”). The exchange ratio for the merger consideration is fixed and will not be adjusted to reflect
changes in the price of LRE common units or Vanguard common units prior to the closing of the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement. The merger consideration is valued at $8.93 per LRE common unit eligible to receive the merger consideration based on the
closing price of Vanguard’s common units as of April 20, 2015, representing a 12.6% premium to the closing price of LRE’s common units
of $7.93 on April 20, 2015. In addition, under the terms of the merger agreement, Vanguard will issue and deliver 12,320 Vanguard
common units to the members of LRE GP in exchange for all of the limited liability company interests in LRE GP. The number of
Vanguard common units to be issued to the members of LRE GP was determined based upon the 0.550 exchange ratio for the merger
consideration.
Vanguard has also entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (as it may be amended from time to time, the “Eagle Rock merger
agreement”) with Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P. (“Eagle Rock”) and Eagle Rock Energy GP, L.P., the general partner of Eagle Rock
(“Eagle Rock GP”), pursuant to which, subject to the terms and conditions thereof, an indirect subsidiary of Vanguard will merge with and
into Eagle Rock, with Eagle Rock continuing as the surviving entity and a wholly owned indirect subsidiary of Vanguard (the “Eagle Rock
merger”). Prior to entering into the Eagle Rock merger agreement, Vanguard obtained the consent of the board of directors of LRE GP, as
required by Section 4.2 of the merger agreement, pursuant to a letter agreement by and among Vanguard, LRE GP and LRE. Neither the
Vanguard unitholders nor the LRE unitholders are entitled to vote with respect to the approval of the Eagle Rock merger agreement or the
Eagle Rock merger, although Vanguard unitholders are entitled to vote with respect to the issuance of Vanguard common units to Eagle
Rock’s unitholders pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement.
If the transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement are consummated, immediately following the later to occur of the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement, it is
expected that LRE unitholders will own approximately 11.8% of the outstanding common units of Vanguard. If, however, the transactions
contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement are not
TABLE OF CONTENTS
consummated, immediately following the completion of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, it is expected that LRE
unitholders will own approximately 15.2% of the outstanding common units of Vanguard. The common units of LRE are traded on the New
York Stock Exchange under the symbol “LRE,” and the common units of Vanguard are traded on the NASDAQ Global Select Market
under the symbol “VNR.”
LRE is holding a special meeting of its unitholders at 1111 Bagby Street, Houston, TX 77002 on September 10, 2015 at 10:00 a.m., local
time, to obtain the vote of its unitholders to approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby. Your vote is very
important, regardless of the number of units you own. The merger cannot be completed unless the holders, as of the record date of the
special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units vote to approve the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby at the LRE special meeting. Certain affiliates of LRE, as holders of certain of the issued and outstanding LRE
common units, have entered into an amended and restated voting and support agreement with Vanguard, pursuant to which they have
agreed to vote all of their LRE common units in favor of the approval of the merger agreement and to take other actions in furtherance of
the merger. Collectively, these LRE unitholders hold LRE common units representing approximately 30.5% of the votes of LRE’s
outstanding common units as of July 31, 2015.
Based upon, among other things, the recommendation of the LRE GP conflicts committee, the board of directors of LRE GP recommends
that LRE unitholders vote “FOR” the approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, “FOR” the merger-
related compensation proposal and “FOR” the adjournment of the LRE special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there
are not sufficient votes to approve the merger agreement at the time of the LRE special meeting.
On behalf of the board of directors of LRE GP, I invite you to attend the LRE special meeting. Regardless of whether you expect to attend
the LRE special meeting in person, we urge you to submit your proxy as promptly as possible through one of the delivery methods
described in the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus.
In addition, we urge you to read carefully the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus (and the documents contained in or incorporated
by reference into the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus), which includes important information about the merger agreement, the
proposed merger, LRE, Vanguard and the LRE special meeting. Please pay particular attention to the section titled “Risk Factors”
beginning on page 44 of the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus.
On behalf of the board of directors of LRE GP, we thank you for your continued support.
Sincerely,
Eric D. Mullins
Co-Chief Executive Officer of LRE GP, LLC,
the general partner of LRR Energy, L.P.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or disapproved of the
securities to be issued under the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus or determined that the accompanying proxy
statement/prospectus is accurate or complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The accompanying proxy statement/prospectus is dated           , 2015 and is first being mailed to the unitholders of LRE on or about           ,
2015.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRR Energy, L.P.
Heritage Plaza
1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING OF UNITHOLDERS
TO BE HELD ON SEPTEMBER 10, 2015
To the Unitholders of LRR Energy, L.P.:
Notice is hereby given that a special meeting of unitholders of LRR Energy, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (“LRE”), will be held at
1111 Bagby Street, Houston, TX, 77002 on September 10, 2015 at 10:00 a.m., local time, solely for the following purposes:
Proposal 1:  to consider and vote on a proposal to approve the Purchase Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of April 20, 2015 (as
such agreement may be amended from time to time, the “merger agreement”), by and among LRE, LRE GP, LLC, the general partner of
LRE (“LRE GP”), Lime Rock Management LP (“LRM”), Lime Rock Resources A, L.P. (“LRR A”), Lime Rock Resources B, L.P. (“LRR B”),
Lime Rock Resources C, L.P. (“LRR C”), Lime Rock Resources II-A, L.P. (“LRR II-A”), Lime Rock Resources II-C, L.P. (“LRR II-C”),
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC (“Vanguard”) and Lighthouse Merger Sub, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Vanguard (“Merger
Sub”), pursuant to which, among other things, Merger Sub will merge with and into LRE, with LRE continuing as the surviving entity (the
“merger”), and, at the same time, Vanguard will purchase all of the outstanding limited liability company interests in LRE GP, resulting in
both LRE and LRE GP becoming wholly owned subsidiaries of Vanguard;
Proposal 2:  to consider and vote on a proposal to approve, on an advisory, non-binding basis, the merger-related compensation
payments that may become payable to certain of LRE’s named executive officers in connection with the merger; and
Proposal 3:  to consider and vote on a proposal to approve the adjournment of the LRE special meeting if necessary to solicit additional
proxies if there are not sufficient votes to approve the merger agreement at the time of the special meeting.
•
•
•
These items of business, including the approval of the merger agreement and the proposed merger, are described in detail in the
accompanying proxy statement/prospectus. Among other things, the LRE GP conflicts committee has determined that the merger
agreement is advisable to and in the best interests of LRE and its unitholders who are not affiliates of LRE GP and has approved the
merger agreement and recommended that the board of directors of LRE GP approve the merger agreement. Based upon, among other
things, such recommendation of the LRE GP conflicts committee, the board of directors of LRE GP has determined that the
merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, are in the best interests of
LRE and its unitholders and recommends that LRE unitholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the merger agreement and
the transactions
TABLE OF CONTENTS
contemplated thereby, “FOR” the advisory merger-related compensation proposal and “FOR” the adjournment of the LRE
special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies in favor of such approval.
Only unitholders of record as of the close of business on July 24, 2015 are entitled to notice of the LRE special meeting and to vote at the
LRE special meeting or at any adjournment or postponement thereof. A list of unitholders entitled to vote at the LRE special meeting will
be available in LRE’s offices located at Heritage Plaza, 1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600, Houston, Texas 77002, during regular business
hours for a period of ten days before the LRE special meeting, and at the place of the LRE special meeting during the meeting.
Approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby by the LRE unitholders is a condition to the consummation
of the merger and requires the affirmative vote of the holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding
LRE common units. Therefore, your vote is very important. Certain affiliates of LRE, as holders of certain of the issued and outstanding
LRE common units, have entered into an amended and restated voting and support agreement with Vanguard, pursuant to which they
have agreed to vote all of their LRE common units in favor of the approval of the merger agreement and to take other actions in
furtherance of the merger. Collectively, these LRE unitholders hold common units representing approximately 30.5% of the votes of LRE’s
outstanding common units as of July 31, 2015.
Your failure to vote your LRE common units will have the same effect as a vote cast “AGAINST” approval of the merger
agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby.
By order of the board of directors,
Eric D. Mullins
Co-Chief Executive Officer of LRE GP, LLC,
the general partner of LRR Energy, L.P.
Houston, Texas
, 2015
YOUR VOTE IS IMPORTANT!
REGARDLESS OF WHETHER YOU EXPECT TO ATTEND THE LRE SPECIAL MEETING IN PERSON, IT IS IMPORTANT THAT
YOUR COMMON UNITS BE REPRESENTED. WE URGE YOU TO SUBMIT YOUR PROXY AS PROMPTLY AS POSSIBLE (1) BY
TELEPHONE, (2) VIA THE INTERNET OR (3) BY MARKING, SIGNING AND DATING THE ENCLOSED PROXY CARD AND
RETURNING IT IN THE PREPAID ENVELOPE PROVIDED. You may revoke your proxy or change your vote at any time before the LRE
special meeting. If your LRE common units are held in the name of a bank, broker, nominee or other record holder, please follow the
instructions on the voting instruction card furnished to you by such record holder.
We urge you to read the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus, including all documents included in or incorporated by reference into
the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus, and its annexes carefully and in their entirety. If you have any questions concerning the
merger, the merger agreement, the advisory, non-binding vote on the merger-related compensation payments that may become payable to
certain of LRE’s named executive officers in connection with the merger, the adjournment vote, the LRE special meeting or the
accompanying proxy statement/prospectus, would like additional copies of the accompanying proxy statement/prospectus or need help
voting your LRE common units, please contact LRE’s proxy solicitor.
The Solicitation Agent for the Special Meeting is:
Morrow & Co., LLC
470 West Avenue — 3rd Floor
Stamford, CT 06902
Banks and Brokerage Firms, please call (203) 658-9400
Unitholders, please call toll free (855) 264-1296
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
This proxy statement/prospectus incorporates by reference important business and financial information about Vanguard and LRE from
other documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) that are not included in or delivered with this proxy
statement/prospectus. See “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Documents incorporated by reference are available to you without charge upon written or oral request. You can obtain any of these
documents by requesting them in writing or by telephone from the appropriate party at the following addresses and telephone numbers.
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC
Attention: Investor Relations
5847 San Felipe, Suite 3000
Houston, Texas 77057
(832) 327-2255
investorrelations@vnrllc.com
LRR Energy, L.P.
Attention: Investor Relations
Heritage Plaza
 
1111 Bagby Street
Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 292-9510
To receive timely delivery of the requested documents in advance of the LRE special meeting, you should make your request no
later than September 2, 2015.
ABOUT THIS DOCUMENT
This proxy statement/prospectus, which forms part of a registration statement on Form S-4 filed with the SEC by Vanguard (File No. 333-
204696), constitutes a prospectus of Vanguard under Section 5 of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), with
respect to the Vanguard common units to be issued pursuant to the merger agreement. This proxy statement/prospectus also constitutes a
notice of meeting and a proxy statement under Section 14(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”),
with respect to the LRE special meeting, at which LRE unitholders will be asked to consider and vote on, among other matters, a proposal
to approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby.
You should rely only on the information contained in or incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. No one has been
authorized to provide you with information that is different from that contained in, or incorporated by reference into, this proxy
statement/prospectus. This proxy statement/prospectus is dated           , 2015. The information contained in this proxy
statement/prospectus is accurate only as of that date or, in the case of information in a document incorporated by reference, as of the date
of such document, unless the information specifically indicates that another date applies. Neither the mailing of this proxy
statement/prospectus to LRE unitholders nor the issuance by Vanguard of its common units pursuant to the merger agreement will create
any implication to the contrary.
This proxy statement/prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy, any securities, or the solicitation of a
proxy, in each case, in any jurisdiction in which, or from any person to whom, it is unlawful to make any such offer or solicitation in such
jurisdiction.
The information concerning Vanguard contained in this proxy statement/prospectus or incorporated by reference has been provided by
Vanguard, and the information concerning LRE contained in this proxy statement/prospectus or incorporated by reference has been
provided by LRE.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
SUMMARY
The Parties
The Merger
Merger Consideration
Treatment of LRE Restricted Units
LRE Special Unitholder Meeting; Unitholders Entitled to Vote; Vote Required
LRE’s Reasons for the Merger; Recommendation of LRE GP’s Board of
Directors and LRE GP’s Conflicts Committee
Voting and Support Agreement
Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement
Registration Rights Agreement
Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Board of Directors
Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Conflicts Committee
Vanguard Unitholder Approval is Not Required
Ownership of Vanguard After the Merger
Interests of Directors and Executive Officers of LRE GP in the Merger
Risks Relating to the Merger and Ownership of Vanguard Common Units
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger
Accounting Treatment of the Merger
1
  10  
  10  
  10  
  10  
  11  
  11
12
12  
  13  
  13  
  14  
  15  
  15  
  15  
  16  
  16  
  17  
  18
i
Listing of Vanguard Common Units; Delisting and Deregistration of LRE
Common Units
No Appraisal Rights
Conditions to Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated by the Merger
Agreement
Regulatory Approvals and Clearances Required for the Merger
No Solicitation by LRE of Alternative Proposals
Change in LRE GP Board Recommendation
Termination of the Merger Agreement
Expenses
18  
  18
18
19  
  19  
  20  
  21  
  21
Termination Fee
  22  
Comparison of Rights of Vanguard Common Unitholders and LRE Unitholders   22  
  22  
Litigation Relating to the Merger
Litigation Relating to the Eagle Rock Merger
  22  
  24  
Recent Developments
  26  
Selected Historical Consolidated Financial Data of Vanguard
  32  
Selected Historical Consolidated Financial Data of LRE
Selected Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial Information
  36  
  38  
Unaudited Comparative Per Unit Information
Comparative Unit Prices and Distributions
  41
TABLE OF CONTENTS
RISK FACTORS
Risk Factors Relating to the Merger
Risk Factors Relating to the Ownership of Vanguard Common Units
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING
STATEMENTS
THE PARTIES
THE LRE SPECIAL MEETING
PROPOSAL 1: THE MERGER
Effect of the Merger
Background of the Merger
Recommendation of LRE GP’s Board of Directors and Its Reasons for the
Merger
Reasons of LRE GP’s Board of Directors for Consenting to the Eagle Rock
Merger
Recommendation of the LRE GP Conflicts Committee and Its Reasons for the
Merger
Reasons of the LRE GP Conflicts Committee for Consenting to the Eagle Rock
Merger
Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Board of Directors
Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Conflicts Committee
Voting and Support Agreement
Registration Rights Agreement
Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement
Unaudited Prospective Financial and Operating Information of LRE and
Vanguard
Vanguard’s Reasons for the Merger
Interests of Directors and Executive Officers of LRE GP in the Merger
No Appraisal Rights
Accounting Treatment of the Merger
Regulatory Approvals and Clearances Required for the Merger
Listing of Vanguard Common Units
Delisting and Deregistration of LRE Common Units
Vanguard Unitholder Approval is Not Required
Ownership of Vanguard After the Merger
Restrictions on Sales of Vanguard Common Units Received in the Merger
Board of Directors and Executive Officers Following the Merger
Litigation Relating to the Merger
THE MERGER AGREEMENT
The Merger
44  
  44  
  51
58
60  
  62  
  67  
  67  
  67
76
79
82
86
89  
  102  
  123  
  126  
  126
126
131  
  131  
  134  
  134  
  134  
  134  
  134  
  134  
  134  
  135  
  135  
  135  
  136  
  136
ii
iii
Effective Time; Closing
Merger Consideration
Treatment of LRE Restricted Units
Adjustments to Prevent Dilution
Withholding
Distributions
Conditions to Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated by the Merger
Agreement
136  
  137  
  137  
  137  
  137  
  138
138
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE Unitholder Approval
No Solicitation by LRE of Alternative Proposals
Change in LRE GP Board Recommendation
Regulatory Matters
Termination of the Merger Agreement
Termination Fee
Expenses
Conduct of Business Pending the Consummation of the Transactions
Contemplated by the Merger Agreement
Indemnification; Directors’ and Officers’ Insurance
Financing Matters
Amendment of Merger Agreement
Remedies; Specific Performance
Representations and Warranties
Additional Agreements
VANGUARD NATURAL RESOURCES, LLC UNAUDITED PRO FORMA
COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES OF THE
MERGER
Tax Opinions Required as a Condition to Closing
Assumptions Related to the U.S. Federal Income Tax Treatment of the Merger
U.S. Federal Income Tax Treatment of the Merger
Tax Consequences of the Merger to LRE
Tax Consequences of the Merger to LRE Common Unitholders
Tax Basis and Holding Period of the Vanguard Common Units Received
Effect of Termination of LRE’s Tax Year at Closing of Merger
Tax Consequences of the Merger to Vanguard and Its Unitholders
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES OF
VANGUARD COMMON UNIT OWNERSHIP
Partnership Status
Limited Partner Status
Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership
Tax Treatment of Operations
Disposition of Common Units
Uniformity of Units
Tax-Exempt Organizations and Other Investors
Administrative Matters
State, Local, Foreign and Other Tax Considerations
DESCRIPTION OF VANGUARD COMMON UNITS
Where Common Units Are Traded
Issuance of Additional Units
Voting Rights
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Transfer Agent and Registrar
Transfer of Common Units
141  
  142  
  143  
  144  
  145  
  146  
  147
147
150  
  151  
  151  
  151  
  152  
  153
154
194
194  
  195  
  196  
  196  
  197  
  198  
  198  
  198
199
200  
  201  
  201  
  206  
  211  
  213  
  214  
  214  
  217  
  219  
  219  
  219  
  219
219  
  220
220  
  221
Summary of Limited Liability Company Agreement
COMPARISON OF RIGHTS OF VANGUARD COMMON UNITHOLDERS AND
LRE UNITHOLDERS
  221  
Purpose
  221  
Outstanding Units
  222  
Issuance of Additional Securities
  222  
Distributions of Available Cash
  225  
Distributions of Cash upon Liquidation
  227  
Merger, Sale or Other Disposition of Assets
  228  
Election of Directors
  228  
Meetings; Voting; Voting Rights
  231  
Withdrawal or Removal of the General Partner; Election of General Partner
  233  
Transfer of General Partner Interests
  233  
No or Limited Preemptive Right
Limited Call Right
  233  
Amendment of Limited Liability Company Agreement or Partnership Agreement   234  
  238  
Indemnification
Fiduciary Duties; Conflicts of Interest
  239  
  241  
Anti-Takeover Provisions
  243  
Dissolution
Transfer of Units; Status as Member, Limited Partner or Assignee
  243  
PROPOSAL 2: ADVISORY VOTE ON MERGER-RELATED NAMED
EXECUTIVE OFFICER COMPENSATION
PROPOSAL 3: ADJOURNMENT OF THE LRE SPECIAL MEETING
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
ANNEX A: Purchase Agreement and Plan of Merger
ANNEX B: Amended and Restated Voting and Support Agreement
ANNEX C: Opinion of Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC, dated April
20, 2015
ANNEX D: Opinion of Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC, dated May
21, 2015
ANNEX E: Opinion of Simmons & Company International, dated April 20, 2015   E-1  
ANNEX F: Opinion of Simmons & Company International, dated May 20, 2015   F-1
246  
  247  
  248  
  249  
  A-1  
  B-1
245
C-1
D-1
iv
TABLE OF CONTENTS
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Set forth below are questions that you, as a unitholder of LRE, may have regarding the merger, the vote on the merger, the advisory, non-
binding vote on the merger-related compensation payments that may become payable to certain of LRE’s named executive officers in
connection with the merger, the adjournment proposal and the LRE special meeting, and brief answers to those questions. You are urged
to read carefully this proxy statement/prospectus and the other documents referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus in their entirety,
including the merger agreement, which is attached as Annex A to this proxy statement/prospectus, and the documents contained in and
incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus, because this section may not provide all of the information that is important
to you with respect to the merger and the LRE special meeting. You may obtain a list of the documents incorporated by reference into this
proxy statement/prospectus in the section titled “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Q: Why am I receiving this proxy statement/prospectus?
A:
Vanguard and LRE have agreed to a merger, pursuant to which Merger Sub will merge with and into LRE, with LRE continuing as the
surviving entity, and, at the same time, Vanguard will purchase all of the limited liability company interests in LRE GP, resulting in both
LRE and LRE GP becoming wholly owned subsidiaries of Vanguard. Following the completion of the transactions contemplated by the
merger agreement, LRE will cease to be a publicly traded limited partnership. In order to complete the merger, LRE unitholders must
vote to approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby. LRE is holding a special meeting of unitholders to
obtain such unitholder approval. LRE unitholders will also be asked to approve, on an advisory, non-binding basis, the payments that
will or may be paid by LRE to certain of its named executive officers in connection with the merger.
In the merger, Vanguard will issue Vanguard common units as the consideration to be paid to holders of LRE common units. This
document is being delivered to you as both a proxy statement of LRE and a prospectus of Vanguard in connection with the merger. It is
the proxy statement by which the board of directors of LRE GP is soliciting proxies from you to vote on the approval of the merger
agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby at the LRE special meeting or at any adjournment or postponement of the LRE
special meeting. It is also the prospectus by which Vanguard will issue Vanguard common units to you in the merger.
Your vote is important. We encourage you to vote as soon as possible.
Q:
What will happen in the merger?
A:
In the merger, Merger Sub will merge with and into LRE. LRE will be the surviving limited partnership in the merger. LRE will cease to
be a publicly traded limited partnership following completion of the merger. At the same time, Vanguard will purchase all of the limited
liability company interests in LRE GP, resulting in both LRE and LRE GP becoming wholly owned subsidiaries of Vanguard.
Q: What will I receive in the merger for my LRE common units?
A:
If the merger is completed, your LRE common units will be cancelled and converted automatically into the right to receive a number of
Vanguard common units equal to 0.550 (the “exchange ratio”) multiplied by the number of LRE common units you hold. No fractional
Vanguard common units will be issued. Holders of LRE common units to whom fractional units would have otherwise been issued will
be entitled to receive, subject to applicable withholding, a cash payment in lieu of such fractional interest based on the average of the
closing sale prices of the Vanguard common units over the ten consecutive full trading days ending at the close of trading on the full
trading day immediately preceding the closing date of the merger. The exchange ratio for the merger consideration is fixed and will not
be adjusted to reflect changes in the price of LRE common units or Vanguard common units prior to the closing of the merger. See “Risk
Factors” beginning on page 44 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Q: Can I elect to receive cash for my LRE common units?
A:
No. Pursuant to the merger agreement, the consideration to be received by the holders of LRE common units consists of the merger
consideration and is fixed at the exchange ratio, in each case as described above.
Q: What will happen to LRE’s restricted units in the merger?
A:
If the merger is completed, each restricted common unit issued under LRE GP’s Long-Term Incentive Plan (the “LTIP”) that is subject to
time-based vesting (an “LRE restricted unit”) and that is outstanding and unvested immediately prior to the effective time will,
automatically and without any action on the part of the holder of such LRE restricted unit, become fully vested and the restrictions with
respect thereto will lapse and such LRE restricted unit will be deemed to be an LRE common unit for purposes of the merger. See “The
Merger Agreement — Treatment of LRE Restricted Units” beginning on page 137 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Q: What happens if the merger is not completed?
A:
If the merger agreement is not approved by LRE unitholders or if the merger is not completed for any other reason, you will not receive
any form of consideration for your LRE units in connection with the merger. Instead, LRE will remain an independent publicly held
limited partnership and its common units will continue to be listed and traded on the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”). Under
specified circumstances, LRE may be required to pay Vanguard a termination fee of $7,288,000. In addition, following a termination of
the merger agreement in specified circumstances, either LRE or Vanguard will be required to pay up to $1,215,000 in expenses to the
other party as described in “The Merger Agreement — Termination Fee” beginning on page 146 and “The Merger
Agreement — Expenses” beginning on page 147 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Q: Will I continue to receive future distributions?
A:
Before completion of the merger, LRE expects to continue to pay its regular quarterly cash distribution on its common units, which is
currently $0.1875 per unit. LRE and Vanguard intend to coordinate the timing of distribution declarations leading up to the merger so
that, in any month, a holder of LRE common units will either receive a regular quarterly distribution in respect of its LRE common units
or a monthly distribution in respect of Vanguard common units that such holder will receive in the merger (but will not receive
distributions in respect of both in any month). However, if the merger is completed at a time in which there is one or more months prior to
completion of the merger for which a holder of LRE common units would not receive either a regular quarterly cash distribution covering
such month or months or a monthly distribution in respect of the Vanguard common units such holder will receive in the merger, LRE
may pay a portion of its regular quarterly cash distribution early to cover such month or months. Receipt of any LRE distributions prior to
the completion of the merger will not reduce the merger consideration you receive. After completion of the merger, you will be entitled
only to distributions on any Vanguard common units you receive in the merger and hold through the applicable distribution record date.
What am I being asked to vote on?
Q:
A: LRE’s unitholders are being asked to vote on the following proposals:
•Proposal 1:  to approve the merger agreement, as such agreement may be amended from time to time, a copy of which is attached as
Annex A to this proxy statement/prospectus, and the transactions contemplated thereby;
•Proposal 2:  to approve, on an advisory, non-binding basis, the merger-related compensation payments that may become payable to
certain of LRE’s named executive officers in connection with the merger; and
•Proposal 3:  to approve the adjournment of the LRE special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are not sufficient
votes to approve the merger agreement at the time of the LRE special meeting.
2
The approval of the proposal to approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby by LRE unitholders is a
condition to the obligations of LRE and Vanguard to complete the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement. Neither the
TABLE OF CONTENTS
approval (on an advisory, non-binding basis) of the merger-related compensation proposal nor the approval of the proposal to adjourn is a
condition to the obligations of LRE or Vanguard to complete the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
A:
Q:Does the board of directors of LRE’s general partner recommend that unitholders approve the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated thereby?
Yes. The board of directors of LRE GP has unanimously approved the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby,
including the merger, and determined that these transactions are in the best interests of the LRE unitholders. Therefore, the board of
directors of LRE GP unanimously recommends that you vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby at the LRE special meeting. See “Proposal 1: The Merger — Recommendation of LRE GP’s Board of Directors
and Its Reasons for the Merger” beginning on page 76 of this proxy statement/prospectus. In considering the recommendation of the
board of directors of LRE GP with respect to the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, including the merger,
you should be aware that, in certain cases, directors and executive officers of LRE GP have interests in the merger that may be different
from, or in addition to, your interests as a unitholder of LRE. You should consider these interests in voting on this proposal. These
different interests are described under “Proposal 1: The Merger — Interests of Directors and Executive Officers of LRE GP in the
Merger” beginning on page 131 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Q:What are the merger-related compensation payments to certain of LRE’s named executive officers and why am I being asked
to vote on them?
The SEC has adopted rules that require LRE to seek an advisory (non-binding) vote on the compensation payments related to the
merger. The related compensation payments are certain compensation payments that are tied to or based on the merger and that will or
may be paid by LRE to certain of its named executive officers in connection with the merger. This proposal is referred to as the “merger-
related compensation proposal.”
A:
Q:Does the board of directors of LRE GP recommend that unitholders approve the merger-related compensation proposal?
A:
Yes. The board of directors of LRE GP unanimously recommends that you vote “FOR” the merger-related compensation proposal. See
“Proposal 2: Approval of Merger-Related Compensation” beginning on page 245 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Q: What happens if the merger-related compensation proposal is not approved?
A:
Approval of the merger-related compensation proposal is not a condition to completion of the merger. The vote is an advisory vote and
is not binding. If the merger is completed, LRE will pay the related compensation to certain of its named executive officers in connection
with the merger even if LRE unitholders fail to approve the merger-related compensation proposal.
Q:Does the board of directors of LRE GP recommend that unitholders approve the adjournment of the LRE special meeting if
necessary?
Yes. The board of directors of LRE GP unanimously recommends that you vote “FOR” the proposal to adjourn the LRE special meeting
if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are not sufficient votes to approve the merger agreement at the time of the LRE special
meeting. See “Proposal 3: Adjournment of the LRE Special Meeting” beginning on page 246 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
A:
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
Q: What unitholder vote is required for the approval of each proposal?
A: The following are the vote requirements for the proposals:
Proposal 1: Approval of the Merger Agreement.  The affirmative vote of the holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of a
majority of the outstanding LRE common units. Accordingly, abstentions, broker non-votes (if any) and unvoted units will have the same
effect as votes “AGAINST” approval.
Proposal 2: Approval of Merger-Related Compensation.  The affirmative vote of the holders, as of the record date of the special
meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units. Accordingly, abstentions, broker non-votes (if any) and unvoted units will
have the same effect as votes “AGAINST” approval.
Proposal 3: Adjournment of the LRE Special Meeting (if necessary).  If a quorum is present at, and if a limited partner vote is solicited
on adjournment of, the meeting, the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units will be required to
approve the proposal. If a quorum is not present at the meeting, the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE
common units present and entitled to be voted at such meeting represented either in person or by proxy, will be required to approve the
proposal. Accordingly, if a quorum is present, abstentions, broker non-votes and unvoted units will have the same effect as votes
“AGAINST” the proposal. If a quorum is not present, abstentions and broker non-votes will have the same effect as votes “AGAINST” the
proposal, and unvoted units will have no effect on the approval of the proposal.
•
•
Simultaneous with the execution of the merger agreement, Vanguard entered into a Voting and Support Agreement (the “original support
agreement”) with each of LRR A, LRR B and LRR C, as holders of certain of the issued and outstanding LRE common units (collectively,
the “Holders”), LRE, LRE GP, and, solely for certain restrictions on the sale of Vanguard common units, LRM, LRR II-A and LRR II-C. On
May 21, 2015, in connection with the execution of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, the parties to the original support agreement
entered into an Amended and Restated Voting and Support Agreement (the “amended and restated support agreement”). Pursuant to the
amended and restated support agreement, the Holders have agreed to vote all of their LRE common units in favor of the merger
agreement and to take certain other specified actions in furtherance of the merger. Collectively, the Holders hold common units
representing approximately 30.5% of the votes of LRE’s outstanding common units as of July 31, 2015.
Q: What constitutes a quorum for the LRE special meeting?
A:
The holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units must be represented in person or by proxy at the meeting in order to
constitute a quorum.
Q: When is this proxy statement/prospectus being mailed?
A:This proxy statement/prospectus and the proxy card are first being sent to LRE unitholders on or about           , 2015.
Q: Who is entitled to vote at the LRE special meeting?
A:
Holders of LRE’s common units outstanding as of the close of business on July 24, 2015, the record date for the determination of
unitholders entitled to notice of and to vote at the LRE special meeting, are entitled to one vote per unit at the LRE special meeting.
As of the record date, there were 28,074,433 common units outstanding, all of which are entitled to be voted at the LRE special meeting.
Q: When and where is the LRE special meeting?
A:The special meeting will be held at 1111 Bagby Street, Houston, TX 77002, on September 10, 2015 at 10:00 a.m., local time.
4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
Q:How do I vote my LRE common units, or cause my LRE common units to be voted, at the LRE special meeting?
A: There are four ways you may cause your LRE common units to be voted at the LRE special meeting:
In Person.  If you are a unitholder of record, you may vote in person at the LRE special meeting. Units held by a broker, bank, nominee or
other holder of record may be voted in person by you only if you obtain a legal proxy from the record holder (which is your broker, bank,
nominee or other holder of record) giving you the right to vote the units;
Via the Internet.  You may submit a proxy electronically via the Internet by accessing the Internet address provided on each proxy card (if
you are a unitholder of record) or vote instruction card (if your LRE common units are held by a broker, bank, nominee or other holder of
record);
By Telephone.  You may submit a proxy by using the toll-free telephone number listed on the enclosed proxy card (if you are a unitholder
of record) or vote instruction card (if your LRE common units are held by a broker, bank, nominee or other holder of record); or
By Mail.  You may submit a proxy by filling out, signing and dating the enclosed proxy card (if you are a unitholder of record) or vote
instruction card (if your LRE common units are held by a broker, bank, nominee or other holder of record) and returning it by mail in the
prepaid envelope provided.
•
•
•
Even if you plan to attend the LRE special meeting in person, your plans may change, thus you are encouraged to submit your proxy as
described above so that your vote will be counted if you later decide not to attend the LRE special meeting.
If your LRE common units are held by a broker, bank, nominee or other holder of record, also known as holding units in “street name,” you
should receive instructions from the broker, bank, nominee or other holder of record that you must follow in order to have your LRE
common units voted. Please review such instructions to determine whether you will be able to submit your proxy via Internet or by
telephone. The deadline for submitting your proxy by telephone or electronically through the Internet is 11:59 p.m. Eastern Time
September 9, 2015 (the “Telephone/Internet deadline”).
Q:If my LRE common units are held in “street name” by my broker, will my broker automatically vote my LRE common units for
me?
No. If your LRE common units are held in an account at a broker or through another nominee, you must instruct the broker or other
nominee on how to vote your LRE common units by following the instructions that the broker or other nominee provides to you with
these materials. Most brokers offer the ability for unitholders to submit voting instructions by mail by completing a voting instruction card,
by telephone and via the Internet.
A:
If you do not provide voting instructions to your broker, your LRE common units will not be voted on any proposal on which your broker
does not have discretionary authority to vote. This is referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus and in general as a broker non-vote.
Because the only proposals for consideration at the LRE special meeting are non-discretionary proposals, it is not expected that there will
be any broker non-votes at the LRE special meeting. If there are any broker non-votes, they will be counted as units that are present and
entitled to be voted for purposes of determining the presence of a quorum, but the broker or other nominee will not be able to vote on those
matters for which specific authorization is required. Under the current rules of the NYSE, brokers do not have discretionary authority to
vote on the proposal to approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby. A broker non-vote (if any) will have the
same effect as a vote cast “AGAINST” (i) approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, (ii) approval of the
merger-related compensation proposal and (iii) approval of the adjournment proposal.
5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Q: How will my LRE common units be represented at the LRE special meeting?
A:
If you submit your proxy by telephone, the Internet website or by signing and returning your proxy card, the officers named in your proxy
card will vote your LRE common units in the manner you requested if you correctly submitted your proxy. If you sign your proxy card and
return it without indicating how you would like to vote your LRE common units, your LRE common units will be voted as the board of
directors of LRE GP recommends, which is:
•
Proposal 1:  “FOR” the approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby;
•Proposal 2:  “FOR” the approval, on an advisory, non-binding basis, the merger-related compensation payments that may become
payable to certain of LRE’s named executive officers in connection with the merger; and
•Proposal 3:  “FOR” the approval of the adjournment of the LRE special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are not
sufficient votes to approval the merger agreement at the time of the special meeting.
If you hold your LRE common units through a broker or other nominee, you must follow the directions you receive from your broker or other
nominee in order to revoke your proxy or change your voting instructions.
Q:
Who may attend the LRE special meeting?
A:
LRE unitholders (or their authorized representatives) and LRE’s invited guests may attend the LRE special meeting. All attendees
should be prepared to present government-issued photo identification (such as a driver’s license or passport) for admittance.
Q:
Is my vote important?
A:
Yes, your vote is very important. If you do not submit a proxy or vote in person at the LRE special meeting, it will be more difficult for
LRE to obtain the necessary quorum to hold the LRE special meeting. In addition, an abstention or your failure to submit a proxy or to
vote in person will have the same effect as a vote cast “AGAINST” approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated
thereby. If you hold your LRE common units through a broker or other nominee, your broker or other nominee will not be able to cast a
vote on such approval without instructions from you. The board of directors of LRE GP recommends that you vote “FOR” the approval of
the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby.
Q:
Can I revoke my proxy?
•
A:
Yes. If you are a unitholder of record, you may revoke or change your proxy at any time before the Telephone/Internet deadline or before
the polls close at the LRE special meeting by:
sending a written notice, no later than the Telephone/Internet deadline, to LRE at Heritage Plaza, 1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600, Suite
4600, Houston, Texas 77002, Attn: Secretary, that bears a date later than the date of the proxy and is received prior to the LRE special
meeting and states that you revoke your proxy;
•submitting a valid, later-dated proxy by mail, telephone or Internet that is received prior to the LRE special meeting; or
attending the LRE special meeting and voting by ballot in person (your attendance at the LRE special meeting will not, by itself, revoke
any proxy that you have previously given).
Q: What happens if I sell my LRE common units after the record date but before the LRE special meeting?
•
A:
The record date for the LRE special meeting is earlier than the date of the LRE special meeting and the date that the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement are expected to be completed. If you sell or otherwise transfer your LRE common units after the
record date but before the date of the LRE
6
TABLE OF CONTENTS
special meeting, you will retain your right to vote at the LRE special meeting. However, you will not have the right to receive the merger
consideration to be received by LRE’s unitholders in the merger. In order to receive the merger consideration, you must hold your LRE
common units through completion of the merger.
Q: What does it mean if I receive more than one proxy card or vote instruction card?
A:
Your receipt of more than one proxy card or vote instruction card means that you have multiple accounts with LRE’s transfer agent or
with a brokerage firm, bank, nominee or other holder of record. If submitting your proxy by mail, please sign and return all proxy cards or
vote instruction cards to ensure that all of your LRE common units are voted. Each proxy card or vote instruction card represents a
distinct number of units, and it is the only means by which those particular units may be voted by proxy.
Q: Am I entitled to appraisal rights if I vote against the approval of the merger agreement?
No. Appraisal rights are not available in connection with the merger under the Delaware Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act (the
“Delaware LP Act”) or under the LRE partnership agreement.
Is completion of the merger subject to any conditions?
A:
Q:
A:
Yes. In addition to the approval of the merger agreement by LRE unitholders, completion of the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement requires the satisfaction or, to the extent permitted by applicable law, waiver of the other conditions specified in the merger
agreement. See “The Merger Agreement — Conditions to Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated by the Merger Agreement”
beginning on page 138 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Q: When do you expect to complete the merger?
A:
LRE and Vanguard are working towards completing the merger promptly. LRE and Vanguard currently expect to complete the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, in the third quarter of 2015, subject to receipt of LRE’s
unitholder approval and other usual and customary closing conditions. However, no assurance can be given as to when, or if, the
merger will occur.
Q: How does the proposed merger relate to Vanguard’s proposed merger with Eagle Rock?
On May 21, 2015, Vanguard and Talon Merger Sub, LLC (“Talon Merger Sub”), an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Vanguard,
entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger with Eagle Rock and Eagle Rock GP (as it may be amended from time to time, the
“Eagle Rock merger agreement”), pursuant to which, subject to the terms and conditions thereof, Talon Merger Sub will be merged with
and into Eagle Rock, with Eagle Rock continuing as the surviving entity and a wholly owned indirect subsidiary of Vanguard (the “Eagle
Rock merger”). Under the terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, holders of Eagle Rock common units will receive 0.185 Vanguard
common units for each Eagle Rock common unit held. The exchange ratio for the Eagle Rock merger is fixed and will not be adjusted to
reflect changes in the price of Eagle Rock common units or Vanguard common units prior to the closing of the transactions
contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement. Prior to entering into the Eagle Rock merger agreement, Vanguard obtained the
A:
consent of the board of directors of LRE GP as required under Section 4.2 of the merger agreement pursuant to a letter agreement by
and among Vanguard, LRE GP and LRE.
A joint proxy statement/prospectus will be mailed to unitholders of Vanguard and Eagle Rock in connection with the Eagle Rock merger.
The Eagle Rock merger is a transaction separate and apart from the merger, and the completion of the Eagle Rock merger is not a
condition to the completion of the merger, and the completion of the merger is not a condition to the completion of the Eagle Rock merger.
Q:What are the expected U.S. federal income tax consequences to an LRE common unitholder as a result of the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement?
It is anticipated that no gain or loss will be recognized by a holder of LRE common units solely as a result of the merger, other than (i)
such unitholder’s distributive share of any gain recognized by LRE as a result of the receipt of the aggregate amount of any cash in lieu
of fractional Vanguard common units
A:
7
TABLE OF CONTENTS
to be received by the LRE unitholders and (ii) any net decrease in such LRE unitholder’s share of partnership liabilities pursuant to
Section 752 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) to the extent such decrease exceeds such LRE unitholder’s
adjusted tax basis in its LRE units at the closing of the merger.
Please read “Risk Factors — Risk Factors Relating to the Merger” and “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the
Merger — Tax Consequences of the Merger to LRE Common Unitholders.”
Q:Under what circumstances could the merger result in a holder of LRE common units recognizing taxable income or gain?
A:
For U.S. federal income tax purposes, LRE will be deemed to contribute all of its assets to Vanguard in exchange for Vanguard
common units, the assumption of LRE’s liabilities and cash in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units, followed by a liquidation of
LRE in which Vanguard common units and cash are distributed to LRE unitholders. The actual receipt of cash and the deemed receipt
of cash by LRE in the merger could trigger gain to LRE either because it would be treated as part of a sale or because it exceeds LRE’s
adjusted tax basis in its assets at the closing of the merger, and any such gain would be allocated to the LRE unitholders pursuant to
the LRE partnership agreement. LRE expects that the actual receipt of cash and the deemed receipt of cash by LRE will qualify for one
or more exceptions to sale treatment, and LRE does not currently expect that it will recognize gain as a result of the deemed receipt of
cash in the merger exceeding its adjusted tax basis in its assets. In addition, as a result of the merger, the holders of LRE common units
who receive Vanguard common units will become limited partners of Vanguard for U.S. federal income tax purposes and will be
allocated a share of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities. Each holder of LRE common units will be treated as receiving a deemed cash
distribution equal to the excess, if any, of such LRE unitholder’s share of nonrecourse liabilities of LRE immediately before the merger
over such common unitholder’s share of nonrecourse liabilities of Vanguard immediately following the merger. If the amount of cash
actually received plus any deemed cash distribution received by a holder of LRE common units exceeds such common unitholder’s
basis in his LRE units, such common unitholder will recognize gain in an amount equal to such excess. While there can be no
assurance, Vanguard and LRE expect that most holders of LRE common units will not recognize gain in this manner. The amount and
effect of any gain that may be recognized by holders of LRE common units will depend on such unitholder’s particular situation,
including the ability of such unitholder to utilize any suspended passive losses. For additional information, please read “Material U.S.
Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger — Tax Consequences of the Merger to LRE,” “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax
Consequences of the Merger — Tax Consequences of the Merger to LRE Common Unitholders” and “Risk Factors Relating to the
Merger.”
Q:What are the expected U.S. federal income tax consequences for a holder of LRE common units of the ownership of Vanguard
common units after the merger is completed?
Each holder of LRE common units who becomes a Vanguard unitholder as a result of the merger will, as is the case for existing
Vanguard common unitholders, be allocated such unitholder’s distributive share of Vanguard’s income, gains, losses, deductions and
credits. In addition to U.S. federal income taxes arising as a result of such allocations, such a holder will be subject to other taxes,
including state and local income taxes, unincorporated business taxes, and estate, inheritance or intangibles taxes that may be
imposed by the various jurisdictions in which Vanguard conducts business or owns property or in which the unitholder is resident.
Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of Vanguard Common Unit Ownership.”
A:
Q:Assuming the merger closes before December 31, 2015, how many Schedule K-1s will I receive if I am an LRE unitholder?
If you are a holder of LRE common units, you will receive two Schedule K-1s, one from LRE, which will report your share of LRE’s
income, gain, loss and deduction for the portion of the tax year that you held LRE units prior to the effective time of the merger, and one
from Vanguard, which will report your share of Vanguard’s income, gain, loss and deduction for the portion of the tax year you held
Vanguard common units following the effective time of the merger.
A:
8
At the effective time of the merger, LRE will be treated as a terminated partnership under Section 708 of the Code. Therefore, as a result of
TABLE OF CONTENTS
the merger, LRE’s taxable year will end as of the date of the merger, and LRE will be required to file a final U.S. federal income tax return
for the taxable year ending on the date the merger is effective. LRE expects to furnish a Schedule K-1 to each LRE unitholder, and
Vanguard expects to furnish a Schedule K-1 to each Vanguard unitholder, within 90 days of the closing of Vanguard’s taxable year on
December 31, 2015.
Q:
What do I need to do now?
A:
Carefully read and consider the information contained in and incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus, including
its annexes. Then, please vote your LRE common units or submit your proxy in accordance with the instructions described above.
If you hold units through a broker or other nominee, please instruct your broker or nominee to vote your LRE common units by following
the instructions that the broker or nominee provides to you with these materials.
Q:
Should I send in my unit certificates now?
A:
No. LRE unitholders should not send in their unit certificates at this time. After completion of the merger, Vanguard’s exchange agent
will send you a letter of transmittal and instructions for exchanging your LRE common units for the merger consideration. All Vanguard
common units issued pursuant to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement will be issued in book-entry form, without
physical certificates.
Q:
Who should I call with questions?
A:
LRE unitholders should call Morrow & Co., LLC (“Morrow”), LRE’s proxy solicitor, toll-free at (855) 264-1296 (banks and brokers can call
collect at (203) 658-9400) with any questions about the merger or the LRE special meeting, or to obtain additional copies of this proxy
statement/prospectus, proxy cards or voting instruction forms.
9
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY
This summary highlights selected information from this proxy statement/prospectus. You are urged to read carefully the entire proxy
statement/prospectus and the other documents referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus because the information in this section does
not provide all the information that might be important to you with respect to the merger agreement, the merger and the other matters being
considered at the LRE special meeting. See “Where You Can Find More Information.” Each item in this summary refers to the page of this
proxy statement/prospectus on which that subject is discussed in more detail.
The Parties (See page 60)
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC (“Vanguard”) is a Delaware limited liability company with common units traded on the NASDAQ
Global Select Market (“NASDAQ”) under the symbol “VNR.” Vanguard is an independent energy company focused on the acquisition,
exploitation and development of mature, long-lived oil and natural gas properties in the United States. Vanguard’s properties and oil and
natural gas reserves are located primarily in nine operating basins in Wyoming, Colorado, Texas, New Mexico, Mississippi, Montana,
Arkansas, Oklahoma and North Dakota. Vanguard’s principal executive offices are located at 5847 San Felipe, Suite 3000, Houston,
Texas 77057, and its telephone number is (832) 327-2255.
LRR Energy, L.P. (“LRE”) is a Delaware limited partnership formed in April 2011 by Lime Rock Management LP (“LRM”), an affiliate of
Lime Rock Resources A, L.P. (“LRR A”), Lime Rock Resources B, L.P. (“LRR B”) and Lime Rock Resources C, L.P. (“LRR C” and,
together with LRR A and LRR B, “Fund I”), to operate, acquire, exploit and develop producing oil and natural gas properties in North
America with long-lived, predictable production profiles. LRE’s properties consist of mature, low-risk onshore oil and natural gas
reservoirs with long-lived, predictable production profiles located across three diverse producing regions: (i) the Permian Basin region in
West Texas and Southeast New Mexico, (ii) the Mid-Continent region in Oklahoma and East Texas and (iii) the Gulf Coast region in
Texas. LRE’s common units are traded on the NYSE under the symbol “LRE”. LRE GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“LRE
GP”), is LRE’s general partner. LRE’s principal executive offices are located at Heritage Plaza, 1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600, Houston,
Texas 77002, and its telephone number is (713) 292-9510.
Lighthouse Merger Sub, LLC (“Merger Sub”) is a Delaware limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of Vanguard. Merger
Sub was created for purposes of the merger and has not carried on any activities to date, other than activities incidental to its formation or
undertaken in connection with the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
Each of LRM, LRR A, LRR B, LRR C, Lime Rock Resources II-A, L.P. (“LRR II-A”) and Lime Rock Resources II-C, L.P. (“LRR II-C”) are
Delaware limited partnerships and affiliates of LRE that own limited liability company interests in LRE GP.
The Merger (See page 67)
Subject to the terms and conditions of the merger agreement and in accordance with Delaware law, the merger agreement provides for
the merger of Merger Sub with and into LRE, with LRE continuing as the surviving entity, and, at the same time, the purchase by
Vanguard of all of the outstanding limited liability company interests in LRE GP, resulting in both LRE and LRE GP becoming wholly
owned subsidiaries of Vanguard.
Merger Consideration (See page 137)
The merger agreement provides that, at the effective time of the merger (the “effective time”), each LRE common unit issued and
outstanding immediately prior to the effective time will be converted into the right to receive 0.550 Vanguard common units. Any LRE
common units that are owned by LRE or Vanguard or any of their respective subsidiaries at the effective time will be cancelled and cease
to exist, without any conversion or payment of consideration in respect thereof.
10
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Treatment of LRE Restricted Units (See page 137)
Under the merger agreement, each LRE restricted unit that is outstanding and unvested immediately prior to the effective time will, at the
effective time, become fully vested and the restrictions with respect thereto will lapse and such LRE restricted unit be deemed to be an
LRE common unit for purposes of the merger.
LRE Special Unitholder Meeting; Unitholders Entitled to Vote; Vote Required (See
page 62)
Meeting.  The special meeting will be held at 1111 Bagby Street, Houston, TX 77002 on September 10, 2015 at 10:00 a.m., local time. At
the LRE special meeting, LRE unitholders will be asked to vote on the following proposals:
•Proposal 1:  to approve the merger agreement, as such agreement may be amended from time to time, and the transactions
contemplated thereby;
•Proposal 2:  to approve, on an advisory, non-binding basis, the merger-related compensation payments that may become payable to
certain of LRE’s named executive officers in connection with the merger; and
•Proposal 3:  to approve the adjournment of the special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are not sufficient votes to
approve the merger agreement at the time of the special meeting.
Record Date.  Only LRE unitholders of record at the close of business on July 24, 2015, the record date for the determination of holders
entitled to notice of and to vote at the LRE special meeting will be entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the LRE special meeting. As
of the close of business on the record date of July 24, 2015, there were 28,074,433 LRE common units outstanding and entitled to be
voted at the meeting. Each holder of LRE common units is entitled to one vote for each unit owned as of the record date.
Required Vote.  To approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, the holders, as of the record date of the
special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units must vote in favor of such proposal. LRE cannot complete the
merger unless its unitholders approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby. Simultaneous with the
execution of the merger agreement, certain affiliates of LRE, as holders of certain of the issued and outstanding LRE common units, have
entered into an amended and restated voting and support agreement with Vanguard, pursuant to which they have agreed to vote all of
their LRE common units in favor of the approval of the merger agreement and to take other actions in furtherance of the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement. Collectively, these LRE unitholders hold common units representing approximately 30.5% of the
votes of LRE’s outstanding common units as of July 31, 2015. Because approval of this proposal is based on the affirmative vote of the
holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units, an LRE unitholder’s failure to vote, an abstention from voting or the failure of
an LRE unitholder who holds his or her units in “street name” through a broker or other nominee to give voting instructions to such broker
or other nominee will have the same effect as a vote cast “AGAINST” approval of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby.
To approve (on an advisory, non-binding basis) the proposal regarding the merger-related compensation payments that may become
payable to certain of LRE’s named executive officers in connection with the merger, the holders, as of the record date of the special
meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units must vote in favor of such proposal. Because approval of this proposal is
based on the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units, an LRE unitholder’s failure to vote, an
abstention from voting or the failure of an LRE unitholder who holds his or her units in “street name” through a broker or other nominee to
give voting instructions to such broker or other nominee will have the same effect as a vote cast “AGAINST” approval of the merger–
related compensation payments.
To approve the adjournment of the LRE special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are not sufficient votes to approve
the merger agreement at the time of the special meeting if a quorum is present at, and if a limited partner vote is solicited on adjournment
of, the meeting, the holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units must vote in favor of the proposal. If a quorum is not
present at the meeting, the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units present and
11
TABLE OF CONTENTS
entitled to be voted at such meeting represented either in person or by proxy is required to adjourn. Because approval of this proposal is
based on the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units if a quorum is present, if a limited partner
vote is solicited, an LRE unitholder’s failure to vote, an abstention from voting or the failure of an LRE unitholder who holds his or her units
in “street name” through a broker or other nominee to give voting instructions to such broker or other nominee will have the same effect as
a vote cast “AGAINST” approval of this proposal.
Unit Ownership of and Voting by LRE GP’s Directors and Executive Officers.  At the close of business on the record date for the LRE
special meeting, LRE GP’s directors and executive officers and their affiliates beneficially owned and had the right to vote 8,962,552 LRE
common units at the LRE special meeting, which represents approximately 32% of the LRE common units entitled to be voted at the LRE
special meeting. It is expected that LRE GP’s directors and executive officers will vote their units “FOR” the approval of the merger
agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, although none of them has entered into any agreement requiring them to do so.
LRE Unitholder Proposals.  Ownership of LRE common units does not entitle LRE common unitholders to make proposals at the LRE
special meeting. The LRE partnership agreement gives LRE GP the right to make rules regarding the conduct of such meetings and only
permits the limited partners of LRE to have the right to vote on matters they are entitled to vote on under the LRE partnership agreement or
with respect to matters that LRE GP determines to submit to a vote of the limited partners of LRE. As a result, LRE GP may adopt a rule for
such meetings that only LRE GP may make proposals at such meetings, and it is expected that LRE GP will adopt such a rule for the LRE
special meeting.
LRE’s Reasons for the Merger; Recommendation of LRE GP’s Board of Directors
and LRE GP’s Conflicts Committee (See pages 76 and 82)
The conflicts committee of the board of directors of LRE GP (the “LRE GP conflicts committee”) has determined that the merger agreement
is advisable to and in the best interests of LRE and its unitholders who are not affiliates of LRE GP and has approved the merger
agreement and recommended that the board of directors of LRE GP approve the merger agreement. Based upon, among other things, the
recommendation of the LRE GP conflicts committee, the board of directors of LRE GP has determined that the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated thereby are in the best interests of LRE and its unitholders and recommends that LRE unitholders vote “FOR”
the approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby.
In the course of reaching its decision to approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, the
board of directors of LRE GP considered a number of factors in its deliberations in addition to the recommendation of the LRE GP conflicts
committee. For a more complete discussion of these factors, see “Proposal 1: The Merger — Recommendation of LRE GP’s Board of
Directors and Its Reasons for the Merger” and “Proposal 1: The Merger — Recommendation of the LRE GP Conflicts Committee and Its
Reasons for the Merger.”
Voting and Support Agreement (See page 123)
Simultaneous with the execution of the merger agreement, Vanguard entered into a Voting and Support Agreement (the “original support
agreement”) with each of LRR A, LRR B and LRR C, as holders of certain of the issued and outstanding LRE common units (collectively,
the “Holders”), LRE, LRE GP, and, solely for certain restrictions on the sale of Vanguard common units, LRM, LRR II-A and LRR II-C (the
“Non-Fund I GP Sellers”). On May 21, 2015, in connection with the execution of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, the parties to the
original support agreement entered into an Amended and Restated Voting and Support Agreement (the “amended and restated support
agreement”). Collectively, the Holders hold LRE common units representing approximately 30.5% of the votes of LRE’s outstanding
common units as of July 31, 2015.
In accordance with the amended and restated support agreement, the Holders have agreed, among other things, subject to a change in
recommendation by the board of directors of LRE GP, to vote or cause to be voted all of their units, including LRE common units owned by
such Holders, in favor of the merger and the approval of the merger agreement and against alternative proposals or other proposals made
in opposition to approval of the merger agreement and other actions or transactions which might materially impede or interfere
12
TABLE OF CONTENTS
with the merger or the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement. The Holders also agreed to provide Vanguard with an
irrevocable proxy over all of their LRE common units, which will empower Vanguard, subject to the terms of the amended and restated
support agreement, to vote those units in favor of the merger and the transactions contemplated thereby on behalf of the Holders. The
foregoing obligations will terminate upon the earliest to occur of (a) the consummation of the merger and (b) the valid termination of the
merger agreement in accordance with its terms.
The Holders have also agreed to certain restrictions under the amended and restated support agreement, including but not limited to: (i) a
restriction on transferring more than 15% of their LRE common units prior to the earlier of the completion of the merger and the valid
termination of the merger agreement in accordance with its terms and (ii) a restriction on soliciting or encouraging alternative proposals.
Furthermore, the Holders agreed to promptly notify Vanguard of any alternative proposal that they receive and to keep Vanguard
reasonably informed on the material developments of any such alternative proposals. For a period beginning at the effective time of the
merger and continuing for a period of 90 days thereafter, the Holders and the Non-Fund I GP Sellers have also agreed not to sell, contract
to sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of any Vanguard common units (or any security exercisable or exchangeable for Vanguard common
units) received in the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, provided that, on each trading day during such period, the
Holders and the Non-Fund I GP Sellers may sell, contract to sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of an aggregate number of Vanguard
common units (or any security exercisable or exchangeable for Vanguard common units), on a daily basis, not to exceed 10% of the
average daily trading volume of Vanguard common units during the four weeks immediately prior to the first day of the calendar month in
which such transaction occurs. Vanguard and the Holders have also agreed to a mutual two-year non-solicitation of employees
commencing at the effective time of the merger.
For a more complete discussion of the amended and restated support agreement, see “Proposal 1: The Merger — Voting and Support
Agreement.”
Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement (See page 126)
As a condition to closing of transactions contemplated under the merger agreement, the parties have agreed to execute and deliver a
Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement (the “termination agreement”) substantially in the form attached as an exhibit to the
merger agreement. Pursuant to the termination agreement, (i) the omnibus agreement among LRE, LRE GP, LRE Operating, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of LRE (“OLLC”), the Holders, LRR GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability
company and the ultimate general partner of each of the Holders, and LRM, will be terminated and (ii) the Holders, severally and in
proportion to each entity's property contributor percentage, will agree to indemnify LRE, LRE GP, OLLC and all of their respective
subsidiaries from and against any losses arising out of any income tax liabilities attributable to the ownership or operation of the oil and
natural gas properties owned or leased by any of LRE, LRE GP, OLLC or their respective subsidiaries prior to the closing of the LRE's
initial public offering. The indemnification obligations of the Holders under the termination agreement will survive until the first anniversary
of the closing date of the merger. See “Proposal 1: The Merger — Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement.”
Registration Rights Agreement (See page 126)
Simultaneous with the execution of the merger agreement, Vanguard entered into a Registration Rights Agreement (the “original
registration rights agreement”) with the Holders and Non-Fund I GP Sellers. On May 21, 2015, in connection with the execution of the
Eagle Rock merger agreement, the parties to the original registration rights agreement entered into an Amended and Restated
Registration Rights Agreement (the “amended and restated registration rights agreement”). Pursuant to the amended and restated
registration rights agreement, among other things, (i) no later than the 14th day following the closing date of the merger, Vanguard will file
with the SEC either (a) a shelf registration statement with respect to the public resale of the Vanguard common units received by the
Holders and Non-Fund I GP Sellers as consideration in the merger and the acquisition of LRE GP or (b) a post-effective amendment to
Vanguard’s existing automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3, (ii) the Holders and the Non-Fund I GP Sellers will have the right
to participate in future underwritten public offerings of Vanguard common units and (iii) subject to certain conditions, Vanguard will be
obligated to initiate an underwritten offering of the Vanguard common units
13
TABLE OF CONTENTS
received by the Holders and the Non-Fund I GP Sellers as consideration in the merger and the acquisition of LRE GP. For a more
complete discussion of the registration rights agreement, see “Proposal 1: The Merger — Registration Rights Agreement.”
Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Board of Directors (See page 89)
The board of directors of LRE GP retained Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC (“TPH”) as its exclusive financial advisor to provide
financial advice and assistance to the board and to provide an opinion to the board in connection with the merger. TPH evaluated the
fairness, from a financial point of view, of the merger consideration to be received in the merger by the holders of LRE common units. At a
meeting of the board of directors of LRE GP held on April 20, 2015, at the request of the board, TPH orally rendered its opinion to the
board that, as of April 20, 2015, based upon and subject to the assumptions, qualifications, limitations and other matters considered by
TPH in connection with the preparation of its opinion, the merger consideration to be received in the merger by the holders of LRE
common units pursuant to the merger agreement was fair, from a financial point of view, to such unitholders. TPH subsequently confirmed
its opinion in writing to the board of directors of LRE GP (the “LRE Opinion”).
Pursuant to the merger agreement, Vanguard’s entering into and performing the Eagle Rock merger agreement and consummating the
transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement (the “Eagle Rock Transactions”), including the Eagle Rock merger,
required the prior consent of the board of directors of LRE GP. Accordingly, in connection with its negotiation of the Eagle Rock merger
agreement, Vanguard sought such consent of the board of directors of LRE GP (the “Consent”). The board of directors of LRE GP retained
TPH as its exclusive financial advisor to provide financial advice and assistance to the board and to provide an opinion to the board in
connection with the board’s consideration of the Consent. TPH evaluated the fairness, from a financial point of view, to Vanguard, giving
pro forma effect to the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement (the “LRE Transactions”) (“New
Vanguard”), of the consideration to be paid by New Vanguard pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement (the “Eagle Rock merger
consideration”). At a meeting of the board of directors of LRE GP held on May 21, 2015, at the request of the board, TPH orally rendered
its opinion to the board that, as of May 21, 2015, based upon and subject to the assumptions, qualifications, limitations and other matters
considered by TPH in connection with the preparation of its opinion, the Eagle Rock merger consideration to be paid by New Vanguard
pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement was fair, from a financial point of view, to New Vanguard. TPH subsequently confirmed its
opinion in writing to the board of directors of LRE GP (the “Eagle Rock Opinion”).
The full text of the LRE Opinion, dated April 20, 2015, and the Eagle Rock Opinion, dated May 21, 2015, each of which sets forth, among
other things, the assumptions made, procedures followed, matters considered, and qualifications and limitations of the review undertaken
by TPH in rendering its opinions, are attached as Annex C and Annex D to this proxy statement/prospectus and are incorporated herein
by reference. The summary of the TPH opinions set forth in this proxy statement/prospectus is qualified in its entirety by reference to the
full text of the opinions. LRE unitholders are urged to read each TPH opinion carefully and in its entirety. TPH provided its opinions for the
information and assistance of the board of directors of LRE GP in connection with (i) its consideration of the merger and (ii) its
consideration of the Consent. Neither TPH opinion nor the summaries thereof, nor the related analyses disclosed in this proxy
statement/prospectus, constitutes a recommendation as to how the board of directors of LRE GP, any holder of securities in LRE,
Vanguard or Eagle Rock or any other person should act or vote with respect to the LRE Transactions, the Eagle Rock Transactions, the
Consent or any other matter. TPH did not express any view on, and neither opinion addressed, any other term or aspect of the merger
agreement, the LRE Transactions, the Eagle Rock merger agreement or the Eagle Rock Transactions. TPH did not express any opinion
as to the price at which Vanguard common units, LRE common units or Eagle Rock common units will trade at any time or as to the
impact of the LRE Transactions or the Eagle Rock Transactions on the solvency or viability of LRE, Vanguard or Eagle Rock or the ability
of each of LRE, Vanguard or Eagle Rock to pay its obligations when they become due.
See “The Merger — Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Board of Directors” beginning on page 89. See also Annex C and
Annex D to this proxy statement/prospectus.
14
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Conflicts Committee (See page 102)
In connection with the merger, Simmons & Company International (“Simmons”) delivered its opinion to the LRE GP conflicts committee to
the effect that, as of April 20, 2015, and based upon and subject to the assumptions, limitations and qualifications set forth in its opinion,
the terms of the merger contemplated by the merger agreement were fair from a financial point of view to the holders of common units of
LRE other than LRM or affiliate entities (the “unaffiliated LRE unitholders”).
In connection with the LRE GP conflicts committee’s consideration of whether to consent to the Eagle Rock merger, Simmons delivered
its opinion to the LRE GP conflicts committee to the effect that, as of May 20, 2015, and based upon and subject to the assumptions,
limitations and qualifications set forth in its opinion, the terms of the Eagle Rock merger contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger
agreement were fair from a financial point of view to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders.
The full text of Simmons’ written opinion, dated April 20, 2015, which sets forth assumptions made, procedures followed, matters
considered and limitations on the review undertaken in connection with the opinion, is attached as Annex E.
The full text of Simmons’ written opinion, dated May 20, 2015, which sets forth assumptions made, procedures followed, matters
considered and limitations on the review undertaken in connection with the opinion, is attached as Annex F.
Simmons’ opinion, dated April 20, 2015, was provided to the LRE GP conflicts committee in connection with the LRE GP conflicts
committee’s consideration of the merger agreement, does not address any other aspect of the proposed merger agreement or the Eagle
Rock merger and does not constitute a recommendation as to how any holder of interests in LRE or any other party to the merger or the
Eagle Rock merger should vote or act with respect to the merger agreement, the Eagle Rock merger or any other matter. Simmons’
opinion, dated May 20, 2015, was provided to the LRE GP conflicts committee in connection with the LRE GP conflicts committee’s
consideration of whether to consent to the Eagle Rock merger, does not address any other aspect of the proposed merger agreement, or
the Eagle Rock merger, and does not constitute a recommendation as to how any holder of interests in LRE or any other party to the
merger agreement or the Eagle Rock merger should vote or act with respect to the merger, the Eagle Rock merger or any other matter.
See “The Merger — Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Conflicts Committee” beginning on page 102. See also Annex E
and Annex F to this proxy statement/prospectus.
Vanguard Unitholder Approval is Not Required (See page 134)
Vanguard unitholders are not required to approve the merger agreement or approve the merger or the issuance of Vanguard common
units in connection with the merger.
Ownership of Vanguard After the Merger (See page 134)
Vanguard will issue approximately 15.44 million Vanguard common units to former LRE unitholders (which does not include the 12,320
Vanguard common units to be issued to the former members of LRE GP) pursuant to the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement. Additionally, if the Eagle Rock merger is consummated, Vanguard will issue approximately 28.75 million Vanguard common
units to former Eagle Rock unitholders pursuant to the transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement. Further, the
number of Vanguard common units outstanding will increase after the date of this proxy statement/prospectus if Vanguard sells additional
common units to the public.
If the Eagle Rock merger is consummated pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, based on the
number of Vanguard common units outstanding as of July 31, 2015, immediately following the later to occur of the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement and the Eagle Rock merger agreement, Vanguard expects to have approximately 130.80 million
Vanguard common units outstanding (including the 12,320 Vanguard common units issued to the members of LRE GP). Under this
scenario, LRE unitholders would be expected to hold approximately 11.8% of the aggregate number of Vanguard common units
outstanding immediately after the completion of the merger and the Eagle Rock merger.
15
TABLE OF CONTENTS
If, however, the Eagle Rock merger is not consummated pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, based
on the number of Vanguard common units outstanding as of July 31, 2015, immediately following the completion of the merger, Vanguard
expects to have approximately 102.06 million common units outstanding (including the 12,320 Vanguard common units issued to the
members of LRE GP). Under this scenario, LRE unitholders would be expected to hold approximately 15.1% of the aggregate number of
Vanguard common units outstanding immediately after the completion of the merger.
Interests of Directors and Executive Officers of LRE GP in the Merger (See page 131)
LRE GP’s directors and executive officers have financial interests in the merger that are different from, or in addition to, the interests of the
LRE unitholders generally. Except as noted below, the members of the board of directors of LRE GP were aware of and considered these
interests, among other matters, in evaluating and negotiating the merger agreement and the merger, and in recommending to LRE’s
unitholders that the merger agreement be approved.
These interests include:
The Vice President and Chief Financial Officer and the independent directors of LRE GP hold restricted units issued under the LTIP that
are subject to time-based vesting. Each LRE restricted unit that is outstanding and unvested immediately prior to the effective time of the
merger will, automatically and without any action on the part of the holder of such LRE restricted unit, become fully vested and the
restrictions with respect thereto will lapse and such LRE restricted unit will be deemed to be LRE common units for purposes of the
merger. The aggregate value of the Vanguard common units to be received by the Vice President and Chief Financial Officer and the
independent directors of LRE GP in connection with the vesting of the LRE restricted units in connection with the merger is currently
estimated to be $1.2 million (based on a per unit price of $16.28, the average closing price of Vanguard common units over the first five
business days following the first public announcement of the transaction).
The employment of one executive officer of LRE GP is expected to be terminated in connection with the merger, and he is expected to
receive a cash severance payment of $750,000 immediately prior to the closing of the merger, as well as other cash bonuses in an
aggregate amount equal to the sum of $250,000 plus a pro rated portion of a $250,000 annual cash bonus.
Eric Mullins and Charles W. Adcock, LRE GP’s Co-Chief Executive Officers, each own a small number (5,840 and 2,250, respectively) of
Vanguard common units. The board of directors of LRE GP did not consider these interests in evaluating and negotiating the merger
agreement and in recommending to LRE’s unitholders that the merger agreement be approved.
•LRE GP’s directors and executive officers are entitled to continued indemnification and insurance coverage under the merger agreement.
•
•
•
Risks Relating to the Merger and Ownership of Vanguard Common Units (See page
44)
LRE unitholders should consider carefully all the risk factors together with all of the other information contained in or incorporated by
reference in this proxy statement/prospectus before deciding how to vote. Risks relating to the merger and ownership of Vanguard
common units are described in the section titled “Risk Factors.” Some of these risks include, but are not limited to, those described below:
•
•
Because the exchange ratio is fixed and because the market price of Vanguard common units will fluctuate prior to the consummation of
the merger, LRE unitholders cannot be sure of the market value of the Vanguard common units they will receive as merger consideration
relative to the value of LRE common units they exchange.
The merger agreement contains provisions that limit LRE’s ability to pursue alternatives to the merger, could discourage a potential
competing acquirer of LRE from making a favorable alternative transaction proposal and, in specified circumstances, could require LRE
to reimburse up to
16
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
$1,215,000 of Vanguard’s out-of-pocket expenses or pay a termination fee to Vanguard of $7,288,000. Following payment of the
termination fee, LRE will not be obligated to pay any additional expenses incurred by Vanguard or its affiliates.
•Certain directors and executive officers of LRE GP have certain interests that are different from those of LRE unitholders generally.
LRE unitholders will have a reduced ownership and voting interest in the combined organization after the merger and will exercise less
influence over management.
•Vanguard common units to be received by LRE unitholders as a result of the merger have different rights from LRE common units.
• No ruling has been requested with respect to the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger.
The intended U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger are dependent upon Vanguard and LRE being treated as
partnerships for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
•LRE common unitholders could recognize taxable income or gain for U.S. federal income tax purposes as a result of the merger.
•Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement restricts the voting rights of unitholders owning 20% or more of its units.
Vanguard’s tax treatment depends on its status as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, as well as it not being subject to a
material amount of entity-level taxation by individual states or local entities. If the IRS treats Vanguard as a corporation or Vanguard
becomes subject to a material amount of entity-level taxation for state or local tax purposes, it would substantially reduce the amount of
cash available for payment for distributions on Vanguard’s common units.
•
•
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger (See page 194)
Tax matters associated with the merger are complicated. The U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger to an LRE unitholder
will depend, in part, on such unitholder’s own personal tax situation. The tax discussions contained herein focus on the U.S. federal
income tax consequences generally applicable to individuals who are residents or citizens of the United States that hold their LRE units
as capital assets and acquired their LRE units in exchange for cash, and these discussions have only limited application to other
unitholders, including those subject to special tax treatment. LRE unitholders are urged to consult their tax advisors for a full
understanding of the U.S. federal, state, local and foreign tax consequences of the merger that will be applicable to them.
In connection with the merger, LRE expects to receive an opinion from Andrews Kurth LLP to the effect that (i) except to the extent that any
cash received in lieu of fractional common units of Vanguard is treated as part of a sale, LRE will not recognize any income or gain as a
result of the merger other than any gain resulting from any decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code; (ii)
except to the extent that any cash received in lieu of fractional common units of Vanguard is treated as part of a sale, a holder of LRE
common units who acquired his units in exchange for cash will not recognize any income or gain as a result of the merger other than any
gain resulting from any actual or constructive distribution of cash, including as a result of any decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant to
Section 752 of the Code; and (iii) at least 90% of the gross income of LRE for the most recent four complete calendar quarters ending
before the Closing Date for which the necessary financial information is available is from sources treated as “qualifying income” within the
meaning of Section 7704(d) of the Code.
In connection with the merger, Vanguard expects to receive an opinion from Paul Hastings LLP to the effect that (i) Vanguard will not
recognize any income or gain as a result of the merger other than any gain resulting from any decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant
to Section 752 of the Code; (ii) a holder of Vanguard common units will not recognize any gain or loss as a result of the merger other than
any gain resulting from any decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code; and (iii) at least 90% of the combined
gross income of each of Vanguard and LRE for the most recent four complete calendar
17
TABLE OF CONTENTS
quarters ending before the Closing Date for which the necessary financial information is available is from sources treated as “qualifying
income” within the meaning of Section 7704(d) of the Code.
Opinions of counsel, however, are subject to certain limitations and are not binding on the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and no
assurance can be given that the IRS could not successfully assert a contrary position to the position of the opinions of counsel regarding
the merger. In addition, such opinions will be based upon certain factual assumptions, representations, warranties and covenants made
by the officers of Vanguard, LRE, LRE GP and their respective affiliates. Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences
of the Merger” for a more complete discussion of the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger.
Accounting Treatment of the Merger (See page 134)
In accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and in accordance with the Financial
Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification Topic 805 — Business Combinations, Vanguard will account for the
merger as an acquisition of a business.
Listing of Vanguard Common Units; Delisting and Deregistration of LRE Common
Units (See page 134)
Vanguard common units are currently listed on the NASDAQ under the symbol “VNR.” It is a condition to closing that the Vanguard
common units to be issued in the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement to LRE unitholders and LRE GP members be
approved for listing on the NASDAQ, subject to official notice of issuance.
LRE common units are currently listed on the NYSE under the ticker symbol “LRE.” If the merger is completed, LRE common units will
cease to be listed on the NYSE and will be deregistered under the Exchange Act.
No Appraisal Rights (See page 134)
Appraisal rights are not available in connection with the merger under the Delaware LP Act or under the LRE partnership agreement.
Conditions to Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated by the Merger
Agreement (See page 138)
Vanguard and LRE currently expect to complete the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement in the third quarter of 2015,
subject to a majority of LRE unitholders voting in favor of approving the merger agreement and to the satisfaction or waiver of the other
conditions to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement described below.
As more fully described in this proxy statement/prospectus, each party’s obligation to complete the transactions contemplated by the
merger agreement depends on a number of customary closing conditions being satisfied or, where legally permissible, waived, including
the following:
•
•
•
•
the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby must have been approved by the affirmative vote of the holders, as of
the record date of the special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units;
all waiting periods applicable to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement under the S. Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust
Improvements Act of 1976, as amended (the “HSR Act”), must have been terminated or expired;
no law, order, judgment or injunction issued, enacted, promulgated, entered or enforced by any court or governmental authority will be in
effect restraining or prohibiting the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement or making the
consummation of such transactions illegal;
the registration statement of which this proxy statement/prospectus forms a part must have become effective and must not be subject to
any stop order suspending the effectiveness or proceedings initiated or threatened by the SEC; and
18
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
the Vanguard common units to be issued pursuant to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement must have been approved
for listing on the NASDAQ, subject to official notice of issuance.
The obligation of Vanguard to effect the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the
following additional conditions:
•
•
the representations and warranties of LRE, LRE GP and the sellers of LRE GP in the merger agreement being true and correct both
when made and at and as of the closing date of the merger, subject to certain standards, including materiality and material adverse effect
qualifications, as described under “The Merger Agreement — Conditions to Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated by the
Merger Agreement”;
LRE, LRE GP and the sellers of LRE GP having performed and complied with, in all material respects, all agreements and covenants
required to be performed by them under the merger agreement;
the receipt of an officer’s certificate executed by a Co-Chief Executive Officer of LRE GP certifying that the two preceding conditions have
been satisfied;
the receipt from Paul Hastings LLP, tax counsel to Vanguard, of a written opinion regarding certain U.S. federal income tax matters, as
described under “The Merger Agreement — Conditions to Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated by the Merger Agreement”;
the receipt of the written resignation of each member of the board of directors of LRE GP and each officer of LRE GP, dated to be
effective as of the effective time;
• the receipt of an assignment of membership interests in LRE GP; and
•the receipt of a counterpart of a termination and continuing obligations agreement from LRE, LRE GP and the sellers of LRE GP.
•
•
•
The obligation of the sellers of LRE GP and LRE to effect the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement is subject to the
satisfaction or waiver of the following additional conditions:
•
the representations and warranties of Vanguard in the merger agreement being true and correct both when made and at and as of the
closing date of the merger, subject to certain standards, including materiality and material adverse effect qualifications, as described
under “The Merger Agreement —  Conditions to Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated by the Merger Agreement”;
Vanguard and Merger Sub having performed and complied with, in all material respects, all agreements and covenants required to be
•
•performed by them under the merger agreement;
the receipt of an officer’s certificate executed by the Chief Executive Officer of Vanguard certifying that the two preceding conditions have
been satisfied; and
the receipt from Andrews Kurth LLP, tax counsel to LRE, of a written opinion regarding certain U.S. federal income tax matters, as
described under “The Merger Agreement — Conditions to Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated by the Merger Agreement.”
•
Regulatory Approvals and Clearances Required for the Merger (See page 134)
Vanguard and LRE are not required to file notifications with the Federal Trade Commission and the Antitrust Division of the Department of
Justice or observe a mandatory pre-merger waiting period before completing the merger under the HSR Act. Vanguard and LRE cannot
assure you, however, that other government agencies or private parties will not initiate actions to challenge the merger before or after it is
completed.
No Solicitation by LRE of Alternative Proposals (See page 142)
Under the merger agreement, LRE has agreed that it will not, and will cause its subsidiaries and use reasonable best efforts to cause its
and its subsidiaries’ directors, officers, employees, investment bankers, financial advisors, attorneys, accountants, agents and other
representatives not to, directly or indirectly:
19
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
initiate, solicit, knowingly encourage or knowingly facilitate any inquiry, proposal or offer that would reasonably be expected to lead to the
submission of any alternative proposal (as defined under “The Merger Agreement — LRE Unitholder Approval”); or
enter into or participate in any discussions or negotiations regarding, or furnish to any person any non-public information with respect to,
or that would reasonably be expected to lead to, any alternative proposal.
In addition, the merger agreement requires LRE and its subsidiaries to cease and cause to be terminated any discussions or negotiations
with any persons conducted prior to the execution of the merger agreement regarding an alternative proposal.
Notwithstanding these restrictions, the merger agreement provides that, under specified circumstances at any time prior to a majority of
LRE unitholders voting in favor of approving the merger agreement, LRE may furnish information, including confidential information, with
respect to it and its subsidiaries to, and participate in discussions or negotiations with, any third party that makes a written alternative
proposal (which was not solicited after the execution of the merger agreement and that did not result from a violation of the no solicitation
restrictions described above) that the board of directors of LRE GP believes is bona fide, and (after consultation with its financial advisors
and outside legal counsel) that the board of directors of LRE GP determines in good faith constitutes or would reasonably be likely to lead
to or result in a superior proposal.
LRE has also agreed in the merger agreement that it will promptly, and in any event within 24 hours after receipt, (i) advise Vanguard in
writing of any alternative proposal (and any changes thereto) and the material terms and conditions of any such alternative proposal,
including the identity of the person making such alternative proposal and (ii) provide Vanguard with copies of all written proposals or draft
agreements received by LRE or any representative of LRE setting forth the terms and conditions of, or otherwise relating to, such
alternative proposal. In addition, LRE will keep Vanguard reasonably informed of all material developments with respect to any such
alternative proposals, offers, inquiries or requests (and promptly (and in no event later than 24 hours after receipt) provide Vanguard with
copies of any additional written proposals received by LRE or that LRE has delivered to any third party making an alternative proposal
that relate to such alternative proposal) and of the status of any such discussions or negotiations.
Change in LRE GP Board Recommendation (See page 143)
The merger agreement provides that the board of directors of LRE GP will not (i) withdraw, modify or qualify, in a manner adverse to
Vanguard, the recommendation of the board of directors of LRE GP that LRE’s unitholders approve the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated thereby, including the merger, (ii) fail to include such recommendation in this proxy statement/prospectus or (iii)
publicly approve or recommend, or publicly propose to approve or recommend, any alternative proposal. LRE taking or failing to take, as
applicable, any of the actions described above is referred to as a “partnership change in recommendation.” The merger agreement also
provides that the board of directors of LRE GP will not: (i) approve, adopt or recommend, or publicly propose to approve, adopt or
recommend, or allow LRE or any of its subsidiaries to execute or enter into, any letter of intent, memorandum of understanding, agreement
in principle, merger agreement, acquisition agreement, option agreement, joint venture agreement, partnership agreement or other similar
contract or any tender or exchange offer providing for, with respect to, or in connection with any alternative proposal; (ii) fail to announce
publicly within ten business days after a tender offer or exchange offer relating to the LRE common units has been commenced that the
board of directors of LRE GP recommends rejection of such tender offer or exchange offer and reaffirming the recommendation of the
board of directors of LRE GP that LRE’s unitholders approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, including
the merger; or (iii) resolve, agree or publicly propose to, or permit LRE or any of its representatives to agree or publicly propose to, take
any of the actions referred to in this paragraph.
Subject to the satisfaction of specified conditions in the merger agreement described under “The Merger Agreement — Change in LRE
GP Board Recommendation,” the board of directors of LRE GP may, at any time prior to the approval of the merger agreement by the
unitholders of LRE, effect a partnership change in recommendation in response to any bona fide alternative proposal if the board of
directors of LRE GP determines, after consultation with its outside legal counsel and financial advisors, that such alternative proposal
constitutes a superior proposal.
20
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Termination of the Merger Agreement (See page 145)
The merger agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the closing, whether before or after LRE unitholders have approved the
merger agreement, as follows:
• by mutual written consent of Vanguard and LRE;
•
by either Vanguard or LRE:
if the closing of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement has not occurred on or before December 31, 2015 (unless such
failure of the closing to occur is due to the failure of the terminating party to perform and comply in all material respects with the covenants
and agreements to be performed or complied with by such party prior to the closing);
if there is in effect a final and nonappealable order of a governmental authority restraining, enjoining or otherwise prohibiting the
consummation of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement (unless such right to terminate is primarily due to the failure of
the terminating party to perform any of its obligations under the merger agreement); or
if after the final adjournment of the LRE special meeting at which a vote of the LRE unitholders has been taken in accordance with the
merger agreement, approval of a majority of LRE unitholders has not been obtained;
•
•
•
by Vanguard:
•
•if, prior to final adjournment of the LRE special meeting, a partnership change in recommendation has occurred; or
if there is a breach by LRE, LRE GP or any LRE GP seller of any of its representations, warranties, covenants or agreements in the
merger agreement such that certain closing conditions would not be satisfied, or if capable of being cured, such breach has not been
cured by the earlier of December 31, 2015 and within 30 days following delivery of written notice of such breach by Vanguard, subject to
certain exceptions discussed in “The Merger Agreement — Termination of the Merger Agreement;” and
•
•
•
•
by LRE:
if there is a breach by Vanguard of any of its representations, warranties, covenants or agreements in the merger agreement such that
certain closing conditions would not be satisfied, or if capable of being cured, such breach has not been cured by the earlier of December
31, 2015 and within 30 days following delivery of written notice of such breach by LRE, subject to certain exceptions discussed in “The
Merger Agreement — Termination of the Merger Agreement;” or
in order to enter into a definitive agreement relating to a superior proposal, provided that LRE must concurrently with such termination
pay to Vanguard the termination fee.
Expenses (See page 147)
Generally, all fees and expenses incurred in connection with the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement will be the
obligation of the respective party incurring such fees and expenses, except that Vanguard and LRE will each pay one-half of the
expenses incurred in connection with any HSR Act filing and the filing, printing and mailing of this proxy statement/prospectus.
In addition, following a termination of the merger agreement in specified circumstances, the non-terminating party would be required to
pay all of the reasonably documented out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the terminating party in connection with the merger agreement
and the transactions contemplated thereby, up to a maximum amount of $1,215,000.
21
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Termination Fee (See page 146)
Following termination of the merger agreement under specified circumstances, including (i) termination by Vanguard due to a partnership
change in recommendation having occurred, (ii) termination by LRE in order to enter into a superior proposal or (iii) termination by either
party after an alternative proposal was received by LRE, and LRE enters into an definitive agreement with respect to such alternative
proposal within 12 months after the date of the merger agreement, LRE will be required to pay Vanguard a termination fee of $7,288,000.
Following payment of the termination fee, LRE will not be obligated to pay any additional expenses incurred by Vanguard or its affiliates.
Comparison of Rights of Vanguard Common Unitholders and LRE Unitholders (See
page 221)
LRE unitholders will own Vanguard common units following the completion of the merger, and their rights associated with those Vanguard
common units will be governed by the Vanguard limited liability company agreement, which differs in a number of respects from the LRE
partnership agreement, and the Delaware Limited Liability Company Act (the “Delaware LLC Act”).
Litigation Relating to the Merger (See page 135)
A putative class action was filed on June 3, 2015 in connection with the merger by a purported LRE unitholder (the “Delaware Plaintiff”)
against LRE, LRE GP, the members of the LRE GP board of directors, Vanguard, Merger Sub and the other parties to the merger
agreement (the “Defendants”). The lawsuit was styled Barry Miller v. LRR Energy, L.P. et al., Case No. 11087-VCG, in the Court of
Chancery of the State of Delaware (the “Delaware Lawsuit”). On July 23, 2015, the Delaware Plaintiff voluntarily dismissed the Delaware
Lawsuit without prejudice.
On July 10, 2015 and July 13, 2015, two additional purported LRE unitholders (the “Texas Plaintiffs”) filed putative class action lawsuits
against the Defendants. These lawsuits were styled (a) Christopher Tiberio v. Eric Mullins et al., Cause No. 2015-39864, in the District
Court of Harris County, Texas, 334th Judicial District; and (b) Eddie Hammond v. Eric Mullins et al., Cause No. 2015-40154, in the District
Court of Harris County, Texas, 295th Judicial District (the “Texas Lawsuits”). On July 28, 2015, the Texas Lawsuits were nonsuited
without prejudice.
On July 14, 2015, another purported LRE unitholder (the “Federal Plaintiff”) filed a putative class action lawsuit against the Defendants.
This lawsuit was styled Ronald Krieger v. LRR Energy, L.P. et al., Civil Action No. 4:15-cv-2017, in the United States District Court for the
Southern District of Texas, Houston Division (the “Federal Lawsuit”). On July 17, 2015, the Federal Plaintiff voluntarily dismissed the
Federal Lawsuit without prejudice.
Litigation Relating to the Eagle Rock Merger
On May 28, 2015 and June 10, 2015, alleged Eagle Rock unitholders (the “Eagle Rock State Plaintiffs”) filed two derivative and class
action lawsuits against Eagle Rock, Eagle Rock GP, Eagle Rock Energy G&P, LLC, the general partner of Eagle Rock GP, Vanguard,
Talon Merger Sub, and the members of the board of directors of Eagle Rock Energy G&P, LLC (collectively, the “Eagle Rock
Defendants”). These lawsuits are styled (a) Irving and Judith Braun v. Eagle Rock Energy GP, L.P. et al., Case No. 2015-30441, in the
District Court of Harris County, Texas, 125th Judicial District; and (b) Cecil Philan v. Eagle Rock Energy GP, L.P. et al., Case No. 2015-
33313, in the District Court of Harris County, Texas, 295th Judicial District (the “Eagle Rock State Lawsuits”). On June 1, 2015, another
alleged Eagle Rock unitholder (the “Eagle Rock Federal Plaintiff” and, together with the Eagle Rock State Plaintiffs, the “Eagle Rock
Plaintiffs”) filed a class action lawsuit against the Eagle Rock Defendants. This lawsuit is styled Pieter Heydenrych v. Eagle Rock Energy
Partners, L.P. et al., Case No. 4:15-cv-01470, in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas, Houston Division
(together with the Eagle Rock State Lawsuits, the “Eagle Rock Lawsuits”).
The Eagle Rock Plaintiffs allege a variety of causes of action challenging the Eagle Rock merger, including that (i) the members of the
board of directors of Eagle Rock G&P, LLC have allegedly breached duties and the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing in
connection with the Eagle Rock merger, and (ii) Eagle Rock GP, Eagle Rock Energy G&P, LLC, Vanguard, and Talon Merger Sub have
allegedly aided and abetted in these alleged breaches. The Eagle Rock Federal Plaintiff also alleges that the Eagle Rock
22
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Defendants have violated Section 14(a) of the Exchange Act and Rule 14a-9 promulgated thereunder. In general, the Eagle Rock
Plaintiffs allege that the Eagle Rock merger (a) provides inadequate consideration to Eagle Rock unitholders, (b) is not subject to minority
unitholder approval due to the support agreement and the absence of a majority-of-the-minority vote requirement, (c) contains contractual
terms (the no-solicitation, matching rights, and termination fee provisions) that will dissuade other potential merger partners from making
alternative proposals, and (d) does not include a collar to protect Eagle Rock unitholders against declines in Vanguard’s unit price. The
Eagle Rock Plaintiffs also allege, in general, that the registration statement filed in connection with the Eagle Rock merger fails, among
other things, to disclose allegedly material details concerning (i) Eagle Rock’s and Vanguard’s financial and operational projections, (ii)
the analysis underlying the opinion of the financial advisor to Eagle Rock, (iii) the analysis underlying the opinion of the financial advisor
to Vanguard and (iv) the background of the Eagle Rock merger.
Based on these allegations, the Eagle Rock Plaintiffs seek to enjoin Eagle Rock from proceeding with or consummating the Eagle Rock
merger. To the extent that the Eagle Rock merger is consummated before injunctive relief is granted, the Eagle Rock Plaintiffs seek to
have the Eagle Rock merger rescinded. The Eagle Rock Federal Plaintiff also seeks damages. The Eagle Rock Plaintiffs also seek
attorneys’ fees.
The Eagle Rock Defendants’ date to answer, move to dismiss, or otherwise respond to the Eagle Rock Lawsuits has not yet been set.
Eagle Rock and Vanguard cannot predict the outcome of the Eagle Rock Lawsuits or any others that might be filed subsequent to the date
of the filing of this joint proxy statement/prospectus; nor can Eagle Rock and Vanguard predict the amount of time and expense that will be
required to resolve the Eagle Rock Lawsuits. The Eagle Rock Defendants believe the Eagle Rock Lawsuits are without merit and intend
The completion of the Eagle Rock merger is not a condition to the completion of the merger, and the completion of the merger is not a
condition to the completion of the Eagle Rock merger.
to vigorously defend against them.
23
TABLE OF CONTENTS
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Agreement and Plan of Merger with Eagle Rock
On May 21, 2015, Vanguard and Talon Merger Sub (collectively, the “Vanguard Entities”), entered into the Eagle Rock merger agreement
with Eagle Rock and Eagle Rock GP, pursuant to which Vanguard will acquire Eagle Rock in exchange for Vanguard common units,
implying an aggregate transaction value of approximately $614 million, including the assumption of Eagle Rock’s existing net debt. The
Eagle Rock merger agreement provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Eagle Rock merger agreement,
Talon Merger Sub will be merged with and into Eagle Rock, with Eagle Rock continuing as the surviving entity and an indirect wholly
owned subsidiary of Vanguard.
Under the terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, each outstanding Eagle Rock common unit will be converted into the right to
receive 0.185 newly issued Vanguard common units or, in the case of fractional Vanguard common units, cash (without interest and
rounded up to the nearest whole cent) (the “Eagle Rock merger consideration”). Further, in connection with the Eagle Rock merger
agreement, Vanguard will adopt Eagle Rock’s long-term incentive plan and each outstanding award of Eagle Rock common units
(including performance units based on Eagle Rock common units, “restricted Eagle Rock units”) issued under such plan will be converted
into new awards of Vanguard restricted units. However, any outstanding Eagle Rock restricted units held by employees and officers of
Eagle Rock and members of the board of directors of Eagle Rock Energy G&P, LLC, the general partner of Eagle Rock GP, who do not
receive offers from Vanguard or who receive “Unqualified Offers” (as such term is defined in the Eagle Rock merger agreement) and do
not accept such offers will accelerate upon the effective time of the Eagle Rock merger (as if terminated without cause following a change
of control) and be converted into the right to receive the Eagle Rock merger consideration, with the vesting level of performance-based
restricted units determined based upon actual performance through the effective time of the Eagle Rock merger (subject to Vanguard’s
good faith review). The Eagle Rock Entities and the Vanguard Entities have each made certain representations and warranties and
agreed to certain covenants in the Eagle Rock merger agreement. Each of the Eagle Rock Entities and Vanguard has agreed, among
other things, subject to certain exceptions, to conduct its respective business in the ordinary course during the period between the
execution of the Eagle Rock merger agreement and the effective time of the Eagle Rock merger (unless the Eagle Rock merger
agreement is earlier terminated in accordance with its terms). In addition, Eagle Rock has agreed not to solicit alternative business
combination transactions during such period, and, subject to certain exceptions, not to engage in discussions or negotiations regarding
any alternative business combination transactions during such period.
The closing of the Eagle Rock merger agreement is subject to satisfaction or waiver of customary closing conditions, including, among
others, (1) the approval of the Eagle Rock merger agreement by the affirmative vote or consent of the holders of at least a majority of the
outstanding Eagle Rock common units, voting as a class, (2) the approval of the issuance of the new Vanguard common units to the
Eagle Rock unitholders in connection with the Eagle Rock by the majority of the votes cast affirmatively or negatively by holders of the
outstanding Vanguard common units and Vanguard class B units present in person or by proxy at a duly called unitholder meeting, (3) the
registration statement on Form S-4 used to register the Vanguard common units to be issued in the Eagle Rock being declared effective
by the SEC, (4) the approval for listing of the Vanguard common units issuable as part of the Eagle Rock merger consideration on
NASDAQ, (5) subject to specified materiality standards, the accuracy of the representations and warranties of, and the performance of all
covenants by, the parties and (6) the delivery of certain tax opinions.
The Eagle Rock merger agreement contains certain termination rights for both Vanguard and Eagle Rock and further provides that, upon
termination of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, under certain circumstances, either party may be required to reimburse the other party’s
expenses up to $2,317,700 and pay the other party a termination fee equal to $20,000,000.
Prior to entering into the Eagle Rock merger agreement, Vanguard obtained the consent of LRE and the board of directors of LRE GP.
Voting and Support Agreement with Holders of Common Units of Eagle Rock
Simultaneous with the execution of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, Vanguard entered into a Voting and Support Agreement (the
“Eagle Rock support agreement”) with each of Montierra Minerals &
24
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Production, L.P., Montierra Management LLC, Natural Gas Partners VII, L.P., Natural Gas Partners VIII, L.P., NGP Income Management
L.L.C., Eagle Rock Holdings NGP 7, LLC, Eagle Rock Holdings NGP 8, LLC, ERH NGP 7 SPV, LLC, ERH NGP 8 SPV, LLC, NGP
Income Co-Investment Opportunities Fund II, L.P. and NGP Energy Capital Management, L.L.C. (collectively, the “Eagle Rock Holders”
and each, an “Eagle Rock Holder”), and, solely for the waiver of an existing voting agreement and termination and other miscellaneous
provisions, Eagle Rock and Eagle Rock GP.
In accordance with the Eagle Rock support agreement, the Eagle Rock Holders have agreed, among other things, to vote all Eagle Rock
common units owned by such Eagle Rock Holders in favor of the Eagle Rock merger and the approval of the Eagle Rock merger
agreement and against alternative proposals or other proposals made in opposition to approval of the Eagle Rock merger agreement and
other actions or transactions which might materially impede or interfere with the Eagle Rock merger or the transactions contemplated by
the Eagle Rock merger agreement. The Eagle Rock Holders also agreed to provide Vanguard with an irrevocable proxy over all of their
Eagle Rock common units, which will empower Vanguard, subject to the terms of the Eagle Rock support agreement, to vote those units
in favor of the Eagle Rock merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby on behalf of the Eagle Rock Holders. The
foregoing obligations will terminate upon the earliest to occur of (a) the consummation of the Eagle Rock merger or the termination of the
Eagle Rock merger agreement in accordance with its terms (the “Eagle Rock expiration date”), (b) the effective date of any waiver,
amendment or other modification to the Eagle Rock merger agreement that is materially adverse to the Eagle Rock Holders and (c) a
change in recommendation of Eagle Rock regarding the Eagle Rock merger.
The Eagle Rock Holders have also agreed to certain restrictions under the Eagle Rock support agreement, including but not limited to: (i)
a restriction on transferring more than 15% of their Eagle Rock common units prior to the Eagle Rock expiration date and (ii) a restriction
on soliciting or encouraging alternative proposals. Furthermore, the Eagle Rock Holders agreed to promptly notify Vanguard of any
alternative proposal that they receive and to keep Vanguard reasonably informed on the material developments of any such alternative
proposals. For a period beginning at the effective time of the Eagle Rock merger and continuing for a period of 90 days thereafter, the
Eagle Rock Holders have also agreed not to sell, contract to sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of any Vanguard common units (or any
security exercisable or exchangeable for Vanguard common units) received in the transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger
agreement, provided that on each trading day during such period, the Eagle Rock Holders may sell, contract to sell, transfer or otherwise
dispose of an aggregate number of Vanguard common units (or any security exercisable or exchangeable for Vanguard common units),
on a daily basis, not to exceed 10% of the average daily trading volume of Vanguard common units during the four weeks immediately
prior to the first day of the calendar month in which such transaction occurs.
Registration Rights Agreement with Holders of Common Units of Eagle Rock
On May 21, 2015, Vanguard entered into a Registration Rights Agreement (the “Eagle Rock registration tights agreement”) with the Eagle
Rock Holders. Pursuant to the Eagle Rock registration rights agreement, among other things, (i) no later than the 14th day following the
closing date of the Eagle Rock merger, Vanguard will file with the SEC either (a) a registration statement with respect to the public resale
of the Vanguard common units received by the Eagle Rock Holders as consideration in the Eagle Rock merger or (b) a post-effective
amendment to Vanguard’s existing automatic shelf registration on Form S-3, (ii) the Eagle Rock Holders will have the right to participate in
future underwritten public offerings of Vanguard common units and (iii) subject to certain conditions, Vanguard will be obligated to initiate
an underwritten offing of the Vanguard common units received by the Eagle Rock Holders as consideration in the Eagle Rock merger.
Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement
On June 3, 2015, Vanguard entered into the Eighth Amendment to its Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amended
Agreement”) which decreased the borrowing base from $2.0 billion to $1.6 billion. The Amended Agreement however provides for an
automatic increase in the borrowing base by $200.0 million upon closing of the merger. In addition, the Amended Agreement includes,
among other provisions, the amendment of the debt to “Last Twelve Months Adjusted EBITDA” covenant to be greater than 5.5 to 1.0 in
2015, 5.25 to 1.0 in 2016 and 4.5 to 1.0 starting in 2017 and beyond.
25
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SELECTED HISTORICAL CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA
OF VANGUARD
The following summary historical consolidated data as of and for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013, 2012, 2011 and 2010 are
derived from Vanguard’s audited historical consolidated financial statements. The following selected historical consolidated financial data
as of and for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and 2014 are derived from Vanguard’s unaudited condensed consolidated financial
statements. In the opinion of Vanguard’s management, all adjustments, consisting of normal recurring adjustments, considered necessary
for a fair statement of Vanguard’s financial position at June 30, 2015, and its operating results and cash flows for the six months ended
June 30, 2015 and 2014 have been included.
You should read the following historical consolidated financial data in conjunction with Vanguard’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2014 and its Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015, as well as Vanguard’s
historical financial statements and notes thereto, which are incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. See “Where
You Can Find More Information.”
38,233
Six Months Ended
 
June 30,
 2015
 (in thousands, except per unit data)
Year Ended December 31,(4)
 2012(5)
 2014
2014
2013
67,078
22,180
2011(6)
2010
7,797
$79,801
   95,651
   19,283
(94,436 )    163,452     11,256      36,846      6,735
31,563      61,874      40,430      29,369      28,621      6,840
64,715      132,515     105,502     74,366      63,944      18,471
130,015      95,118      226,937     167,535     104,542      84,857      22,231
232,968      219,823     788,065     454,504     347,202      319,577     93,154
$142,163   $268,685   $268,922   $233,153    $236,003   $50,022  
     133,348     285,439     124,513     47,270      47,977      25,778  
     38,748      70,489      49,813      29,933      28,862      9,557
Statement of
Operations Data:
Revenues:
Oil sales
Natural gas sales
NGLs sales
Net gains (losses) on
commodity derivative
contracts(1)
Total revenue
Costs and Expenses:     
Production
     
Lease operating
expenses
Production and other
taxes
Depreciation,
depletion,
amortization and
accretion
Impairment of oil and
natural gas
properties
Selling, general and
administrative
expenses(2)
Total costs and
expenses
Income (Loss) from
Operations:
Other Income
(Expense):
Interest expense
Net losses on
interest rate
derivative contracts
Net gain (loss) on
acquisitions of oil
and natural gas
properties
Other income
 
Total other expense    (42,002 )    (2,142 )    (37,121 )    (55,584 )    (37,552 )    (34,246 )    (13,593)
1,103,441     207,298     686,599     339,409     478,465      197,201     57,676
(870,473 )    12,525      101,466     115,095     (131,263)    122,376     35,478
15,902      30,839      25,942      22,466      19,779      10,134
(40,563 )    (32,808 )    (69,765 )    (61,148 )    (41,891 )    (28,994 )    (5,766 )
32,114      34,523      5,591
11,111      (367
)    (6,992
)    (4,962 )    (2,148 )
)    (1,579 )    (1,933 )    (96
247,722      —
865,975      —
234,434     —
)    (5,680 )
131
54
69
220
77
1
—
45
18,193
(1,484
—
26
Net Income (Loss)
Less: Net income
attributable to non-
controlling interest
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Six Months Ended
 
June 30,
 2015
 (in thousands, except per unit data)
 $(912,475)  $10,383    $64,345
2014
Year Ended December 31,(4)
 2014
2013
2012(5)
2011(6)
2010
$59,511    $(168,815)  $88,130    $21,885
—
—
—
—
—
(26,067 )    —
Net Income (Loss)
Attributable to
Vanguard
Unitholders
Less: Distributions to
Preferred unitholders
Net Income (Loss)
Attributable to
Common and Class
B
unitholders
Net Income (Loss)
Per Common and
Class B Unit:
Basic
Diluted
Distributions
Declared Per
Common and Class
B Unit(3)
Weighted Average
Common Units
Outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
Weighted Average
Class B Units
Outstanding
Cash Flow Data:
Net cash provided by
operating activities
Net cash used in
investing activities
Net cash provided by
(used in) financing
activities
Other Financial
Information:
Adjusted EBITDA
attributable to
Vanguard
unitholders interest
$(912,475)  $10,383    $64,345
$59,511    $(168,815)  $62,063    $21,885
(13,380 )    (6,558
)    (18,197
)    (2,634
)    —
—
—
$(925,855)  $3,825
$46,148
$56,877    $(168,815)  $62,063    $21,885
$(10.86
 $(10.86
)  $0.05
)  $0.05
$0.56
   $0.55
$0.78
   $0.77
$(3.11
   $(3.11
)  $1.95
)  $1.95
$1.00
   $1.00
$0.80
$1.26
$2.52
$2.46
$2.79
$2.28
$2.15
84,816      79,865      81,611
   84,816      79,865      82,039
72,644      53,777      31,370      21,500  
     72,992      53,777      31,370      21,500
420
420
420
420
420
420
420
$164,715    $154,927    $339,752
$260,965    $204,490    $176,332    $71,577
$(57,486 )  $(573,155)  $(1,446,202)  $(397,977)  $(839,244)  $(236,350)  $(429,994)
$(103,097)  $428,523    $1,094,632    $137,267    $643,466    $61,041    $359,758
$175,918    $187,552    $421,445
$309,745    $230,512    $164,603    $80,396
Oil and natural gas derivative contracts were used to reduce Vanguard’s exposure to changes in oil and natural gas prices. In 2008, all
commodity derivative contracts were either de-designated as cash flow hedges or they failed to meet the hedge documentation
requirements for cash flow hedges. As a result, (a) for the cash flow hedges that were settled in 2008 through 2011, the change in fair
value through December 31, 2007 was reclassified to earnings from accumulated other comprehensive loss and is classified as gain
(loss) on commodity cash flow hedges and (b) the changes in the fair value of commodity derivative contracts are recorded in earnings
and classified as gain (loss) on commodity derivative contracts.
Includes $7.8 million, $5.0 million, $11.7 million, $5.9 million, $5.4 million, $3.0 million and $1.0 million of non-cash unit-based
compensation expense in the six months ended June 30, 2015 and 2014 and in the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013, 2012,
2011 and 2010, respectively.
(1)
(2)
27
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(3)
(4)
(5)
Includes distributions declared during the respective periods. Due to the change in the payment of Vanguard’s distributions from
quarterly to monthly starting with Vanguard’s July 2012 distribution, the distributions declared during 2012 include 14 months of
distributions compared to 12 months of distributions for each of the other years presented.
From 2010 through 2014, Vanguard acquired certain oil and natural gas properties and related assets, as well as additional interests in
these assets. The operating results of these properties were included with Vanguard’s from the closing date of the acquisitions forward.
From 2010 through 2014, Vanguard acquired certain oil and natural gas properties and related assets, as well as additional interests in
these assets. The operating results of these properties were included with Vanguard’s from the closing date of the acquisitions forward.
On December 31, 2010, Vanguard acquired all of the member interests in Encore Energy Partners GP, LLC, the general partner of
Encore Energy Partners LP (“ENP”) and certain limited partnership interests in ENP (the “ENP Purchase”) together representing a
(6)
46.7% aggregate equity interest in ENP at the date of the ENP Purchase. On December 1, 2011, Vanguard acquired the remaining
53.4% of the limited partnership interests in ENP not held by Vanguard through a merger (the “ENP Merger”) with one of Vanguard’s
wholly-owned subsidiaries. The operating results of the subsidiaries Vanguard acquired in the ENP Purchase through the date of the
completion of the ENP Merger on December 1, 2011 were subject to a 53.4% non-controlling interest.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
Adjusted EBITDA
Vanguard presents Adjusted EBITDA in addition to its reported net income (loss) attributable to Vanguard unitholders in accordance with
GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that is defined as net income (loss) attributable to Vanguard unitholders plus,
for 2011, net income (loss) attributable to the non-controlling interest. The result is net income (loss) which includes the non-controlling
interest for 2011. From this Vanguard adds or subtracts the following:
Impairment of oil and natural gas properties;
• Net interest expense, including write-off of deferred financing fees;
• Depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion;
•
• Net gains or losses on commodity derivative contracts;
• Cash settlements on matured commodity derivative contracts;
• Net gains or losses on interest rate derivative contracts;
• Net gains and losses on acquisitions of oil and natural gas properties;
•
Texas margin taxes;
•
Compensation related items, which include unit-based compensation expense, unrealized fair value of phantom units granted to officers
and cash settlement of phantom units granted to officers;
• Transaction costs incurred on acquisitions and mergers;
•
Interest income;
•
For 2011, non-controlling interest amounts attributable to each of the items above from the beginning of year through the completion of
the ENP Merger on December 1, 2011, which revert the calculation back to an amount attributable to the Vanguard unitholders; and
•For 2011, administrative services fees charged to ENP, excluding the non-controlling interest, which are eliminated in consolidation.
28
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Adjusted EBITDA is a significant performance metric used by Vanguard management as a tool to measure (prior to the establishment of
any cash reserves by the board of directors of Vanguard, debt service and capital expenditures) the cash distributions Vanguard could
pay its unitholders. Specifically, this financial measure indicates to investors whether or not Vanguard is generating cash flow at a level
that can sustain or support an increase in its monthly distribution rates. Adjusted EBITDA is also used as a quantitative standard by
Vanguard’s management and by external users of its financial statements such as investors, research analysts and others to assess the
financial performance of Vanguard’s assets without regard to financing methods, capital structure or historical cost basis; the ability of
Vanguard’s assets to generate cash sufficient to pay interest costs and support its indebtedness; and Vanguard’s operating performance
and return on capital as compared to those of other companies in its industry.
Vanguard’s Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net income, operating income, cash flow from operating
activities or any other measure of financial performance or liquidity presented in accordance with GAAP. Vanguard’s Adjusted EBITDA
excludes some, but not all, items that affect net income and operating income and these measures may vary among other companies.
Therefore, Vanguard’s Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. For example, Vanguard
funds premiums paid for derivative contracts, acquisitions of oil and natural gas properties, including the assumption of derivative
contracts related to these acquisitions and other capital expenditures primarily with proceeds from debt or equity offerings or with
borrowings under Vanguard’s reserve-based credit facility. For the purposes of calculating Adjusted EBITDA, Vanguard consider the cost
of premiums paid for derivatives and the fair value of derivative contracts acquired as part of a business combination as investments
related to its underlying oil and natural gas properties; therefore, they are not deducted in arriving at Vanguard’s Adjusted EBITDA.
Vanguard’s Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, prepared in accordance with GAAP, present cash settlements on matured
derivatives and the initial cash outflows of premiums paid to enter into derivative contracts as operating activities. When Vanguard
assumes derivative contracts as part of a business combination, Vanguard allocates a part of the purchase price and assigns them a fair
value at the closing date of the acquisition. The fair value of the derivative contracts acquired is recorded as a derivative asset or liability
and presented as cash used in investing activities in Vanguard’s Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. As the volumes associated
with these derivative contracts, whether Vanguard entered into them or assumed them, are settled, the fair value is recognized in
operating cash flows. Whether these cash settlements on derivatives are received or paid, they are reported as operating cash flows
which may increase or decrease the amount Vanguard has available to fund distributions.
As noted above, for purposes of calculating Adjusted EBITDA, Vanguard considers both premiums paid for derivatives and the fair value
of derivative contracts acquired as part of a business combination as investing activities. This is similar to the way the initial acquisition or
development costs of Vanguard’s oil and natural gas properties are presented in its Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows; the initial
cash outflows are presented as cash used in investing activities, while the cash flows generated from these assets are included in
operating cash flows. The consideration of premiums paid for derivatives and the fair value of derivative contracts acquired as part of a
business combination as investing activities for purposes of determining Vanguard’s Adjusted EBITDA differs from the presentation in its
consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP which (i) presents premiums paid for derivatives entered into as
operating activities and (ii) the fair value of derivative contracts acquired as part of a business combination as investing activities.
29
The following table presents a reconciliation of Vanguard’s consolidated net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Six Months Ended
 
June 30,
 2015
 (in thousands)
2014
Year Ended December 31,
2014
2013
2012
2011(e)
2010(f)
$(912,475)  $10,383    $64,345    $59,511    $(168,815)  $62,063    $21,885
—
—
—
—
26,067      —
(912,475)    10,383      64,345      59,511      (168,815)    88,130      21,885 
     
 
   40,563      32,808      69,765      61,148      41,891      28,994      5,766
130,015      95,118      226,937      167,535     104,542      84,857      22,231
865,975      —
234,434      —
247,722      —
—
(38,233 )    94,436      (163,452)    (11,256 )    (36,846 )    (6,735 )    (7,797 )
80,620      (19,380 )    10,187      30,905      39,102      18,720      25,887
—
Net income (loss)
attributable to
Vanguard
unitholders
Net income
attributable to non-
controlling interest
Net income (loss)
Plus:
Interest expense
Depreciation,
depletion,
amortization and
accretion
Impairment of oil and
natural gas
properties
Net (gains) losses on
commodity derivative
contracts
Net cash settlements
received (paid) on
matured commodity
derivative(a)(b)(c)
Net losses on
interest rate
derivative contracts(d)
Net (gain) loss on
acquisitions of oil
and natural gas
properties
Texas margin taxes    142
Compensation
related
items
Transaction costs
incurred on
acquisitions and
mergers
Less:
Interest income
Adjusted EBITDA
before non-
controlling
interest
Non-controlling
interest attributable to
adjustments above
—
—
—
—
Administrative
1,484
7,827
1,579
1,933
96
6,992
4,962
2,148
(32,114 )    (34,523 )    (5,591 )    (11,111 )    367
5,680
(281
)    (630
)    601
239
261
(12
)
5,003
11,710      5,931
6,796
3,026
1,026
—
739
865
—
2,019
3,583
—
—
—
—
—
(1
)
$175,918    $187,552   $421,445    $309,745   $230,512    $224,601   $80,396
—
—
—
—
(62,838 )    —
services fees
eliminated in
consolidation
Adjusted EBITDA
attributable to
Vanguard
unitholders
—
—
—
—
—
2,840
—
$175,918    $187,552   $421,445    $309,745   $230,512    $164,603   $80,396
30
TABLE OF CONTENTS
$2,567    $—
$—
$220
$11,641  $11,346  $1,950
$20,281    $10,864  $21,306  $30,200  $26,505  $169
$1,995
(a)
Excludes premiums
paid, whether at
inception or deferred,
for derivative
contracts that settled
during the period.
Vanguard considers
the cost of premiums
paid for derivatives
as an investment
related to Vanguard’s
underlying oil and
natural gas
properties
(b)
Excludes the fair
value of derivative
contracts acquired as
part of prior period
business
combinations that
apply to contracts
settled during the
period. Vanguard
considers the
amounts paid to
sellers for derivative
contracts assumed
with business
combinations a part
of the purchase price
of the underlying oil
and natural gas
properties
(c)
$(31,945)  $—
Excludes fair value of
restructured
derivative contracts
(d)
$—
$—
$—
$—
$—
$1,980    $2,005   $4,035   $3,888   $2,515   $2,874   $1,799
Includes settlements
paid on interest rate
derivatives
(e)
Results of operations from oil and natural gas properties acquired in the ENP Purchase
through the date of the completion of the ENP Merger on December 1, 2011 were
subject to a 53.4% non-controlling interest.
(f)
(f)
As the ENP Purchase was completed on December 31, 2010, no results of operations
were included for the year ended December 31, 2010.
31
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SELECTED HISTORICAL CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA
OF LRE
The following summary historical consolidated data as of and for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 and for the period
from November 16, 2011 to December 31, 2011 are derived from LRE’s audited historical consolidated financial statements. The selected
financial data for the period from January 1, 2011 to November 15, 2011 and as of and for the year ended December 31, 2010 are derived
from the audited financial statements of LRE’s predecessor. References to “LRE’s predecessor” refer collectively to LRR A, LRR B and
LRR C, which sold and contributed oil and natural gas properties and related net profits interests and operations to LRE in connection
with LRE’s initial public offering. The following selected historical consolidated financial data as of and for the six months ended June 30,
2015 and 2014 are derived from LRE’s unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements. In the opinion of LRE’s management, all
adjustments, consisting of normal recurring adjustments, considered necessary for a fair statement of LRE’s financial position at June 30,
2015, and its operating results and cash flows for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and 2014 have been included.
You should read the following historical consolidated financial data in conjunction with LRE’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2014 and its Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015, as well as LRE’s historical
financial statements and notes thereto, which are incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. See “Where You Can
Find More Information.”
LRE
Predecessor
(in thousands,
except
per unit data)
Six
Months
 
Ended
June 30,
2015
Six
Months
 
Ended
June 30,
2014
Year
Year
Ended
Ended
 
December
 
December
31,
31,
2014
2013
Year
Ended
 
December
31,
2012
November
Year
January 1
16
Ended
to
to
 
November
 
 
December
December
31,
15,
31,
2011
2010
2011
55
71
14,500     14,748
35,883     48,088
9,755      (18,950)    71,235     781
12,748      12,287     22,027     24,065
$59,605   $52,670
2,832      6,124      11,362     10,147      11,627      1,976
7,986      15,664      28,521     26,800      23,502      3,976
$26,291    $40,510    $76,662   $77,181    $72,916    $9,766
Statement of
Operations
Data:
Revenues:
Oil sales
Natural gas
sales
Natural gas
liquids sales
Gain (loss) on
commodity
derivative
instruments, net
Other income
 
Total revenues    46,919      43,419      187,905     115,095     120,838     28,005     132,174     139,687 
Operating
expenses:
Lease
operating
expenses
Production and
ad valorem
taxes
Depletion and
depreciation
Impairment of
oil and gas
properties
Accretion
expense
17,574      17,145      36,729     43,420      46,928      5,876
12,780      12,664      25,821     25,397      29,069      3,193
37,758     63,663      3,544
—
1,924
1,575
191
1,029      1,013      2,071
8,614
7,790
1,076
7,763
9,320
2,748      4,648      8,738
37,206     55,828
16,765     11,712
1,290
1,366
125
186
45
21,391     23,804
159
116
35,962      —
—
Loss (gain) on
settlement of
asset retirement
obligations
Management
fees
General and
administrative
expenses
Total operating
expenses
Operating
income
(loss)
68
61
151
358
(31
)    —
496
(209
)
—
—
—
—
—
—
5,435
6,104
16,464      5,881      11,447     11,965      13,758      1,892
5,149
5,293
86,625      41,412      122,715     155,341     102,633     12,228     95,495     113,218
(39,706)    2,007      65,190     (40,246 )    18,205      15,777     36,679     26,469
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE
Predecessor
(in thousands,
except
per unit data)
Six
Months
 
Ended
June 30,
2015
Six
Months
 
Ended
June 30,
2014
November
Year
January 1
Year
Year
Year
16
Ended
to
Ended
Ended
Ended
to
 
November
 
 
December
 
December
 
December
 
December
December
31,
15,
31,
31,
31,
31,
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
2011
32
$—
$—
$—
$—
$—
$1
$17
(5,889 )    (5,116 )    (10,472)    (9,235 )    (6,596 )    (604
(1,673 )    (1,422 )    (1,790 )    1,256      (4,650 )    —
)    (919
)    (3,223
)
(133
)    (897
)
)    (1,051 )    (4,103
)
(7,562 )    (6,538 )    (12,262)    (7,979 )    (11,246)    (604
(47,268)    (4,531 )    52,928      (48,225)    6,959      15,173      35,628      22,366
18
(112
)    (186
)    (56
)    (172
)    (48
)    76
(32
)
$(47,250)  $4,643    $52,742    $(48,281)  $6,787    $15,125    $35,704    $22,334
—
—
(448
)    (6,790 )    (2,975 )    —
—
Other income
(expense), net:
Interest income  $—
Interest
expense
Gain (loss) on
interest rate
derivative
instruments, net
Other income
(expense), net
Income (loss)
before taxes
Income tax
(expense)
benefit
Net income
(loss)
Net (income)
loss attributable
to common
control
operations
—
Net income
(loss) available
to unitholders
General
partner’s
interest in net
income (loss)
Limited
partners’
interest in net
income (loss)
Net income
(loss) per
limited partner
unit (basic and
$(47,250)  $(4,643 )  $52,742    $(48,729)  $(3
)  $12,150      —
—
$(9,434 )  $(4
)  $53
$(49
)  $—
$12
—
—
$(37,816)  $(4,639 )  $52,689    $(48,680)  $(3
)  $12,138      —
—
$(1.35
)  $(0.17
)  $1.94
$(1.92
)  $(0.00
)  $0.54
—
—
diluted)
Weighted
average
number of
limited partner
units
outstanding
(basic and
diluted)
Other Financial
Data:
Adjusted
EBITDA
Cash Flow
Data:
Net cash
provided by
(used in)
operating
activities
Net cash
provided by
(used in)
investing
activities
Net cash
provided by
(used in)
financing
activities
28,073      26,539      27,092      25,372      22,425      22,418      —
—
$40,169    $40,677    $88,385    $79,550    $81,156    $13,603    $79,762    $119,130
$35,954    $31,663    $67,885    $65,541    $77,223    $5,523    $84,027    $121,269
$(17,606)  $(17,029)  $(69,950)  $(35,805)  $(40,433)  $(755
)  $(44,981)  $(125,846)
$(14,243)  $(16,180)  $1,224    $(28,786)  $(34,836)  $(3,255 )  $(38,000)  $1,505
33
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
LRE discloses the non-GAAP financial measures Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow for the periods presented and provides
reconciliations of these items to net income (loss), LRE’s most directly comparable financial performance measure calculated and
presented in accordance with GAAP. LRE defines Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus or minus:
Income tax expense (benefit);
•
• Interest expense-net, including loss (gain) on interest rate derivative instruments, net;
• Depletion and depreciation;
• Accretion of asset retirement obligations;
• Amortization of equity awards;
• Loss (gain) on settlement of asset retirement obligations;
• Loss (gain) on commodity derivative instruments, net;
• Commodity derivative instrument net cash settlements;
• Impairment of oil and natural gas properties; and
• Other non-recurring items that LRE deems appropriate.
Adjusted EBITDA is used as a supplemental financial measure by LRE’s management and by external users of LRE’s financial
statements, such as investors, commercial banks, research analysts and others, to assess LRE’s financial performance as compared to
that of other companies and partnerships in its industry, without regard to financing methods, capital structure or historical cost basis.
LRE defines Distributable Cash Flow as Adjusted EBITDA less cash income tax expense, cash interest expense and estimated
maintenance capital.
Distributable Cash Flow is a supplemental financial measure used by LRE’s management and by external users of LRE’s financial
statements, such as investors, commercial banks, research analysts and others to compare basic cash flows generated by LRE (prior to
the establishment of any retained cash reserve by LRE GP) to the cash distributions LRE expects to pay its unitholders. Distributable
Cash Flow is also an important financial measure for LRE’s unitholders as it serves as an indicator of its success in providing a cash
return on investment. Specifically, distributable cash flow indicates to investors whether or not LRE is generating cash flow at a level that
can sustain or support an increase in its quarterly distribution rates. Distributable Cash Flow is a quantitative standard used throughout
the investment community with respect to publicly-traded partnerships and limited liability companies because the yield is based on the
amount of cash distributions the entity pays to a unitholder compared to the unit price.
LRE’s management believes that both Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow are useful to investors because these measures
are used by many partnerships in the industry as measures of operating and financial performance and are commonly employed by
financial analysts and others to evaluate the operating and financial performance from period to period and to compare it with the
performance of other publicly traded partnerships within the industry. Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow should not be
considered alternatives to net income (loss), operating income (loss), or any other measures of financial performance presented in
accordance with GAAP. LRE’s Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of
another company because all companies may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow in the same manner.
LRE’s Adjusted EBITDA for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and 2014, for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013, 2012, and for
the period from November 16 to December 31, 2011 was $40.2 million, $40.7 million, $83.4 million, $79.6 million, $81.2 million, and $13.6
million, respectively. LRE’s predecessor’s Adjusted EBITDA for the period from January 1 to November 15, 2011 and the year ended
December 31, 2010 was $79.8 million and $119.1 million, respectively.
34
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE’s Distributable Cash Flow for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and 2014, for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013, and
2012 and for the period from November 16 to December 31, 2011 was $23.9 million, $25.2 million, $52.0 million, $49.6 million, $53.8
million and $11.0 million, respectively.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow to net income (loss), LRE’s most directly
comparable GAAP financial performance measure, for each of the periods indicated.
LRE
Predecessor
Six
Months
 
Ended
June 30,
2015
Six
Months
 
Ended
June 30,
2014
November
January 1
Year
Year
Year
16
Year
to
Ended
to
Ended
Ended
Ended
 
November
 
 
 
 
 
December
December
December
December
December
15,
31,
31, 2014
31, 2013
31, 2012
31, 2010
2011
2011
$(47,250)  $(4,643 )  $52,742    $(48,281)  $6,787    $15,125    $35,704    $22,334
(18
)    112
186
56
172
48
(76
)    32
7,562      6,538      12,262      7,979      11,246      604
1,052      4,120
17,574      17,145      36,729      43,420      46,928      5,876      37,206      55,828
1,029      1,013      2,071      1,924      1,575      191
1,290      1,366
838
534
1,081      549
313
31
—
—
68
61
151
358
(31
)    —
496
(209
)
(9,755 )    18,950      (71,235)    (781
)    (12,748)    (12,287)    (22,027)    (24,065 )
25,061      967
11,640      10,663      23,370      4,015      9,353      48,029
(in thousands)
Net income
(loss)
Income tax
expense
(benefit)
Interest
expense – net,
including loss
(gain) on
interest rate
derivative
instruments, net
Depletion and
depreciation
Accretion of
asset retirement
obligations
Amortization of
equity awards
Loss (gain) on
settlement of
asset retirement
obligations
Loss (gain) on
commodity
derivative
instruments, net
Commodity
derivative
instrument net
cash
settlements
35,962      —
9,098      —
—
37,758      63,663      3,544      —
16,765      11,712
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(1
—
)    (17
)
$40,169    $40,677    $83,385    $79,550    $81,156    $13,603    $79,762    $119,130
$40,169    $40,677    $83,385    $79,550    $81,156    $13,603
(85
)    (88
)    (146
)    (132
)    (86
)    —
(6,638 )    (5,401 )    (10,905)    (9,513 )    (7,012 )    (31
)
(9,500 )    (10,000)    (20,300)    (20,300)    (20,300)    (2,538 )
Impairment of
oil
and natural gas
properties
Other non-
recurring items
Interest income    —
Adjusted
EBITDA
Adjusted
EBITDA
Cash income
tax expense
Cash interest
expense
Estimated
maintenance
capital(1)
Distributable
cash
flow
$23,946    $25,188    $52,034    $49,605    $53,758    $11,034
(1)
Estimated maintenance capital expenditures as defined by LRE’s partnership agreement represent LRE’s estimate of the amount of
capital required on average per year to maintain LRE’s production over the long term. For the period from November 16 to December
31, 2011, the amount represents prorated maintenance capital for the period.
35
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SELECTED UNAUDITED PRO FORMA COMBINED FINANCIAL
INFORMATION
The following selected unaudited pro forma combined balance sheet as of June 30, 2015 reflects the transactions contemplated by the
merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement as if they occurred on June 30, 2015. The
unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2014 and the six months ended June 30, 2015
reflect the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, the transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement and
certain acquisitions made by Vanguard in 2014 as if they occurred on January 1, 2014.
The following selected unaudited pro forma combined financial information has been prepared for illustrative purposes only and is not
necessarily indicative of what the combined organization’s financial position or results of operations actually would have been had the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement been
completed as of the dates indicated. In addition, the unaudited pro forma combined financial information does not purport to project the
future financial position or operating results of the combined organization. Future results may vary significantly from the results reflected
because of various factors. The following selected unaudited pro forma combined financial information should be read in conjunction with
the section entitled “Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial Information” and related notes included in this proxy statement/prospectus.
The completion of the Eagle Rock merger is not a condition to the completion of the merger and there can be no assurance that the
transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement will be completed.
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Balance Sheet Data as of June 30, 2015
Historical
(in thousands)
Vanguard  LRE
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
Vanguard/
LRE
 
Pro Forma
Combined
Historical
Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Combined
Total assets
Total liabilities
Total members’
equity
Total liabilities
and members’
$2,768,042  $502,863  $ 5,015
 $2,190,403  $349,881  $ (4,189
$3,275,920  $562,178  $ 49,569
)   $2,536,095  $276,970  $ 30,449
$3,887,667 
  $2,843,514
$577,639   $152,982  $ 9,204
$739,825   $285,208  $ 19,120
$1,044,153
$2,768,042  $502,863  $ 5,015
$3,275,920  $562,178  $ 49,569
$3,887,667
equity
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of Operations Data for the Year Ended December 31, 2014
(in thousands
except
per unit data)
Vanguard
LRE
As
 
 
Historical
Adjusted(1)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
Vanguard
 
Pro Forma
Combined
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Combined
$902,083   $187,905  $ (4
)  $1,089,984  $298,204    $ —
$1,388,188
710,724     122,715    (14,494 )    818,945     585,259      (38,176 )    1,366,028
191,359     65,190     14,490      271,039     (287,055)    38,176      22,160
$95,125   $52,742   $ 18,939    $166,806   $(352,367)  $ 42,493    $(143,068)
Total revenues
Total costs and
expenses
Income from
operations
Income (loss)
from continuing
operations
attributable to
common and
Class B
unitholders
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(in thousands
except
per unit data)
Vanguard
LRE
As
 
 
Historical
Adjusted(1)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
Vanguard
Pro
 
Forma
Combined
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Combined
Income (loss)
from continuing
operations per
common and
Class B Unit
Basic
Diluted
$ 1.16
 $ 1.14
$ 1.94      —
   $ 1.94      —
$ 1.71
 $ 1.69
$ (2.25 )     —
   $ (2.25 )     —
$ (1.13 ) 
 $ (1.13 )
36
(1)
On January 31, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Encore Energy Partners Operating, LLC, completed the acquisition of
certain natural gas and oil assets in the Pinedale and Jonah fields located in Southwestern Wyoming for approximately $555.6 million
in cash (the “Pinedale Acquisition”), and, on September 30, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Vanguard Operating,
LLC, completed the acquisition of natural gas, oil and NGL assets in the Piceance Basin located in Colorado for approximately $496.4
million (the “Piceance Acquisition”). The Vanguard As Adjusted column in the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of
Operations Data for Year Ended December 31, 2014, above, incorporates the following financial information related to the Pinedale
Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition:
(in thousands except per unit
data)
Vanguard
 
Historical
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Vanguard
 
As
Adjusted
  $902,083 
    710,724 
    191,359
Total revenues
Total costs and expenses
Income from operations
Net income (loss) attributable to
common and Class B
unitholders
Net income per common and
Class B Unit
Basic
Diluted
$788,065  $ 14,259    $ 99,759
   686,599    5,785
     18,340
     81,419
   101,466    8,474
$46,148   $ (24,628 )  $ 73,605
$95,125
$0.56
 $0.55
—
    —
—
     —
$1.16
  $1.14
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of Operations Data for the Six Months Ended June 30, 2015
Historical
Historical
Vanguard
LRE
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
Vanguard
 
Pro Forma
Combined
Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Combined
   $353,675
$232,968    $46,919    $ —
$279,887    $73,788    $ —
1,103,441     86,625      (9,804
)     1,180,262     147,336     (10,403 )    1,317,195
(870,473 )    (39,706)    9,804
(900,375 )    (73,548 )    10,403      (963,520
)
$(925,855 )  $(47,250)  $ 12,568    $(960,537 )  $(81,119 )  $ 10,359    $(1,031,297)
$(10.86
)  $(1.35
)    —
$(9.47
)  $(0.54
)  $ —
$(7.92
)
(in thousands
except
per unit data)
Total revenues
Total costs and
expenses
Loss from
operations
Loss from
continuing
operations
attributable to
common and Class
B unitholders
Loss from
continuing
operations per
common and Class
B Unit Basic &
Diluted
37
TABLE OF CONTENTS
UNAUDITED COMPARATIVE PER UNIT INFORMATION
The tables below set forth historical and unaudited pro forma combined per unit information of Vanguard, LRE and Eagle Rock.
Historical Per Unit Information of Vanguard and LRE
The historical per unit information of Vanguard and LRE set forth in the tables below is derived from the audited consolidated financial
statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2014 and the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements as of and for
the six months ended June 30, 2015 for each of Vanguard and LRE.
Pro Forma Combined Per Unit Information of Vanguard
The unaudited pro forma combined per unit information of Vanguard set forth in the tables below gives effect, as applicable, to the
transactions contemplated by (i) the merger agreement under the purchase method of accounting, as if the merger had been effective on
January 1, 2014, in the case of income from continuing operations per unit and cash distributions data, and June 30, 2015, in the case of
book value per unit data, and, in each case, assuming that 0.550 Vanguard common units have been issued in exchange for each
outstanding LRE common unit and after giving effect to the settlement of outstanding restricted units awarded under the LTIP in
accordance with the merger agreement, and (ii) the Eagle Rock merger agreement under the purchase method of accounting, as if the
Eagle Rock merger had been effective on January 1, 2014, in the case of income from continuing operations per unit and cash
distributions data, and June 30, 2015, in the case of book value per unit data, and, in each case, assuming that 0.185 Vanguard common
units have been issued in exchange for each outstanding Eagle Rock common unit and after giving effect to the settlement of outstanding
restricted units awarded under the long-term incentive program of Eagle Rock in accordance with the Eagle Rock merger agreement.
General
You should read the information set forth below in conjunction with the selected historical financial information of Vanguard and LRE
included elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus and the historical financial statements and related notes of Vanguard and LRE that
are incorporated by reference into or contained in this proxy statement/prospectus. See “— Selected Historical Consolidated Financial
Data of Vanguard,” “— Selected Historical Consolidated Financial Data of LRE” and “Where You Can Find More Information.”
The accounting for an acquisition of a business is based on the authoritative guidance for business combinations. Purchase accounting
requires, among other things, that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recognized at their fair values as of the date the merger
is completed. The allocation of the purchase price is dependent upon certain valuations of LRE’s assets and liabilities and other studies
that have yet to commence or progress to a stage where there is sufficient information for a definitive measurement. Accordingly, the pro
forma adjustments reflect the assets and liabilities of LRE at their preliminary estimated fair values. Differences between these preliminary
estimates and the final purchase accounting will occur, and these differences could have a material impact on the unaudited pro forma
combined per unit information set forth in the following tables.
38
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The unaudited pro forma per unit information of Vanguard does not purport to represent the actual results of operations that Vanguard
would have achieved or distributions that would have been declared had the companies been combined during these periods or to project
the future results of operations that Vanguard may achieve or the distributions it may pay after the merger (in thousands, except per unit
data).
Historical – Vanguard
Total revenues
Net income (loss) per common unit and Class B unit
Basic
Diluted
Distribution declared per common unit and Class B unit
Book value per common unit and Class B unit
Historical – LRE
Total revenues
Net income (loss) per common unit
Basic & Diluted
Distribution declared per common unit
Book value per common unit
As of and for
the
 
Year Ended
December 31,
2014
As of and
for the
Six months
 
Ended
June 30,
2015
 $232,968    $ 788,065
     
 $(10.86
 $(10.86
 $0.798
 $2.79
)  $ 0.56
)  $ 0.55
   $ 2.515
   $ 14.29
As of and for
the
 
Year Ended
December 31,
2014
As of and
for the
Six months
 
Ended
June 30,
2015
 $ 46,919    $ 187,905
     
 $ (1.35
)   $ 1.94
$ 0.375
 $ 5.77
$ 1.9825
   $ 9.03
Pro Forma – Vanguard
(giving effect to the LRE merger only)
As of and
for the
Six months
 
Ended
June 30,
2015
 $279,887    $ 1,089,984
Total revenues
     
Net income (loss) per common unit and Class B unit
 $(9.47
Basic
Diluted
 $(9.47
Distribution declared per common unit and Class B unit(1)  $0.798
Book value per common unit and Class B unit
 $3.95
)  $ 1.71
)  $ 1.69
   $ 2.515
     (2)
As of and for
the
 
Year Ended
December 31,
2014
(1) Pro forma distributions per unit are based solely on historical distributions for Vanguard.
(2) A pro forma balance sheet was prepared only as of June 30, 2015.
Equivalent Pro Forma – LRE(1)
(giving effect to the LRE merger only)
Net income (loss) per common unit and Class B unit
Basic
Diluted
Distribution declared per common unit and Class B unit
Book value per common unit and Class B unit
As of and
for the
Six months
 
Ended
June 30,
2015
     
 $   (5.21
 $ (5.21
 $ 0.439
 $ 2.17
As of and for
the
 
Year Ended
December 31,
2014
)   $      0.94
)   $ 0.93
   $ 1.383
(2)
(1)
LRE’s equivalent pro forma earnings, book value and cash distribution amounts have been calculated by multiplying Vanguard’s pro
forma per unit amounts by the 0.550x exchange ratio.
(2) A pro forma balance sheet was prepared only as of June 30, 2015.
39
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Pro Forma – Vanguard
(giving effect to the LRE merger and the Eagle Rock
merger)
As of and
for the
Six months
 
Ended
June 30,
2015
As of and for
the
Year Ended
 
December 31,
2014
Total revenues
Loss from continuing operations per common unit and
Class B unit
 $(7.92
Basic & Diluted
Distribution declared per common unit and Class B unit(1)  $0.798
Book value per common unit and Class B unit
 $5.41
$353,675    $1,388,188
)  $(1.13
   $2.515
     (2)
)
(1) Pro forma distributions per unit are based solely on historical distributions for Vanguard.
(2) A pro forma balance sheet was prepared only as of June 30, 2015.
Equivalent Pro Forma – LRE(1)
(giving effect to the LRE merger and the Eagle Rock
merger)
Loss from continuing operations per common unit and
Class B unit
Basic & Diluted
Distribution declared per common unit and Class B unit
Book value per common unit and Class B unit
As of and
for the
Six months
 
Ended
June 30,
2015
As of and for
the
 
Year Ended
December 31,
2014
$   (4.36
 $ 0.439
 $ 2.97
)   $     (0.62
   $ 1.383
     (2)
)
(1)
LRE’s equivalent pro forma earnings, book value and cash distribution amounts have been calculated by multiplying Vanguard’s pro
forma per unit amounts by the 0.550x exchange ratio.
(2) A pro forma balance sheet was prepared only as of June 30, 2015.
40
TABLE OF CONTENTS
COMPARATIVE UNIT PRICES AND DISTRIBUTIONS
Vanguard common units are currently listed on the NASDAQ under the ticker symbol “VNR.” LRE common units are currently listed on the
NYSE under the ticker symbol “LRE.” The table below sets forth, for the calendar quarters indicated, the high and low sale prices per
Vanguard common unit on the NASDAQ and per LRE common unit on the NYSE.
2015
Third quarter (through July 31, 2015)
Second quarter
First quarter
2014
Vanguard Common
 
Units
 High
     
 $ 15.50
 $ 17.59
 $ 19.50
Low
      
  $ 10.44
  $ 13.81
  $ 11.90
LRE Common Units
High
       
   $7.99
   $8.90
   $8.80
Low
      
  $ 5.22
  $ 6.35
  $ 5.61
Fourth quarter
Third quarter
Second quarter
First quarter
2013
Fourth quarter
Third quarter
Second quarter
First quarter
2012
Fourth quarter
Third quarter
Second quarter
First quarter
$ 27.72
 $ 33.04
 $ 32.21
 $ 31.50
     
 $ 29.75
 $ 28.45
 $ 29.93
 $ 29.64
     
 $ 30.22
 $ 29.00
 $ 29.29
 $ 29.75
$ 12.57
  $ 26.11
  $ 29.26
  $ 29.11
      
  $ 27.13
  $ 24.23
  $ 27.08
  $ 26.21
      
  $ 24.25
  $ 25.80
  $ 22.81
  $ 26.36
$18.04   $ 6.57
 
   $20.11   $ 17.10  
   $18.36   $ 16.90  
   $18.16   $ 16.01  
       
 
   $18.45   $ 15.75  
   $16.15   $ 13.41  
   $18.28   $ 13.13  
   $19.20   $ 18.78  
       
 
   $20.08   $ 15.66  
   $19.00   $ 14.23  
   $20.63   $ 12.25  
   $21.62   $ 17.68
The following table shows the amount of cash distributions declared on Vanguard common units and LRE common units, respectively, for
the periods indicated. Vanguard changed its cash distribution policy from a quarterly payment schedule to a monthly payment schedule
beginning with the distributions relating to the third quarter of 2012.
41
2015
Second Quarter
June
May
April
First Quarter
March
February
January
2014
Fourth Quarter
December
November
October
Third Quarter
September
August
July
Second Quarter
June
May
April
First Quarter
March
February
January
2013
Fourth Quarter
December
November
October
Vanguard Cash
 
Distributions
  
  
 $ —
 $ 0.1175
 $ 0.1175
 $ 0.1175
 $ —
 $ 0.1175
 $ 0.1175
 $ 0.1175
$ 0.1875
   $ —
   $ —
   $ —
   $ 0.1875
   $ —
   $ —
   $ —
LRE Cash
 
Distributions
Paid
July 15, 2015
 
    June 12, 2015  
    May 15, 2015
 
    May 15, 2015
 
    April 14, 2015  
    March 17, 2015
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard
 
Cash
Distributions
  
  
 $ —
 $ 0.2100
 $ 0.2100
LRE Cash
 
Distributions
Paid
$ 0.4975
   $ —
   $ —
February 13, 2015  
    February 13, 2015  
    January 14, 2015
$ 0.2100
$ —
$ —
$ 0.4975
$ 0.2100
$ 0.2100
$ 0.2100
$ —
 $ 0.2100
 $ 0.2100
 $ 0.2100
 $ —
 $ 0.2100
 $ 0.2100
 $ 0.2075
  
  
 $ —
 $ 0.2075
 $ 0.2075
$ —
$ —
$ —
$ 0.4950
   $ —
   $ —
   $ —
   $ 0.4925
   $ —
   $ —
   $ —
       
   $ 0.4900
   $ —
   $ —
$ 0.2075
$ —
December 15,
2014
November 14,
2014
November 14,
2014
October 15, 2014
September 12,
2014
August 14, 2014
 
    August 14, 2014
 
    July 15, 2014
 
    June 13, 2014
 
    May 15, 2014
 
    May 15, 2014
 
    April 14, 2014
 
    March 17, 2014
      
 
    February 14, 2014  
    February 14, 2014  
    January 15, 2014
December 13,
Third Quarter
$ —
$ 0.4875
September
August
July
Second Quarter
June
May
April
First Quarter
March
February
January
2012
Fourth Quarter
December
November
October
Third Quarter
September
August
July
Second Quarter
First Quarter
$ 0.2075
$ 0.2075
$ 0.2075
$ —
 $ 0.2050
 $ 0.2050
 $ 0.2050
 $ —
 $ 0.2025
 $ 0.2025
 $ 0.2025
  
  
 $ —
 $ 0.2025
 $ 0.2025
$ —
$ —
$ —
$ 0.4850
   $ —
   $ —
   $ —
   $ 0.4825
   $ —
   $ —
   $ —
       
   $ 0.4800
   $ —
   $ —
$ 0.2025
$ —
$ —
$ 0.4775
$ 0.20
$ 0.20
$ 0.20
$ —
$ —
$ —
$ 0.60
 $ 0.5925
$ 0.4750
   $ 0.4750
2013
November 14,
2013
November 14,
2013
October 15, 2013
September 13,
2013
August 14, 2013
 
    August 14, 2013
 
    Juley 15, 2013
 
    June 14, 2013
 
    May 15, 2013
 
    May 15, 2013
 
    April 12, 2013
 
    March 15. 2013
      
 
    February 14, 2013  
    February 14, 2013  
    January 14, 2013
December 14,
2012
November 14,
2012
November 14,
2012
October 15, 2012
September 14,
2012
August 14, 2012
    May 14, 2012
42
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The following table presents per unit closing prices for Vanguard common units and LRE common units on April 20, 2015, the last trading
day before the public announcement of the merger agreement, and on            , 2015, the last practicable trading day before the date of this
proxy statement/prospectus. This table also presents the equivalent market value per LRE common unit on such dates. The equivalent
market value per LRE common unit has been determined by multiplying the closing prices of Vanguard common units on those dates by
the exchange ratio of 0.550 of a Vanguard common unit.
Vanguard
 
Common
Units
LRE
 
Common
Units
Equivalent
Market
Value
 
per LRE
Common
Unit
$
 $ 16.23
$
   $ 7.93
$
   $ 8.93
, 2015
April 20, 2015
Although the exchange ratio is fixed, the market prices of Vanguard common units and LRE common units will fluctuate prior to the
consummation of the merger and the market value of the merger consideration ultimately received by LRE unitholders will depend on the
closing price of Vanguard common units on the day the merger is consummated. Thus, LRE unitholders will not know the exact market
value of the merger consideration they will receive until the closing of the merger.
43
TABLE OF CONTENTS
RISK FACTORS
In addition to the other information included and incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus, including the matters
addressed in the section titled “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” you should carefully consider the
following risks before deciding whether to vote to approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby. In addition,
you should read and carefully consider the risks associated with each of Vanguard and LRE and their respective businesses. These risks
can be found in Vanguard’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 and subsequent Quarterly Reports on
Form 10-Q, all of which are filed with the SEC and incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus with respect to
Vanguard, and included in LRE’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 and subsequent Quarterly Reports
on Form 10-Q, all of which are filed with the SEC and incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus with respect to LRE.
For further information regarding the documents contained in or incorporated into this proxy statement/prospectus by reference, please
see the section titled “Where You Can Find More Information.” Realization of any of the risks described below, any of the events described
under “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” or any of the risks or events described in the documents contained
in or incorporated by reference could have a material adverse effect on Vanguard’s, LRE’s or the combined organization’s respective
businesses, financial condition, cash flows and results of operations and could result in a decline in the trading prices of their respective
common units.
Risk Factors Relating to the Merger
Because the exchange ratio is fixed and because the market price of Vanguard common units will
fluctuate prior to the consummation of the merger, LRE unitholders cannot be sure of the market value of
the Vanguard common units they will receive as merger consideration relative to the value of LRE
common units they exchange.
The market value of the consideration that LRE unitholders will receive in the merger will depend on the trading price of Vanguard’s
common units at the closing of the merger. The exchange ratio that determines the number of Vanguard common units that LRE
unitholders will receive in the merger is fixed. This means that there is no mechanism contained in the merger agreement that would
adjust the number of Vanguard common units that LRE unitholders will receive based on any decreases in the trading price of Vanguard
common units. Unit price changes may result from a variety of factors (many of which are beyond Vanguard’s or LRE’s control), including:
• changes in Vanguard’s business, operations and prospects;
• changes in market assessments of Vanguard’s business, operations and prospects;
interest rates, general market, industry and economic conditions and other factors generally affecting the price of Vanguard common
units; and
•federal, state and local legislation, governmental regulation and legal developments in the businesses in which Vanguard operates.
•
If Vanguard’s common unit price at the closing of the merger is less than Vanguard’s common unit price on the date that the merger
agreement was signed, then the market value of the consideration received by LRE unitholders will be less than contemplated at the time
the merger agreement was signed.
The fairness opinions rendered to each of the board of directors of LRE GP and the LRE GP conflicts
committee by their respective financial advisors were based on the financial analyses performed by their
respective financial advisors, which considered factors such as market and other conditions then in
effect, and financial forecasts and other information made available to the financial advisors, as of the
date of their respective opinions. As a result, these opinions do not reflect changes in events or
circumstances after the date of such opinions. Neither the board of directors of LRE GP nor the LRE GP
conflicts committee has obtained, or expects to obtain, updated fairness opinions from the financial
advisors reflecting changes in circumstances that may have occurred since the signing of the merger
agreement.
The fairness opinions rendered to the board of directors of LRE GP by Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC and the fairness
opinions rendered to the LRE GP conflicts committee by Simmons &
44
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Company International were provided in connection with, and at the time of, the evaluation of the merger and the merger agreement, and
the determination of whether to consent to the Eagle Rock merger, respectively, by the board of directors of LRE GP and the LRE GP
conflicts committee, respectively. These opinions were based on the financial analyses performed by their respective financial advisors,
which considered market and other conditions then in effect, and financial forecasts and other information made available to their
respective financial advisors, as of the date of the opinions, which may have changed, or may change, after the date of their respective
opinions. Neither the board of directors of LRE GP nor the LRE GP conflicts committee has obtained updated opinions from its respective
financial advisor as of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus nor does it expect to obtain updated opinions prior to completion of the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement or the Eagle Rock merger agreement. Changes in the operations and prospects of
Vanguard or LRE, general market and economic conditions and other factors which may be beyond the control of Vanguard and LRE, and
on which the fairness opinions were based, may have altered the value of Vanguard or LRE or the prices of Vanguard common units or
LRE common units since the date of such opinions, or may alter such values and prices by the time the merger or the Eagle Rock merger
is completed. The opinions do not speak as of any date other than the date of the opinions. For a description of the opinions that the board
of directors of LRE GP and the LRE GP conflicts committee received, please refer to “Proposal 1: The Merger — Opinions of the Financial
Advisor to the LRE GP Board of Directors” and “Proposal 1: The Merger — Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Conflicts
Committee.”
LRE is subject to provisions that limit its ability to pursue alternatives to the merger, could discourage a
potential competing acquirer of LRE from making a favorable alternative transaction proposal and, in
specified circumstances under the merger agreement, would require LRE to reimburse up to $1,215,000 of
Vanguard’s out-of-pocket expenses and pay a termination fee to Vanguard of $7,288,000.
Under the merger agreement, LRE is restricted from entering into alternative transactions. Unless and until the merger agreement is
terminated, subject to specified exceptions (which are discussed in more detail in “The Merger Agreement — No Solicitation by LRE of
Alternative Proposals”), LRE is restricted from initiating, soliciting, knowingly encouraging or knowingly facilitating any inquiry, proposal or
offer for a competing acquisition proposal with any person. Under the merger agreement, in the event of a potential change by the board of
directors of LRE GP of its recommendation with respect to the proposed merger in light of a superior proposal, LRE must provide
Vanguard with three business days’ notice to allow Vanguard to propose an adjustment to the terms and conditions of the merger
agreement. These provisions could discourage a third party that may have an interest in acquiring all or a significant part of LRE from
considering or proposing that acquisition, even if such third party were prepared to pay consideration with a higher per unit market value
than the merger consideration, or might result in a potential competing acquirer of LRE proposing to pay a lower price than it would
otherwise have proposed to pay because of the added expense of the termination fee that may become payable in specified
circumstances.
If the merger agreement is terminated under specified circumstances, LRE will be required to pay all of the reasonably documented out-of-
pocket expenses incurred by Vanguard and its affiliates in connection with the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated
thereby, up to a maximum amount of $1,215,000. In addition, if the merger agreement is terminated by Vanguard due to a partnership
change in recommendation having occurred, by LRE in order to enter into a superior proposal or by either party after an alternative
proposal was received by LRE and LRE enters into an definitive agreement with respect to such alternative proposal within 12 months
after the date of the merger agreement, LRE will be required to pay Vanguard a termination fee of $7,288,000. Following payment of the
termination fee, LRE will not be obligated to pay any additional expenses incurred by Vanguard or its affiliates. Please read “The Merger
Agreement —  Termination Fee” and “The Merger Agreement — Expenses.” If such a termination fee is payable, the payment of this fee
could have material and adverse consequences to the financial condition and operations of LRE. For a discussion of the restrictions on
LRE soliciting or entering into a takeover proposal or alternative transaction and the board of directors of LRE GP’s ability to change its
recommendation, see “The Merger Agreement — No Solicitation by LRE of Alternative Proposals” and “The Merger
Agreement — Change in LRE GP Board Recommendation.”
45
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Directors and executive officers of LRE GP have certain interests that are different from those of LRE
unitholders generally.
Directors and executive officers of LRE GP have interests in the merger that may be different from, or be in addition to, your interests as a
unitholder of LRE. You should consider these interests in voting on the merger. These different interests are described under “Proposal 1:
The Merger — Interests of Directors and Executive Officers of LRE GP in the Merger.”
Vanguard may have difficulty attracting, motivating and retaining executives and other employees in light
of the merger.
The success of the combined organization after the merger will depend in part upon the ability of Vanguard to retain its key employees.
Key employees may depart either before or after the merger because of issues relating to the uncertainty and difficulty of integration or a
desire not to remain following the merger. Accordingly, no assurance can be given that the combined organization will be able to retain
key Vanguard employees to the same extent as in the past.
The unaudited pro forma financial statements included in this document are presented for illustrative
purposes only and may not be an indication of the combined entity’s financial condition or results of
operations following the merger, and, if completed, the Eagle Rock merger.
The unaudited pro forma financial statements contained in this document are presented for illustrative purposes only, are based on
various adjustments, assumptions and preliminary estimates, and may not be an indication of the combined entity’s financial condition or
results of operations following the merger, and, if completed, the Eagle Rock merger, for several reasons. The actual financial condition
and results of operations of the combined entity following the merger, and, if completed, the Eagle Rock merger, may not be consistent
with, or evident from, these pro forma financial statements. In addition, the assumptions used in preparing the pro forma financial
information may not prove to be accurate, and other factors may affect the combined entity’s financial condition or results of operations
following the merger, and, if completed, the Eagle Rock merger. Any potential decline in the combined entity’s financial condition or
results of operations may cause significant variations in the price of Vanguard common units after completion of the merger, and, if
completed, the Eagle Rock merger. See “Selected Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial Information.”
Lawsuits have been filed challenging the merger and additional lawsuits may be filed in the future. Any
injunctive relief, rescission, damages, or other adverse judgment could prevent the merger from occurring
or could have a material adverse effect on LRE, Vanguard or Merger Sub.
Alleged LRE unitholders have filed lawsuits challenging the merger against LRE, LRE GP, the members of the board of directors of LRE
GP, Vanguard, Merger Sub and the other parties to the merger agreement. Although each of these lawsuits has been dismissed or
nonsuited, additional lawsuits challenging the merger may be filed in the future. For more information on these lawsuits, see “The
Merger — Litigation Relating to the Merger.”
One of the conditions to the completion of the merger is that no order, decree or injunction of any court or agency of competent jurisdiction
shall be in effect, and no law shall have been enacted or adopted, that enjoins, prohibits or makes illegal consummation of any of the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement. A preliminary injunction could delay or jeopardize the completion of the merger, and
an adverse judgment granting permanent injunctive relief could indefinitely enjoin completion of the merger. An adverse judgment for
rescission or for monetary damages could have a material adverse effect on LRE, Vanguard or Merger Sub.
Vanguard and LRE are subject to business uncertainties and contractual restrictions while the proposed
merger is pending, and, with respect to Vanguard, while the Eagle Rock merger is pending, which could
adversely affect each party’s business and operations.
In connection with the pending merger, it is possible that some customers, suppliers and other persons with whom Vanguard or LRE have
business relationships may delay or defer certain business decisions or, might decide to seek to terminate, change or renegotiate their
relationship with Vanguard or LRE as a result
46
TABLE OF CONTENTS
of the merger, which could negatively affect Vanguard’s and LRE’s respective revenues, earnings and cash available for distribution, as
well as the market price of Vanguard common units and LRE common units, regardless of whether the merger is completed.
Under the terms of the merger agreement, each of Vanguard and LRE is subject to certain restrictions on the conduct of its business prior
to completing the merger, and under the terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, Vanguard is subject to restrictions on the conduct of
its business prior to completing the Eagle Rock merger, which may adversely affect its ability to execute certain of its business strategies.
Such limitations could negatively affect each party’s businesses and operations prior to the completion of the merger or the Eagle Rock
merger. Furthermore, the process of planning to integrate three businesses and organizations for the post-merger and post-Eagle Rock
merger period can divert management attention and resources and could ultimately have an adverse effect on each party. For a
discussion of these restrictions, see “The Merger Agreement — Conduct of Business Pending the Consummation of the Transactions
Contemplated by the Merger Agreement.”
Vanguard and LRE will incur substantial transaction-related costs in connection with the merger.
Vanguard and LRE expect to incur substantial expenses in connection with completing the merger and integrating the business,
operations, networks, systems, technologies, policies and procedures of Vanguard and LRE. These expenses include, but are not limited
to, fees paid to legal, financial and accounting advisors, filing fees and printing costs. There are a large number of systems that must be
integrated, including billing, management information, purchasing, accounting and finance, sales, payroll and benefits, fixed assets, lease
administration and regulatory compliance, and there are a number of factors beyond Vanguard’s and LRE’s control that could affect the
total amount or the timing of integration expenses. Many of the expenses that will be incurred, by their nature, are difficult to estimate
accurately at the present time. Due to these factors, the transaction and integration expenses associated with the merger could,
particularly in the near term, exceed the savings that the combined organization expects to achieve from the elimination of duplicative
expenses and the realization of economies of scale and cost savings related to the integration of two businesses following the completion
of the merger.
Failure to successfully combine the businesses of LRE and Vanguard in the expected time frame may
adversely affect the future results of the combined organization, and, consequently, the value of the
Vanguard common units that LRE unitholders receive as part of the merger consideration.
The success of the proposed merger will depend, in part, on the ability of Vanguard to realize the anticipated benefits and synergies from
combining the businesses of Vanguard and LRE. To realize these anticipated benefits, the businesses must be successfully combined. If
the combined organization is not able to achieve these objectives, or is not able to achieve these objectives on a timely basis, the
anticipated benefits of the merger may not be realized fully or at all. In addition, the actual integration may result in additional and
unforeseen expenses, which could reduce the anticipated benefits of the merger. These integration difficulties could result in declines in
the market value of Vanguard’s common units and, consequently, result in declines in the market value of the Vanguard common units
that LRE unitholders receive as part of the merger consideration.
The merger is subject to conditions, including certain conditions that may not be satisfied on a timely
basis, if at all. Failure to complete the merger, or significant delays in completing the merger, could
negatively affect the trading prices of Vanguard common units and LRE common units and the future
business and financial results of Vanguard and LRE.
The completion of the merger is subject to a number of conditions. The completion of the merger is not assured and is subject to risks,
including the risk that approval of the merger by the LRE unitholders is not obtained or that other closing conditions are not satisfied. If the
merger is not completed, or if there are significant delays in completing the merger, the trading prices of Vanguard common units and LRE
common units and the respective future business and financial results of Vanguard and LRE could be negatively affected, and each of
them will be subject to several risks, including the following:
•the parties may be liable for damages to one another under the terms and conditions of the merger agreement;
47
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
•
negative reactions from the financial markets, including declines in the price of Vanguard common units or LRE common units due to the
fact that current prices may reflect a market assumption that the merger will be completed;
having to pay certain significant costs relating to the merger, including, in the case of LRE in certain circumstances, the termination fee of
$7,288,000, and in the case of both LRE and Vanguard, the obligation to reimburse the other party of up to $1,215,000 if the merger
agreement is terminated in specified circumstances, as described in “The Merger Agreement — Termination Fee” and “The Merger
Agreement — Expenses”; and
the attention of management of Vanguard and LRE will have been diverted to the merger rather than each organization’s own operations
and pursuit of other opportunities that could have been beneficial to that organization.
If the merger is approved by LRE unitholders, the date that those unitholders will receive the merger
consideration is uncertain.
As described in this proxy statement/prospectus, completing the proposed merger is subject to several conditions, not all of which are
controllable or waiveable by Vanguard or LRE. Accordingly, if the proposed merger is approved by LRE unitholders, the date that those
unitholders will receive the merger consideration depends on the completion date of the merger, which is uncertain.
LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s financial estimates are based on various assumptions that may not
prove to be correct.
The financial estimates set forth in the forecast included under “Proposal 1: The Merger — Unaudited Prospective Financial and
Operating Information of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock” are based on assumptions of, and information available to, LRE, Vanguard and
Eagle Rock, respectively, at the time they were prepared and provided to the board of directors of LRE GP and LRE’s financial advisors.
LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock do not know whether such assumptions will prove correct. Any or all of such estimates may turn out to be
wrong. Such estimates can be adversely affected by inaccurate assumptions or by known or unknown risks and uncertainties, many of
which are beyond LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s control. Many factors mentioned in this proxy statement/prospectus, including the
risks outlined in this “Risk Factors” section and the events or circumstances described under “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-
Looking Statements,” will be important in determining LRE’s, Vanguard’s and/or Eagle Rock’s future results. As a result of these
contingencies, actual future results may vary materially from LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s estimates. In view of these
uncertainties, the inclusion of LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s financial estimates in this proxy statement/prospectus is not and
should not be viewed as a representation that the forecasted results will be achieved.
LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s financial estimates were not prepared with a view toward public disclosure, and LRE’s and
Vanguard’s financial estimates were not prepared with a view toward compliance with published guidelines of any regulatory or
professional body. Further, any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and LRE, Vanguard and Eagle
Rock undertake no obligation, other than as required by applicable law, to update their financial estimates herein to reflect events or
circumstances after the date those financial estimates were prepared or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events or
circumstances.
The financial estimates included in this proxy statement/prospectus have been prepared by, and are the responsibility of, LRE, Vanguard
and/or Eagle Rock’s. Moreover, the prospective financial information included in this proxy statement/prospectus has been prepared by,
and is the responsibility of, LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s management. None of Vanguard’s independent registered public
accounting firm, LRE’s independent registered public accounting firm, Eagle Rock’s independent registered public accounting firm or any
other independent accountants, has compiled, examined or performed any procedures with respect to the unaudited prospective financial
and operating information contained herein, accordingly they have not expressed any opinion or any other form of assurance on such
information. The report of the independent registered public accounting firm of LRE in its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2014, relates to LRE’s historical financial information, and the report of the independent
48
TABLE OF CONTENTS
registered public accounting firm of Vanguard in its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, relates to
Vanguard’s historical financial information and the report of the independent registered public accounting firm of Eagle Rock in its Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, relates to Eagle Rock’s historical financial information. These reports do not
extend to the unaudited prospective financial and operating information and should not be read to do so. See “Proposal 1: The
Merger — Unaudited Prospective Financial and Operating Information of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock” for more information.
The number of outstanding Vanguard common units will increase as a result of the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement, and, if completed, the Eagle Rock merger agreement, which
could make it more difficult to pay distributions.
As of July 31, 2015, there were approximately 86.60 million Vanguard common units outstanding. Vanguard will issue approximately
15.44 million common units to former LRE unitholders (which does not include the 12,320 Vanguard common units to be issued to the
former members of LRE GP) pursuant to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, and, if the Eagle Rock merger is
completed, will issue approximately 28.75 million common units to former Eagle Rock unitholders. Accordingly, the aggregate dollar
amount required to pay the current per unit distribution on all Vanguard common units will increase, which could increase the likelihood
that Vanguard will not have sufficient funds to pay the current level of monthly distributions to all Vanguard unitholders.
If the transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement are consummated, based on this distribution amount on
approximately 130.80 million Vanguard common units (including the 12,320 Vanguard common units issued to members of LRE GP), the
combined pro forma Vanguard monthly distribution with respect to the month ended June 30, 2015, had the merger and the Eagle Rock
merger been completed prior to the record date for such distribution, would have totalled approximately $15.37 million, which is an
additional $5.19 million compared to the historical distribution amount for the month ended June 30, 2015. If, however, the transactions
contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement are not consummated, based on this distribution amount on approximately 102.06
million Vanguard common units (including the 12,320 Vanguard common units issued to members of LRE GP), the combined pro forma
Vanguard monthly distribution with respect to the month ended June 30, 2015, had the merger been completed prior to the record date for
such distribution, would have totalled approximately $11.99 million, which is an additional $1.82 million compared to the historical
distribution amount for the month ended June 30, 2015.
LRE unitholders will have a reduced percentage ownership of the combined entity after the merger, and, if
completed, the Eagle Rock merger, and will exercise less influence over management.
When the merger occurs, each LRE unitholder that receives Vanguard common units will become a unitholder of Vanguard with a
percentage ownership of the combined organization that is much smaller than such unitholder’s percentage ownership of LRE. If the
Eagle Rock merger is completed, such ownership percentage of the combined organization will decline further.
Vanguard common units to be received by LRE unitholders as a result of the merger have different rights
from LRE common units.
Following completion of the merger, LRE unitholders will no longer hold LRE common units, but will instead be unitholders of Vanguard.
There are important differences between the rights of LRE unitholders and the rights of Vanguard unitholders. See “Comparison of Rights
of Vanguard Common Unitholders and LRE Unitholders” for a discussion of the different rights associated with LRE common units and
Vanguard common units.
No ruling has been obtained with respect to the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger.
No ruling has been or will be requested from the IRS with respect to the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger. Instead,
Vanguard and LRE are relying on the opinions of their respective counsel as to the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger,
and counsel’s conclusions may not be sustained if challenged by the IRS. Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences
of the Merger.”
49
The expected U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger are dependent upon Vanguard and
LRE being treated as partnerships for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The treatment of the merger as nontaxable to holders of LRE common units is dependent upon Vanguard and LRE each being treated as
a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. If Vanguard or LRE were treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax
purposes, the consequences of the merger would be materially different and the merger would likely be a fully taxable transaction to a
holder of LRE common units.
LRE unitholders could recognize taxable income or gain for U.S. federal income tax purposes, in certain
circumstances, as a result of the merger.
For U.S. federal income tax purposes, LRE will be deemed to contribute all of its assets to Vanguard in exchange for Vanguard common
units, the assumption of LRE’s liabilities and cash in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units, followed by a liquidation of LRE in which
Vanguard common units and cash are distributed to LRE unitholders. The actual receipt of cash and the deemed receipt of cash by LRE
in the merger could trigger gain to LRE either because it would be treated as part of a sale or because it exceeds LRE’s adjusted tax basis
in its assets at the closing of the merger, and any such gain would be allocated to the LRE unitholders pursuant to the LRE partnership
agreement. The actual receipt of cash and the deemed receipt of cash by LRE will qualify for one or more exceptions to sale treatment
and LRE does not currently expect that it will recognize gain as a result of the deemed receipt of cash in the merger exceeding its
adjusted tax basis in its assets. Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger — Tax Consequences of the
Merger to LRE.” In addition, as a result of the merger, holders of LRE common units who receive Vanguard common units will become
limited partners of Vanguard for U.S. federal income tax purposes and will be allocated a share of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities.
Each such LRE unitholder will be treated as receiving a deemed cash distribution equal to the excess, if any, of such LRE unitholder’s
share of nonrecourse liabilities of LRE immediately before the merger over such LRE unitholder’s share of nonrecourse liabilities of
Vanguard immediately following the merger. If the amount of cash actually received in the merger plus any deemed cash distribution
received by such LRE unitholder exceeds the LRE unitholder’s basis in his LRE units, such LRE unitholder will recognize gain in an
amount equal to such excess. While there can be no assurance, Vanguard and LRE expect that most holders of LRE common units will
not recognize gain in this manner. The amount and effect of any gain that may be recognized by holders of LRE common units will
depend on such unitholder’s particular situation, including the ability of such unitholder to utilize any suspended passive losses. For
additional information, please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger — Tax Consequences of the Merger
to LRE Common Unitholders.”
A holder of LRE common units may have a holding period for Vanguard common units received in the
merger that is shorter than such holder’s holding period in the surrendered LRE common units.
As a result of the merger, LRE will be deemed to contribute its assets to Vanguard in exchange for Vanguard common units, the
assumption of LRE’s liabilities, and cash in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units followed by a liquidation of LRE in which Vanguard
common units and cash are distributed to holders of LRE common units. Such unitholders’ holding period in the Vanguard common units
received in the merger will not be determined by reference to their holding period in the surrendered LRE common units. Instead, such
unitholders’ holding period in the Vanguard common units received in the merger that are attributable to LRE’s capital assets or assets
used in its business as defined in Section 1231 of the Code will include LRE’s holding period in those assets. The holding period for
Vanguard common units received by a holder of LRE common units attributable to other assets of LRE, such as inventory and
receivables, will begin on the day following the merger.
50
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard may not be able to complete the pending Eagle Rock merger, which could adversely affect its
business.
Completion of the Eagle Rock merger is subject to, among other things, the approval of Eagle Rock unitholders of the Eagle Rock merger
agreement, the Vanguard unitholders’ approval of the issuance of Vanguard common units to Eagle Rock’s unitholders pursuant to the
Eagle Rock merger agreement and other customary closing conditions. It is possible that Eagle Rock unitholder approval or Vanguard
unitholder approval may not be received in a timely manner or at all, or that one or more other closing conditions may not be satisfied or, if
not satisfied, that such conditions may not be waived in accordance with the terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement. The Eagle Rock
merger is a transaction separate and apart from the merger and the completion of the Eagle Rock merger is not a condition to the
completion of the merger, and the completion of the merger is not a condition to the completion of the Eagle Rock merger. Therefore, it is
possible that the merger will be consummated but the Eagle Rock merger will not be consummated. If Vanguard is unable to complete the
Eagle Rock merger, Vanguard will not fully realize the anticipated benefits of the Eagle Rock merger.
Risk Factors Relating to the Ownership of Vanguard Common Units
The Vanguard limited liability company agreement limits Vanguard’s duties to its unitholders and restricts
the remedies available to unitholders for actions taken by Vanguard that might otherwise constitute
breaches of duty.
The Vanguard limited liability agreement contains provisions that reduce the standards to which Vanguard might otherwise be held by
state fiduciary duty law. For example, the Vanguard limited liability company agreement:
•
•
•
provides that the board of directors of Vanguard will not have breached any duty to Vanguard or Vanguard unitholders for decisions
made so long as such person acted in good faith, meaning it believed the determination or other action was in the best interests of
Vanguard;
provides generally that affiliated transactions and resolutions of conflicts of interest not approved by Vanguard’s conflicts committee or by
a vote of Vanguard unitholders must be on terms no less favorable to Vanguard than those generally being provided to or available from
unrelated third parties or be “fair and reasonable” to Vanguard and that, in determining whether a transaction or resolution is “fair and
reasonable,” the totality of the relationships between the parties involved may be considered, including other transactions that may be
particularly advantageous or beneficial to Vanguard; and
provides that the officers and directors of Vanguard will not be liable for monetary damages to Vanguard or its unitholders for any acts or
omissions unless there has been a final and non-appealable judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction determining that such
persons acted in bad faith or engaged in fraud, willful misconduct or, in the case of a criminal matter, acted with knowledge that the
conduct was criminal.
Any Vanguard unitholder is bound by the provisions in the Vanguard liability company agreement, including those discussed above.
The Vanguard limited liability company agreement restricts the voting rights of those unitholders owning
20% or more of Vanguard’s common units.
Vanguard unitholders’ voting rights are restricted by the Vanguard limited liability company agreement provision providing that any units
held by a person that owns 20% or more of any class of units then outstanding, other than its founding unitholder and his affiliates or
transferees and persons who acquire such units with the prior approval of the board of directors of Vanguard, cannot vote on any matter.
The Vanguard limited liability company agreement also contains provisions limiting the ability of Vanguard unitholders to call meetings or
to acquire information about its operations, as well as other provisions limiting Vanguard unitholders’ ability to influence the manner or
direction of Vanguard’s management.
51
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard may issue an unlimited number of additional units without common unitholder approval, which
would dilute the ownership interest of existing unitholders.
Vanguard may, without the approval of Vanguard common unitholders, issue an unlimited number of additional limited liability company
interests at any time, including common units, without the approval of Vanguard common unitholders. The issuance by Vanguard of
additional units or other equity securities may have the following effects:
• Vanguard unitholders’ proportionate ownership interest in Vanguard will may decrease;
• the amount of cash available for distribution on each unit may decrease;
• the relative voting strength of each previously outstanding unit may be diminished; and
• the market price of Vanguard common units may decline.
The Vanguard limited liability company agreement provides for a limited call right that may require
unitholders to sell their units at an undesirable time or price.
If, at any time, any person owns more than 90% of any class of the Vanguard units then outstanding, such person has the right, but not the
obligation, which it may assign to any of its affiliates or to Vanguard, to acquire all, but not less than all, of the remaining Vanguard units of
such class then outstanding at a price not less than the then-current market price of the units. As a result, unitholders may be required to
sell their Vanguard common units at an undesirable time or price and therefore may receive a lower or no return on their investment.
Vanguard unitholders may also incur a tax liability upon a sale of their units.
Vanguard does not have the same flexibility as other types of organizations to accumulate cash and
equity to protect against illiquidity in the future.
Unlike a corporation, the Vanguard limited liability company agreement requires Vanguard to make quarterly distributions to its
unitholders of all available cash, reduced by any amounts of reserves for commitments and contingencies, including capital and operating
costs and debt service requirements. Vanguard pays distributions on a monthly basis. The value of Vanguard’s units, including common
units, may decrease in direct correlation with decreases in the amount Vanguard distribute per unit. Accordingly, if Vanguard experiences
a liquidity problem in the future, it may have difficulty issuing more equity to recapitalize.
Vanguard’s management may have conflicts of interest with its unitholders. The Vanguard limited liability
company agreement limits the remedies available to its unitholders in the event its unitholders have a
claim relating to conflicts of interest.
Conflicts of interest may arise between Vanguard’s management, on the one hand, and Vanguard and its unitholders, on the other hand,
related to the divergent interests of Vanguard’s management. Situations in which the interests of Vanguard’s management may differ from
interests of its non-affiliated unitholders include, among others, the following situations:
the Vanguard limited liability company agreement gives its board of directors broad discretion in establishing cash reserves for the proper
conduct of its business, which will affect the amount of cash available for distribution. For example, Vanguard’s management will use its
reasonable discretion to establish and maintain cash reserves sufficient to fund its drilling program;
Vanguard’s management team, subject to oversight from its board of directors, determines the timing and extent of its drilling program
and related capital expenditures, asset purchases and sales, borrowings, issuances of additional units and reserve adjustments, all of
which will affect the amount of cash that Vanguard distributes to its unitholders; and
affiliates of Vanguard’s directors are not prohibited under its limited liability company agreement from investing or engaging in other
businesses or activities that compete with Vanguard.
•
•
•
52
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The price of Vanguard’s common and cumulative preferred units could be subject to wide fluctuations
and unitholders could lose a significant part of their investment.
During the first six months of 2015, the quoted market prices of Vanguard’s common and cumulative preferred units fluctuated as follows:
Common unit (VNR)
Series A Preferred unit (VNRAP)
Series B Preferred unit (VNRBP)
Series C Preferred unit (VNRCP)
Closing
 
High
Closing
 
Low
 $12.50   $18.72  
 $21.85   $25.10  
 $19.43   $23.68  
 $19.75   $24.20
The market prices of Vanguard’s common and cumulative preferred units are subject to fluctuations in response to a number of factors,
most of which Vanguard cannot control, including:
•
•
fluctuations in broader securities market prices and volumes, particularly among securities of oil and natural gas companies and
securities of publicly traded limited partnerships and limited liability companies;
changes in general conditions in the U.S. economy, financial markets or the oil and natural gas industry, including fluctuations in
commodity prices;
•changes in securities analysts’ recommendations and their estimates of Vanguard’s financial performance;
•the public’s reaction to Vanguard’s press releases, announcements and Vanguard’s filings with the SEC;
• changes in market valuations of similar companies;
•
• commencement of or involvement in litigation;
•variations in Vanguard’s quarterly results of operations or those of other oil and natural gas companies;
• variations in the amount of Vanguard’s monthly cash distributions; and
•
future issuances and sales of Vanguard’s units.
departures of key personnel;
In recent years, the securities market has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations. This volatility has had a significant effect on
the market price of securities issued by many companies for reasons unrelated to the operating performance of these companies. Future
market fluctuations may result in a lower price of Vanguard’s common units.
Vanguard Unitholders may have liability to repay distributions.
Under certain circumstances, Vanguard unitholders may have to repay amounts wrongfully returned or distributed to them. Under Section
18-607 of the Delaware Limited Liability Company Act, Vanguard may not make a distribution to unitholders if the distribution would cause
Vanguard’s liabilities to exceed the fair value of its assets. Delaware law provides that for a period of three years from the date of an
impermissible distribution, members or unitholders who received the distribution and who knew at the time of the distribution that it
violated Delaware law will be liable to the limited liability company for the distribution amount. A purchaser of Vanguard common units
who becomes a member or unitholder is liable for the obligations of the transferring member to make contributions to the limited liability
company that are known to such purchaser of units at the time it became a member and for unknown obligations if the liabilities could be
determined from the Vanguard limited liability company agreement.
53
TABLE OF CONTENTS
An increase in interest rates may cause the market price of Vanguard’s common units to decline.
Like all equity investments, an investment in Vanguard’s common units is subject to certain risks. In exchange for accepting these risks,
investors may expect to receive a higher rate of return than would otherwise be obtainable from lower-risk investments. Accordingly, as
interest rates rise, the ability of investors to obtain higher risk-adjusted rates of return by purchasing government-backed debt securities
may cause a corresponding decline in demand for riskier investments generally, including yield-based equity investments such as
publicly traded limited liability company interests. Reduced demand for Vanguard’s units resulting from investors seeking other more
favorable investment opportunities may cause the trading price of Vanguard’s common units to decline.
Vanguard’s tax treatment depends on its status as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, as well
as it not being subject to a material amount of entity-level taxation by individual states or local entities. If
the IRS were to treat Vanguard as a corporation or if Vanguard were to become subject to a material
amount of entity-level taxation for state or local tax purposes, it would substantially reduce the amount of
cash available for payment for distributions on Vanguard’s common units.
The anticipated after-tax economic benefit of an investment in Vanguard’s common units depends largely on Vanguard being treated as a
partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. A publicly traded partnership such as Vanguard may be treated as a corporation for U.S.
federal income tax purposes unless it satisfies a “qualifying income” requirement. Based on its current operations Vanguard believes that
it satisfies the qualifying income requirement, will satisfy the qualifying income requirement following the merger and will therefore be
treated as a partnership. Failing to meet the qualifying income requirement or a change in current law could cause Vanguard to be treated
as a corporation for federal income tax purposes or otherwise subject Vanguard to taxation as an entity. Vanguard has not requested, and
does not plan to request, a ruling from the IRS with respect to its treatment as a partnership for federal income tax purposes.
If Vanguard were treated as a corporation for federal income tax purposes, it would pay federal income tax on its taxable income at the
corporate tax rate, which is currently a maximum of 35% and would likely pay state income tax at varying rates. Distributions to
Vanguard’s common unitholders would generally be taxed again as corporate distributions and no income, gains, losses, or deductions
would flow through to unitholders. Because a tax would be imposed on Vanguard as a corporation, its cash available for distribution to its
unitholders would be substantially reduced. Therefore, treatment of Vanguard as a corporation would result in a material reduction in the
anticipated cash flow and after-tax return to its unitholders likely causing a substantial reduction in the value of its units.
At the state level, because of widespread state budget deficits and other reasons, several states are evaluating ways to subject
partnerships to entity-level taxation through the imposition of state income, franchise and other forms of taxation. Imposition of any such
tax on Vanguard by any such state will reduce the cash available for distribution to its unitholders.
The tax treatment of publicly traded partnerships or an investment in Vanguard’s common units could be
subject to potential legislative, judicial or administrative changes or differing interpretations, possibly
applied on a retroactive basis.
The present U.S. federal income tax treatment of publicly traded partnerships, including Vanguard, or an investment in Vanguard’s
common units may be modified by administrative, legislative or judicial changes or differing interpretations at any time. For example, the
Obama Administration’s budget proposal for fiscal year 2016 recommends that publicly traded partnerships earning income from activities
related to fossil fuels be taxed as corporations beginning in 2021. From time to time, members of Congress propose and consider
substantive changes to the existing U.S. federal income tax laws that affect publicly traded partnerships. One such legislative proposal
would eliminate the qualifying income exception to the treatment of all publicly traded partnerships as corporations upon which Vanguard
relies for its treatment as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Vanguard is unable to predict whether any of these changes
or other proposals will be reintroduced or will ultimately be enacted. Any such changes could negatively impact the value of an investment
in Vanguard’s common units. Any modification to the U.S. federal income tax laws may be applied retroactively and could make it more
difficult or impossible to meet the exception for certain publicly traded partnerships to be treated as partnerships for U.S. federal income
tax purposes.
54
TABLE OF CONTENTS
If the IRS contests the federal income tax positions Vanguard takes, the market for Vanguard’s common
units may be adversely impacted, and the cost of any IRS contest will reduce Vanguard’s cash available
for distribution.
Vanguard has not requested a ruling from the IRS with respect to its treatment as a partnership for federal income tax purposes. The IRS
may adopt positions that differ from the positions it takes. It may be necessary to resort to administrative or court proceedings to sustain
some or all of the positions Vanguard takes. A court may not agree with some or all of the positions it takes. Any contest with the IRS may
materially and adversely impact the market for Vanguard’s common units and the price at which they trade. In addition, the costs of any
contest with the IRS will be borne indirectly by Vanguard’s unitholders because the costs will reduce its cash available for distribution.
Vanguard unitholders may be required to pay taxes on their share of income even if they do not receive
any cash distributions from Vanguard.
Because Vanguard’s unitholders will be treated as partners to whom Vanguard will allocate taxable income that could be different in
amount than the cash Vanguard distributes, they will be required to pay any federal income taxes and, in some cases, state and local
income taxes on their share of Vanguard’s taxable income even if they receive no cash distributions from Vanguard. Vanguard’s
unitholders may not receive cash distributions from Vanguard equal to their share of Vanguard’s taxable income or even equal to the tax
liability that results from that income.
Tax gain or loss on the disposition of Vanguard common units could be more or less than expected.
If a unitholder sells his Vanguard common units, he will recognize gain or loss equal to the difference between the amount realized and
his tax basis in those common units. Prior distributions to a Vanguard unitholder in excess of the total net taxable income he was
allocated for a Vanguard common unit, which decreased his tax basis in that common unit, will, in effect, become taxable income to him to
the extent the common unit is sold at a price greater than his tax basis in that common unit, even if the price is less than his original cost. A
substantial portion of the amount realized, whether or not representing gain, may be ordinary income. In addition, because the amount
realized includes a unitholder’s share of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities, if a unitholder sells his Vanguard common units, he may incur
a tax liability in excess of the amount of cash he receives from the sale.
Tax-exempt entities and non-U.S. persons face unique tax issues from owning Vanguard common units
that may result in adverse tax consequences to them.
Investment in Vanguard common units by tax-exempt entities, such as individual retirement accounts (“IRAs”), other retirement plans and
non-U.S. persons raises issues unique to them. For example, virtually all of Vanguard’s income allocated to organizations that are exempt
from federal income tax, including IRAs and other retirement plans, will be unrelated business taxable income and will be taxable to them.
Distributions to non-U.S. persons will be reduced by withholding taxes at the highest applicable effective tax rate, and non-U.S. persons
will be required to file United States federal tax returns and pay tax on their share of Vanguard’s taxable income. If a Vanguard unitholder
is a tax-exempt entity or a non-U.S. person, he should consult his tax advisor before investing in Vanguard common units.
Vanguard will treat each purchaser of Vanguard common units as having the same tax benefits without
regard to the actual common units purchased. The IRS may challenge this treatment, which could
adversely affect the value of the common units.
Due to a number of factors, including its inability to match transferors and transferees of its common units, Vanguard will adopt
depreciation and amortization positions that may not conform to all aspects of existing Treasury Regulations. A successful IRS challenge
to those positions could adversely affect the amount of tax benefits available to its unitholders. It also could affect the timing of these tax
benefits or the amount of gain from the sale of Vanguard’s common units and could have a negative impact on the value of Vanguard’s
common units or result in audit adjustments to a unitholders’ tax returns.
55
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard prorates its items of income, gain, loss and deduction between transferors and transferees of
its units each month based upon the ownership of its units on the first day of each month, instead of on
the basis of the date a particular unit is transferred. The IRS may challenge this treatment, which could
change the allocation of items of income, gain, loss and deduction among Vanguard’s unitholders.
Vanguard prorates its items of income, gain, loss and deduction between transferors and transferees of its units each month based upon
the ownership of its units on the first day of each month, instead of on the basis of the date a particular unit is transferred. The use of this
proration method may not be permitted under existing Treasury Regulations. Recently, the U.S. Treasury Department issued proposed
Treasury Regulations that provide a safe harbor pursuant to which a publicly traded partnership may use a similar monthly simplifying
convention to allocate tax items among transferor and transferee unitholders. The proposed regulations do not, however, specifically
authorize the use of the proration method Vanguard has adopted. If the IRS were to challenge its proration method or new Treasury
Regulations were issued, Vanguard may be required to change the allocation of items of income, gain, loss and deduction among
unitholders.
A Vanguard unitholder whose units are the subject of a securities loan (e.g., a loan to a “short seller” to
cover a short sale of units) may be considered to have disposed of those units. If so, he would no longer
be treated for tax purposes as a partner with respect to those units during the period of the loan and may
recognize gain or loss from the disposition.
Because there are no specific rules governing the federal income tax consequences of loaning a partnership interest, a unitholder whose
units are the subject of a securities loan may be considered to have disposed of the loaned units. In that case, he may no longer be
treated for tax purposes as a partner with respect to those units during the period of the loan and the unitholder may recognize gain or loss
from such disposition. Moreover, during the period of the loan, any of Vanguard’s income, gain, loss or deduction with respect to those
units may not be reportable by the unitholder and any cash distributions received by the unitholder as to those units could be fully taxable
as ordinary income. Unitholders desiring to assure their status as partners and avoid the risk of gain recognition from a loan of their units
are urged to modify any applicable brokerage account agreements to prohibit their brokers from borrowing their units.
The sale or exchange of 50% or more of Vanguard’s capital and profits interests during any twelve-month
period will result in the termination of Vanguard for federal income tax purposes.
Vanguard will be considered to have constructively terminated its partnership for federal income tax purposes if there is a sale or
exchange of 50% or more of the total interests in its capital and profits within a twelve-month period. For purposes of determining whether
the 50% threshold has been met, multiple sales of the same interest are counted only once. Vanguard’s termination would, among other
things, result in the closing of its taxable year for all unitholders, which would result in Vanguard filing two tax returns (and its unitholders
receiving two Schedule K-1s) for one calendar year and could result in a deferral of depreciation deductions allowable in computing its
taxable income. In the case of a unitholder reporting on a taxable year other than a calendar year, the closing of Vanguard’s taxable year
may also result in more than twelve months of its taxable income or loss being includable in such unitholder’s taxable income for the year
of termination. Vanguard’s termination currently would not affect its classification as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, but
instead, it would be treated as a new partnership for federal income tax purposes. If treated as a new partnership, Vanguard must make
new tax elections and could be subject to penalties if it is unable to determine in a timely manner that a termination occurred. The IRS has
announced a relief procedure whereby if a publicly traded partnership that has technically terminated requests and the IRS grants special
relief, the partnership may be permitted to provide only a single Schedule K-1 to its unitholders for the tax year in which the termination
occurs.
Vanguard unitholders may be subject to state and local taxes and return filing requirements in
jurisdictions where they do not live as a result of investing in Vanguard common units.
In addition to federal income taxes, Vanguard unitholders may be subject to return filing requirements and other taxes, including state and
local taxes, unincorporated business taxes and estate, inheritance or intangible taxes that are imposed by the various jurisdictions in
which Vanguard conducts business or owns property now or in the future, even if you do not live in any of those jurisdictions. Further,
Vanguard
56
TABLE OF CONTENTS
unitholders may be subject to penalties for failure to comply with those return filing requirements. Vanguard currently conducts business
and owns assets in many states. Several of these states currently impose a personal income tax on individuals, and all of these states
impose an income tax on corporations and other entities. As Vanguard makes acquisitions or expands its business, it may conduct
business or own assets in additional states that impose a personal income tax. It is the responsibility of each unitholder to file all U.S.
federal, state and local tax returns.
57
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING
STATEMENTS
This proxy statement/prospectus and the documents incorporated herein by reference include “forward-looking statements” as defined by
the SEC. All statements other than historical facts, including, without limitation, statements regarding the expected benefits of the
proposed transaction to Vanguard and LRE and their respective unitholders, the anticipated completion of the proposed transaction or the
timing thereof, the expected future reserves, production, financial position, business strategy, revenues, earnings, costs, capital
expenditures and debt levels of the combined company, and plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-
looking statements. When used in this proxy statement/prospectus, words such as we “may,” “can,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “estimate,”
“anticipate,” “predict,” “project,” “foresee,” “believe,” “will” or “should,” “would,” “could,” or the negative thereof or variations thereon or
similar terminology are generally intended to identify forward-looking statements. It is uncertain whether the events anticipated will
transpire, or if they do occur what impact they will have on the results of operations and financial condition of Vanguard, LRE, Eagle Rock
or of the combined company. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to
differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, such statements. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to:
• the ability to obtain unitholder approval of the proposed transaction;
• the ability to complete the proposed transaction on anticipated terms and timetable;
•Vanguard’s, LRE’s and Eagle Rock’s ability to integrate successfully after the transaction and achieve anticipated benefits from the
proposed transaction;
• the possibility that various closing conditions for the transaction may not be satisfied or waived;
• risks relating to any unforeseen liabilities of Vanguard, LRE or Eagle Rock;
• declines in oil, NGLs or natural gas prices;
• the level of success in exploitation, development and production activities;
• adverse weather conditions that may negatively impact development or production activities;
• the timing of exploitation and development expenditures;
• inaccuracies of reserve estimates or assumptions underlying them;
• revisions to reserve estimates as a result of changes in commodity prices;
• impacts to financial statements as a result of impairment write-downs;
risks related to level of indebtedness and periodic redeterminations of the borrowing base under Vanguard’s, LRE’s and Eagle Rock’s
credit agreements;
•the ability of Vanguard, LRE and Eagle Rock to comply with covenants contained in the agreements governing their indebtedness;
•ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations to meet the internally funded portion of any capital expenditures budget;
• ability to obtain external capital to finance exploitation and development operations and acquisitions;
federal, state and local initiatives and efforts relating to the regulation of hydraulic fracturing; failure of properties to yield oil or gas in
commercially viable quantities;
• uninsured or underinsured losses resulting from oil and gas operations;
• inability to access oil and gas markets due to market conditions or operational impediments;
• the impact and costs of compliance with laws and regulations governing oil and gas operations;
• ability to replace oil and natural gas reserves;
• any loss of senior management or technical personnel;
•
•
58
TABLE OF CONTENTS
• competition in the oil and gas industry;
•
risks arising out of hedging transactions; and
•
other risks described under the caption “Risk Factors” in Vanguard’s and LRE’s respective Annual Reports on Form 10-K for the period
ended December 31, 2014.
Unless expressly stated otherwise, forward-looking statements are based on the expectations and beliefs of the respective managements
of Vanguard and LRE, based on information currently available, concerning future events affecting Vanguard and LRE. Although
Vanguard and LRE believe that these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, they are subject to uncertainties
and factors related to Vanguard’s and LRE’s operations and business environments, all of which are difficult to predict and many of which
are beyond Vanguard’s and LRE’s control. Any or all of the forward-looking statements in this proxy statement/prospectus may turn out to
be wrong. They can be affected by inaccurate assumptions or by known or unknown risks and uncertainties. The foregoing list of factors
should not be construed to be exhaustive. Many factors mentioned in this proxy statement/prospectus, including the risks outlined under
the caption “Risk Factors” contained in Vanguard’s or LRE’s Exchange Act reports incorporated herein by reference will be important in
determining future results, and actual future results may vary materially. There is no assurance that the actions, events or results of the
forward-looking statements will occur, or, if any of them do, when they will occur or what effect they will have on Vanguard’s or LRE’s
results of operations, financial condition, cash flows or distributions. In view of these uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place
undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of their dates. Except as required by law, neither Vanguard nor LRE
intends to update or revise its forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
59
TABLE OF CONTENTS
THE PARTIES
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC is a limited liability company formed in Delaware in 2006 with common units listed and traded on the
NASDAQ under the symbol “VNR.” Vanguard is an independent energy company focused on the acquisition, exploitation and
development of mature, long-lived oil and natural gas properties in the United States. Vanguard’s properties and oil and natural gas
reserves are located in nine operating basins:
•
•
the Green River Basin in Wyoming;
the Piceance Basin in Colorado;
the Gulf Coast Basin in Texas and Mississippi;
the Big Horn Basin in Wyoming and Montana;
the Arkoma Basin in Arkansas and Oklahoma;
• the Permian Basin in West Texas and New Mexico;
•
•
•
• the Williston Basin in North Dakota and Montana;
•
•
the Wind River Basin in Wyoming; and
the Powder River Basin in Wyoming.
As of December 31, 2014, Vanguard’s total estimated proved reserves were 2,031.3 Bcfe, of which approximately 15% were oil reserves,
73% were natural gas reserves and 12% were NGLs reserves. Of these reserves, 68% were classified as proved developed.
As of December 31, 2014, Vanguard owned working interests in 9,759 gross (3,664 net) productive wells, which accounted for
approximately 53% of Vanguard’s total estimated proved reserves at December 31, 2014. Vanguard’s average net daily production for the
year ended December 31, 2014 was 327,109 Mcfe/day.
In addition, as of December 31, 2014, Vanguard owned approximately 870,140 gross undeveloped leasehold acres surrounding its
existing wells. As of December 31, 2014, Vanguard had identified 1,254 proved undeveloped drilling locations and over 3,931 other
drilling locations on its leasehold acreage.
The address of Vanguard’s principal executive offices is 5847 San Felipe, Suite 3000, Houston, Texas 77057. Additional information
about Vanguard and its subsidiaries is included in the documents incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. See
“Where You Can Find More Information.”
LRR Energy, L.P.
LRR Energy, L.P. is a Delaware limited partnership formed in April 2011 by Lime Rock Management LP, an affiliate of Lime Rock
Resources A, L.P., Lime Rock Resources B, L.P. and Lime Rock Resources C, L.P., with common units listed and traded on the NYSE
under the symbol “LRE.” LRE is an independent energy company focused on the operation, acquisition, exploitation and development of
producing oil and natural gas properties in North America with long-lived, predictable production profiles. LRE’s properties consist of
mature, low-risk onshore oil and natural gas reservoirs with long-lived, predictable production profiles located across three diverse
producing regions:
• the Permian Basin region in West Texas and Southeast New Mexico;
• the Mid-Continent region in Oklahoma and East Texas; and
•
the Gulf Coast region in Texas.
60
TABLE OF CONTENTS
As of December 31, 2014, LRE’s total estimated proved reserves were 33.8 MMBoe, of which approximately 88% were proved developed
reserves (approximately 73% proved developed producing and approximately 15% proved developed non-producing). As of December
31, 2014, LRE operated 87% of its proved reserves. LRE’s proved reserves had a standardized measure of $441.7 million as of
December 31, 2014. For the year ended December 31, 2014, LRE’s average net production was 6,433 Boe/d.
The address of LRE’s principal executive offices is Heritage Plaza, 1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600, Houston, Texas 77002. Additional
information about LRE and its subsidiaries is included in the documents incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus.
See “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P.
Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P. is a Delaware limited partnership formed in May 2006, with common units listed and traded on the
NASDAQ under the symbol “EROC.” Eagle Rock is engaged in (a) the exploitation, development, and production of oil and natural gas
properties and (b) ancillary gathering, compressing, treating, processing and marketing services with respect to its production of natural
gas, natural gas liquids, condensate and crude oil. Eagle Rocks interests include long-lived, high working interest properties with
extensive production histories and development opportunities located in the following four regions of the United States:
• the Mid-Continent, which includes areas in Oklahoma, Arkansas and the Texas Panhandle;
• Alabama, which includes associated gathering and processing assets;
• Permian, which includes areas in West Texas; and
• East Texas, South Texas and Mississippi.
As of December 31, 2014, Eagle Rock’s working interest properties included 561 gross operated productive wells and 1,217 gross non-
operated wells with net production of approximately 73.5 MMcfe/d and proved reserves of approximately 169.1 Bcf of natural gas, 11.0
MMBbls of crude oil, and 13.8 MMBbls of natural gas liquids, of which 78.5% were proved developed. The reserve life index of Eagle
Rock’s properties is approximately 11.8 years based on Eagle Rock’s average daily production for the year ended 2014.
The address of Eagle Rock’s principal executive offices is 1415 Louisiana Street, Suite 2700, Houston, Texas 77002. Additional
information about Eagle Rock and its subsidiaries is included in the documents incorporated by reference into this proxy
statement/prospectus. See “Where You Can Find More Information.”
The Eagle Rock merger is a transaction separate and apart from the merger. The completion of the Eagle Rock merger is not a condition
to the completion of the merger, and the completion of the merger is not a condition to the completion of the Eagle Rock merger.
61
TABLE OF CONTENTS
THE LRE SPECIAL MEETING
LRE is providing this proxy statement/prospectus to its unitholders in connection with the solicitation of proxies to be voted at the special
meeting of unitholders that LRE has called for, among other things, the purpose of holding a vote upon a proposal to approve the merger
agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby and at any adjournment or postponement thereof. This proxy statement/prospectus
constitutes a prospectus for Vanguard in connection with the issuance by Vanguard of its common units in connection with the merger and
the purchase of the limited liability company interests in LRE GP. This proxy statement/prospectus is first being mailed to LRE’s
unitholders on or about           , 2015, and provides LRE unitholders with the information they need to know to be able to vote or instruct
their vote to be cast at the LRE special meeting.
Date, Time and Place
The special meeting will be held at 1111 Bagby Street, Houston, TX 77002 on September 10, 2015 at 10:00 a.m., local time.
Purpose
At the LRE special meeting, LRE unitholders will be asked to vote solely on the following proposals:
•Proposal 1:  to approve the merger agreement, as such agreement may be amended from time to time, and the transactions
contemplated thereby;
•Proposal 2:  to approve, on an advisory, non-binding basis, the merger-related compensation payments that may become payable to
certain of LRE’s named executive officers in connection with the merger; and
•Proposal 3:  to approve the adjournment of the LRE special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are not sufficient
votes to approve the merger agreement at the time of the special meeting.
LRE GP’s Board Recommendation
The board of directors of LRE GP recommends that unitholders of LRE vote:
• Proposal 1:  “FOR” the approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby;
•Proposal 2:  “FOR” the approval, on an advisory, non-binding basis, of the merger-related compensation payments that may become
payable to certain of LRE’s named executive officers in connection with the merger; and
•Proposal 3:  “FOR” the approval of any adjournment of the LRE special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are not
sufficient votes to approve the merger agreement at the time of the special meeting.
Among other things, the LRE GP conflicts committee has determined that the merger agreement is advisable to and in the best
interests of, LRE and its unitholders who are not affiliates of LRE GP and has approved the merger agreement and
recommended that the board of directors of LRE GP approve the merger agreement. Based upon, among other things, the
recommendation of the LRE GP conflicts committee, the board of directors of LRE GP unanimously (i) determined that the
merger agreement and the merger are in the best interests of LRE and its unitholders, (ii) approved the merger and the merger
agreement and (iii) resolved to recommend approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby to the
LRE unitholders. See “Proposal 1: The Merger —  Recommendation of LRE GP’s Board of Directors and Its Reasons for the Merger.”
In considering the recommendation of the board of directors of LRE GP with respect to the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby, you should be aware that some of LRE GP’s directors and executive officers may have interests that are different
from, or in addition to, the interests of LRE unitholders more generally. See “Proposal 1: The Merger — Interests of Directors and
Executive Officers of LRE GP in the Merger.”
62
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE Record Date; Outstanding Units; Units Entitled to be Voted
The record date for the LRE special meeting is July 24, 2015. Only LRE unitholders of record at the close of business on the record date
will be entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the LRE special meeting or any adjournment or postponement of the meeting.
As of the close of business on the record date of July 24, 2015, there were 28,074,433 LRE common units outstanding and entitled to be
voted at the meeting. Each holder of LRE common units is entitled to one vote for each LRE common unit held by it.
If at any time any person or group (other than LRE GP or its affiliates) beneficially owns 20% or more of any class of LRE units then
outstanding, then such person or group loses voting rights on all of its units and such units will not be considered “outstanding.” This loss
of voting rights does not apply to (i) any person or group who acquired 20% or more of any class of LRE units directly from LRE GP or its
affiliates (other than directly from LRE), (ii) any person or group who directly or indirectly acquired 20% or more of any class of LRE units
from that person or group described in clause (i) provided that LRE GP notified such transferee in writing that such loss of voting rights did
not apply, or (iii) any person or group who acquired 20% or more of any class of LRE units if LRE GP notified such person or group in
writing that such loss of voting rights did not apply. As of July 31, 2015, no person or group (other than LRE GP and its affiliates)
beneficially owns 20% or more of any class of LRE units.
A complete list of LRE unitholders entitled to vote at the LRE special meeting will be available for inspection at the principal place of
business of LRE during regular business hours for a period of no less than ten days before the LRE special meeting and at the place of
the LRE special meeting during the meeting.
Quorum
A quorum of unitholders is required to vote on the approval of the merger agreement at the LRE special meeting, but not to approve any
adjournment of the meeting. The holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units
must be represented in person or by proxy at the meeting in order to constitute a quorum. Any abstentions made by a unitholder pursuant
to a valid proxy or at the meeting and broker non-votes (if any) will be counted in determining whether a quorum is present at the LRE
special meeting.
Required Vote
To approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, the holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of
a majority of the outstanding LRE common units, voting together as a single class, must affirmatively vote in favor of approval of the
merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby. To approve (on an advisory, non-binding basis) the proposal regarding
merger-related compensation payments that may become payable to certain of LRE’s named executive officers in connection with the
merger, the holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units, voting together as a
single class, must vote in favor of such proposal.
Because approval is based on the affirmative vote of the holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of a majority of the
outstanding LRE common units, voting together as a single class, an LRE unitholder’s failure to submit a proxy card or to vote in person at
the LRE special meeting or an abstention from voting, or the failure of an LRE unitholder who holds his or her units in “street name”
through a broker or other nominee to give voting instructions to such broker or other nominee, will have the same effect as a vote cast
“AGAINST” approval of the merger agreement, the transactions contemplated thereby and the merger-related compensation payments
that may become payable as a result of the merger.
To approve the adjournment of the LRE special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are not sufficient votes to approve
the merger agreement at the time of the special meeting and if a quorum is present at, and if a limited partner vote is solicited on
adjournment of, the meeting, holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units, voting together as a single class, must vote in
favor of the proposal. If a quorum is not present at the meeting, the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE
common units present and entitled to be voted at such meeting represented either in person or by proxy, voting together as a single class,
is required to adjourn. Because approval of this proposal is based on the
63
TABLE OF CONTENTS
affirmative vote of the holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units, voting
together as a single class, an LRE unitholder’s failure to vote, an abstention from voting or the failure of an LRE unitholder who holds his
or her units in “street name” through a broker or other nominee to give voting instructions to such broker or other nominee will have the
same effect as a vote cast “AGAINST” approval of this proposal.
Common Unit Ownership of and Voting by LRE GP’s Directors and Executive Officers
At the close of business on the record date for the LRE special meeting, LRE GP’s directors and executive officers and their affiliates
beneficially owned and had the right to vote 8,962,552 LRE common units at the LRE special meeting, which represents approximately
32% of the LRE common units entitled to be voted at the LRE special meeting. It is expected that LRE GP’s directors and executive
officers will vote their LRE common units “FOR” the approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby,
although none of them has entered into any agreement requiring them to do so.
Voting of Common Units by Holders of Record
If you are entitled to vote at the LRE special meeting and hold your LRE common units in your own name, you can submit a proxy or vote
in person by completing a ballot at the LRE special meeting. However, LRE encourages you to submit a proxy before the LRE special
meeting even if you plan to attend the LRE special meeting in order to ensure that your LRE common units are voted. A proxy is a legal
designation of another person to vote your LRE common units on your behalf. If you hold common units in your own name, you may
submit a proxy for your common units by:
•calling the toll-free number specified on the enclosed proxy card and following the instructions when prompted;
•accessing the Internet website specified on the enclosed proxy card and following the instructions provided to you; or
•filling out, signing and dating the enclosed proxy card and mailing it in the prepaid envelope included with these proxy materials.
When a unitholder submits a proxy by telephone or through the Internet, his or her proxy is recorded immediately. LRE encourages its
unitholders to submit their proxies using these methods whenever possible. If you submit a proxy by telephone or the Internet website,
please do not return your proxy card by mail.
All LRE common units represented by each properly executed and valid proxy received before the LRE special meeting will be voted in
accordance with the instructions given on the proxy. If an LRE unitholder executes a proxy card without giving instructions, the LRE
common units represented by that proxy card will be voted as the board of directors of LRE GP recommends, which is:
• Proposal 1:  “FOR” the approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby;
•Proposal 2:  “FOR” the approval, on an advisory, non-binding basis, of the merger-related compensation payments that may become
payable to certain of LRE’s named executive officers in connection with the merger; and
•Proposal 3:  “FOR” the approval of the adjournment of the LRE special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are not
sufficient votes to approve the merger agreement at the time of the special meeting.
Your vote is important. Accordingly, please submit your proxy by telephone, through the Internet or by mail, regardless of whether you plan
to attend the meeting in person. Proxies must be received by 11:59 p.m., Eastern Time, on September 9, 2015.
Voting of Common Units Held in Street Name
If your LRE common units are held in an account at a broker or through another nominee, you must instruct the broker or other nominee on
how to vote your LRE common units by following the instructions
64
TABLE OF CONTENTS
that the broker or other nominee provides to you with these proxy materials. Most brokers offer the ability for unitholders to submit voting
instructions by mail by completing a voting instruction card, by telephone and via the Internet.
If you do not provide voting instructions to your broker, your LRE common units will not be voted on any proposal on which your broker
does not have discretionary authority to vote. This is referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus and in general as a broker non-vote.
Because the only proposals for consideration at the LRE special meeting are non-discretionary proposals, it is not expected that there will
be any broker non-votes at the LRE special meeting. If there are any broker non-votes, they will be counted as LRE common units that are
present and entitled to be voted for purposes of determining the presence of a quorum, but the broker or other nominee will not be able to
vote your LRE common units on those matters for which specific authorization is required. Under the current rules of the NYSE, brokers do
not have discretionary authority to vote on any of the proposals. Therefore, a broker non-vote (if any) will have the same effect as a vote
cast “AGAINST” (i) approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, (ii) approval of the merger-related
compensation proposal and (iii) approval of the adjournment proposal.
If you hold common units through a broker or other nominee and wish to vote your LRE common units in person at the LRE special
meeting, you must obtain a proxy from your broker or other nominee and present it to the inspector of election with your ballot when you
vote at the LRE special meeting.
Revocability of Proxies; Changing Your Vote
You may revoke your proxy and/or change your vote at any time before your proxy is voted at the LRE special meeting. If you are a
unitholder of record, you can do this by:
•
sending a written notice, no later than the Telephone/Internet deadline, to LRE at Heritage Plaza, 1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600,
Houston, Texas 77002, Attn: Secretary, that bears a date later than the date of the proxy and is received prior to the LRE special meeting
and states that you revoke your proxy;
•submitting a valid, later-dated proxy by mail, telephone or Internet that is received prior to the LRE special meeting; or
attending the LRE special meeting and voting by ballot in person (your attendance at the LRE special meeting will not, by itself, revoke
any proxy that you have previously given).
•
If you hold your LRE common units through a broker or other nominee, you must follow the directions you receive from your broker or other
nominee in order to revoke your proxy or change your voting instructions.
Solicitation of Proxies
This proxy statement/prospectus is furnished in connection with the solicitation of proxies by the board of directors of LRE GP to be voted
at the LRE special meeting. Under the merger agreement, Vanguard and LRE agreed to each pay one-half of the expenses incurred in
connection with the filing, printing and mailing of this proxy statement/prospectus. LRE will bear all other costs and expenses in
connection with the solicitation of proxies. LRE has engaged Morrow & Co., LLC (“Morrow”) to assist in the solicitation of proxies for the
meeting and LRE estimates it will pay Morrow a fee of approximately $7,500 for these services. LRE has also agreed to reimburse Morrow
for reasonable out-of-pocket expenses and disbursements incurred in connection with the proxy solicitation and to indemnify Morrow
against certain losses, costs and expenses. In addition, LRE may reimburse brokerage firms and other persons representing beneficial
owners of LRE common units for their reasonable expenses in forwarding solicitation materials to such beneficial owners. Proxies may
also be solicited by certain of LRE GP’s directors, officers and employees by telephone, electronic mail, letter, facsimile or in person, but
no additional compensation will be paid to them.
LRE unitholders should not send unit certificates with their proxies. A letter of transmittal and instructions for the surrender of LRE
common unit certificates will be mailed to LRE unitholders shortly after the completion of the merger.
65
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No Other Business
Under the LRE partnership agreement and the rules of conduct expected to be adopted for the LRE special meeting by LRE GP, the
business to be conducted at the LRE special meeting will be limited to the purposes stated in the notice to LRE unitholders provided with
this proxy statement/prospectus.
Adjournments
Adjournments may be made for the purpose of, among other things, soliciting additional proxies. To approve an adjournment if a quorum
is present, holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units, voting together as a single class, must vote in favor of the proposal
if the chairman of the meeting solicits a vote of the limited partners for adjournment of the meeting. If a quorum is not present, the
affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units entitled to be voted at such meeting represented either in
person or by proxy, voting together as a single class, is required to adjourn. LRE is not required to notify unitholders of any adjournment of
45 days or less if the time and place of the adjourned meeting are announced at the meeting at which the adjournment is taken, unless
after the adjournment a new record date is fixed for the adjourned meeting. At any adjourned meeting, LRE may transact any business
that it might have transacted at the original meeting, provided that a quorum is present at such adjourned meeting. Proxies submitted by
LRE unitholders for use at the LRE special meeting will be used at any adjournment or postponement of the meeting. References to the
LRE special meeting in this proxy statement/prospectus are to such special meeting as adjourned or postponed.
LRE Unitholder Proposals
Ownership of LRE common units does not entitle LRE common unitholders to make proposals at the LRE special meeting. The LRE
partnership agreement gives LRE GP the right to make rules regarding the conduct of such meetings and only permits the limited partners
of LRE to have the right to vote on matters they are entitled to vote on under the LRE partnership agreement or with respect to matters that
LRE GP determines to submit to a vote of the limited partners of LRE. As a result, LRE GP may adopt a rule for such meetings that only
LRE GP may make proposals at such meetings, and it is expected that LRE GP will adopt such a rule of conduct for the LRE special
meeting.
Assistance
If you need assistance in completing your proxy card or have questions regarding the LRE special meeting, please contact call Morrow,
LRE’s proxy solicitor, toll-free at (855) 264-1296 (banks and brokers can call collect at (203) 658-9400).
66
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROPOSAL 1: THE MERGER
This section of the proxy statement/prospectus describes the material aspects of the proposed merger. This section may not contain all of
the information that is important to you. You should carefully read this entire proxy statement/prospectus and the documents incorporated
herein by reference, including the full text of the merger agreement (which is attached as Annex A), for a more complete understanding of
the merger. In addition, important business and financial information about each of Vanguard, LRE and Eagle Rock is contained in or
incorporated into this proxy statement/prospectus by reference. See “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Effect of the Merger
Subject to the terms and conditions of the merger agreement and in accordance with Delaware law, the merger agreement provides for
the merger of Merger Sub with and into LRE, with LRE continuing as the surviving entity, and, at the same time, the acquisition by
Vanguard of LRE GP, resulting in both LRE and LRE GP becoming wholly owned subsidiaries of Vanguard. LRE will cease to be a
publicly traded limited partnership following completion of the merger. After the completion of the merger, the certificate of limited
partnership of LRE in effect immediately prior to the effective time will be the certificate of limited partnership of the surviving entity, until
amended in accordance with its terms and applicable law.
Each LRE common unit issued and outstanding or deemed issued and outstanding as of immediately prior to the effective time will be
converted into the right to receive 0.550 Vanguard common units. Any LRE common units that are owned by LRE or Vanguard or any of
their respective subsidiaries at the effective time will be cancelled without any conversion or payment of consideration in respect thereof.
Vanguard’s common units had a value of $16.23 per unit, based on the closing price of Vanguard common units as of April 20, 2015.
Because the exchange ratio was fixed at the time the merger agreement was executed and because the market value of Vanguard
common units and LRE common units will fluctuate prior to the consummation of the merger, LRE unitholders cannot be sure of the value
of the merger consideration they will receive relative to the value of LRE common units that they are exchanging. For example, decreases
in the market value of Vanguard common units will negatively affect the value of the merger consideration that they receive, and increases
in the market value of LRE common units may mean that the merger consideration that they receive will be less than anticipated on the
date Vanguard and LRE entered into the merger agreement. See “Risk Factors — Risk Factors Relating to the Merger.” Because the
exchange ratio is fixed and because the market price of Vanguard common units will fluctuate prior to the consummation of the merger,
LRE unitholders cannot be sure of the market value of the Vanguard common units they receive as merger consideration relative to the
value of LRE common units they exchange.
Vanguard will not issue any fractional units in the merger. Instead, each holder of LRE common units to whom fractional units would have
otherwise been issued will be entitled to receive from the exchange agent appointed by Vanguard pursuant to the merger agreement,
subject to applicable withholding, a cash payment in lieu of such fractional interest based on the average trading prices of the Vanguard
common units over the ten-day period prior to the closing date of the merger.
Under the merger agreement, each LRE restricted unit that is outstanding and unvested immediately prior to the effective time will,
automatically and without any action on the part of the holder of such LRE restricted unit, vest in full and the restrictions with respect
thereto will lapse and such LRE restricted unit shall be deemed to be LRE common units for purposes of the merger.
See the section entitled “The Merger Agreement” for further information.
Background of the Merger
The Vanguard Merger
LRE management and the board of directors of LRE GP regularly review operational and strategic opportunities to enhance unitholder
value. From time to time, other master limited partnerships (“MLPs”) operating in the upstream oil and gas industry have approached LRE
regarding strategic opportunities.
In early May 2013, Scott W. Smith, President and Chief Executive Officer of Vanguard, approached Eric Mullins, Chairman of the board of
directors of LRE GP and Co-Chief Executive Officer of LRE, on an
67
TABLE OF CONTENTS
unsolicited basis regarding a potential strategic combination of LRE with Vanguard. At such time, LRE was not actively seeking to engage
in a strategic combination. On May 10, 2013, Mr. Smith and Mr. Mullins met to discuss the potential benefits of a merger transaction
between LRE and Vanguard. Mr. Mullins advised LRE management and Jonathan Farber and Townes Pressler, Jr., both members of the
board of directors of LRE GP, that LRE should enter into a confidentiality agreement with Vanguard so that LRE could provide Vanguard
with the necessary information and other data to obtain a written proposal from Vanguard.
On May 24, 2013, LRE and Vanguard executed a confidentiality agreement in anticipation of a possible merger proposal. Over the course
of the next five weeks, LRE and Vanguard exchanged business information with one another regarding their respective operations.
On July 2, 2013, members of Vanguard management made a presentation to LRE management outlining a proposed acquisition pursuant
to which Vanguard would acquire all of LRE’s outstanding common units in exchange for Vanguard common units at a fixed exchange
ratio of 0.58x. The offer implied a 5% premium to the closing price of LRE’s common units on the New York Stock Exchange on July 1,
2013. After analyzing the proposal, LRE management concluded that the proposed exchange ratio and implied valuation did not
adequately take into account LRE’s future growth potential. Based on an analysis of the merits of the proposed transaction, the board of
directors of LRE GP and LRE management decided that this proposed acquisition by Vanguard was not in the best interests of LRE’s
unitholders at that time.
LRE management and the board of directors of LRE GP continued to review strategic opportunities to enhance unitholder value during the
remainder of 2013 and 2014. In November 2014, oil and natural gas prices began to decline significantly, which materially impaired
LRE’s ability to access the capital markets. As a result of the depressed commodity prices, challenging capital markets and future liquidity
concerns, LRE management believed it was in the best interests of LRE to consider engaging a firm to assist LRE in identifying potential
strategic alternatives. LRE management’s objectives in engaging in the strategic alternatives process were to identify potential business
combinations or acquisitions that would create unitholder value and increase LRE’s scale of operations, expand LRE’s liquidity position
and access to capital markets, and put LRE in the best position to benefit if and when commodity prices increased. LRE management
contacted Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC, or TPH, in late December 2014 to discuss the potential engagement of TPH.
On January 6, 2015, LRE management met with representatives of TPH to discuss LRE’s engagement of TPH to help identify and
facilitate potential strategic alternatives, including potential asset acquisitions, joint venture transactions and strategic merger transactions
between LRE and other public or private companies. TPH had previously acted as financial advisor to the LRE GP conflicts committee on
transactions during 2012 and 2013 and was familiar with both LRE and the upstream oil and gas industry. During the initial phase of this
strategic alternatives process, or Phase 1, which began in early 2015, LRE management directed TPH to focus its efforts on identifying
potential strategic transactions with upstream companies other than public MLPs. LRE management’s initial focus on upstream
companies other than public MLPs was based on the belief that a transaction with an upstream company other than a public MLP would
likely require more time to consummate than a transaction with a public upstream MLP. LRE management planned to consider the results
of Phase 1 efforts prior to seeking a strategic transaction with a public upstream MLP, or Phase 2. On January 12, 2015, LRE and TPH
agreed on a preliminary list of companies to contact in Phase 1. LRE management and TPH formulated the list largely based on the
profiles of the oil and gas assets of these companies, which they believed to be well-suited for an MLP structure and thus complementary
to LRE’s existing assets. Throughout the process, LRE management periodically updated the board of directors of LRE GP and individual
board members on the status and material developments of the process.
TPH began contacting companies on behalf of LRE in the middle of January 2015 and continued contacting companies over the next two
months. A private exploration and production company, which we refer to as Company A, was contacted during this period. At the
direction of LRE management, TPH did not begin Phase 2 until March 2015, as described below. Throughout Phase 1 and Phase 2, TPH
contacted a total of 52 companies, ten of which were upstream MLPs including Vanguard. Of the 52 companies contacted, 31 companies
expressed initial interest in pursuing a transaction with LRE. Accordingly, LRE provided these 31 companies with a summary overview of
LRE’s business and operations, prepared using only LRE’s publicly
68
TABLE OF CONTENTS
available information. Following delivery of the summary overview, 21 companies requested confidentiality agreements, and ultimately
LRE executed confidentiality agreements with 13 companies. At the request of LRE management, TPH evaluated several of these
potential bidders. All of the parties that signed confidentiality agreements were granted access to a virtual data room, or VDR, created by
LRE and TPH to provide relevant non-public data necessary for their evaluation of LRE.
As a result of this strategic alternatives process, from late January 2015 through the middle of April 2015, LRE management engaged in
extensive discussions with Company A. Company A had proved developed reserves that LRE management believed would complement
LRE’s existing asset base. LRE management and representatives from Company A, with the assistance of their respective financial
advisors, conducted due diligence investigations of Company A’s and LRE’s assets and operations, respectively. LRE and Company A
engaged in negotiations regarding a contemplated transaction pursuant to which LRE would acquire assets from Company A in exchange
for LRE common units, an interest in LRE GP and LRE’s assumption of Company A’s outstanding debt. Both LRE and Company A made
several non-binding proposals with respect to various forms of this proposed transaction.
Following the February 28, 2015 bid date for the companies contacted during Phase 1, on March 3, 2015, LRE management met with the
board of directors of LRE GP during a regularly scheduled board meeting. LRE management provided the board of directors of LRE GP
with an update on various strategic options and efforts, the status of negotiations regarding a potential transaction with Company A and
the possibility of pursuing a merger of LRE with an upstream MLP. After considering the feedback from companies contacted during
Phase 1, and having discussed the impact of current and projected commodity prices, expiring commodity hedges, liquidity and future
debt repayment obligations on LRE’s business and prospects, the board of directors of LRE GP decided to expand the strategic
alternatives process to Phase 2 and include a potential merger with an upstream MLP. Additionally, in connection with this decision, the
board of directors of LRE GP took into consideration, among other things, (i) an increasing risk that LRE’s borrowing base under its
revolving credit facility would be redetermined to a much lower level based on the current commodity price environment, which would then
require a repayment (possibly with a term loan with much higher interest rates and fees) and/or a reduction or elimination of LRE’s
distributions to its unitholders, which could have materially adversely affected the trading price of the LRE common units, (ii) an increasing
risk that LRE would need to further reduce or eliminate its quarterly cash distributions as a result of difficulties in the business caused by
the prevailing commodity price environment and (iii) the potential for improved liquidity of the combined entity following a merger with an
upstream MLP in comparison to LRE as a standalone entity.
On March 4, 2015, LRE management and TPH took part in a call in which LRE management instructed TPH to canvas interest among
upstream MLPs for a potential merger transaction. TPH contacted ten upstream MLPs and discussed LRE’s strategic alternatives process
with them, informing them of an April 1, 2015 bid date. Five upstream MLPs that signed confidentiality agreements were given access to
LRE’s VDR for the purpose of evaluating a potential merger transaction with LRE. In response, LRE management received a written
merger proposal only from Vanguard.
TPH began contacting upstream MLPs on March 5, 2015, and continued its initial contacts through the week of March 9, 2015. On March
5, 2015, representatives of TPH called Mr. Smith at Vanguard and informed him that TPH had been authorized to run a strategic
alternatives process for LRE, including seeking a potential merger with another upstream MLP. On March 6, 2015, representatives of TPH
called Mark S. Carnes, Director — Acquisitions of Vanguard, to discuss the timing on data sharing and an expected bid date. Later that
day, LRE and Vanguard signed a confidentiality agreement, and Vanguard was granted access to LRE’s VDR.
During the month of March 2015, LRE and Vanguard representatives exchanged data necessary for their detailed evaluation of their
respective businesses. TPH and LRE collaborated to answer questions and respond to information requests from Vanguard
management. On March 26, 2015, LRE management held a conference call with representatives from Vanguard to discuss and clarify
certain information in the VDR.
On April 1, 2015, TPH received a written non-binding indication of interest from Vanguard to acquire LRE in a tax-free, unit-for-unit equity
exchange with a proposed 0.535x exchange ratio. The non-binding
69
TABLE OF CONTENTS
proposal stated, among other things, that Vanguard needed to complete its due diligence review and obtain approval from its board of
directors prior to signing a definitive merger agreement. As of March 31, 2015, the implied equity value of Vanguard’s proposal was $210
million, which constituted a 17% premium to the closing price of LRE’s common units on the New York Stock Exchange as of March 31,
2015.
On April 2, 2015, members of Vanguard management and representatives of TPH participated in a call with Mr. Smith and Mr. Carnes.
During the call, representatives of TPH sought to clarify certain items mentioned in Vanguard’s non-binding proposal letter and to indicate
that Vanguard was involved in a competitive process and would have to increase the value of the consideration in its proposal.
On April 6, 2015, LRE engaged Andrews Kurth LLP, or Andrews Kurth, as its special counsel for legal matters related to the strategic
alternatives process.
On April 7, 2015, an initial draft of a purchase agreement and plan of merger prepared by Paul Hastings LLP, or Paul Hastings, special
counsel to Vanguard, was delivered to TPH and Andrews Kurth.
On April 8, 2015, Paul Hastings delivered initial drafts of a voting and support agreement, or the voting agreement, and a registration
rights agreement to TPH. On that same day, Mr. Mullins spoke telephonically with Mr. Smith at Vanguard. Mr. Mullins mentioned to Mr.
Smith that he was aware that both organizations were working to complete their respective diligence reviews and that he was interested in
resolving Vanguard’s outstanding inquiries or questions regarding LRE and the proposed merger transaction. Mr. Mullins mentioned that
it was important to resolve all such questions so that any future acquisition proposals from Vanguard would not be contingent upon
completion of its due diligence review with respect to LRE. Also on April 8, 2015, LRE, through Andrews Kurth, engaged Richards, Layton
& Finger, P.A., or Richards Layton, as its special Delaware Counsel for legal matters.
On April 10, 2015, LRE management gave John Bailey, Chairman of the LRE GP conflicts committee, a verbal report regarding the TPH
strategic alternatives process relating to a potential transaction with Vanguard or Company A and the status of negotiations with
Vanguard, and asked Mr. Bailey to have the LRE GP conflicts committee review strategic alternatives and the proposed terms of the
potential merger with Vanguard in light of all relevant circumstances. LRE management asked the LRE GP conflicts committee to review
the potential merger to guard against potential conflicts of interests between LRE’s general partner and its affiliates, on the one hand, and
the Partnership and the other holders of its common units, on the other hand. During the evening of April 10, 2015, the LRE GP conflicts
committee contacted Latham & Watkins LLP, or Latham, its special counsel, about the potential merger.
On April 11, 2015, an Andrews Kurth attorney delivered to a Paul Hastings attorney a revised draft of the proposed purchase agreement
and plan of merger containing several changes to the terms and conditions of the proposed merger as compared to the initial draft
prepared by Paul Hastings. Among other things, the revised draft prepared by Andrews Kurth expanded the ability of the board of directors
of LRE GP to terminate the merger agreement in light of a superior proposal, modified the termination events that could give rise to
obligations of LRE to pay Vanguard a termination fee or reimburse Vanguard for transaction expenses and balanced the representations
and warranties to be made by each party.
On April 13, 2015, representatives from LRE, Vanguard, TPH and Citigroup, financial advisor to Vanguard, met in person at TPH’s office
in Houston. LRE and Vanguard presented a company and asset overview, and discussed outstanding due diligence items.
Representatives of LRE and Vanguard agreed to provide each other with a financial forecast model for their diligence efforts. Immediately
following the meeting, Mr. Mullins and Charles W. Adcock, Co-Chief Executive Officer of LRE and a member of the board of directors of
LRE GP, met privately with Mr. Smith and Richard A. Robert, Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Secretary of
Vanguard. The individuals discussed the potential timing of completing their respective due diligence investigations and negotiations. Mr.
Mullins asked Mr. Smith and Mr. Robert to update Vanguard’s proposal letter by removing the due diligence contingency and increasing
the exchange ratio.
On April 14, 2015, LRE management provided Mr. Bailey with Vanguard’s non-binding proposal letter dated April 1, 2015. Also on that
day, LRE management and Vanguard management exchanged financial forecast models regarding their respective companies. That
same day, an Andrews Kurth attorney delivered a
70
TABLE OF CONTENTS
revised draft of the voting agreement to Paul Hastings. The revised draft of the voting agreement prepared by Andrews Kurth included
several proposed changes to the initial draft prepared by Paul Hasting, including the insertion of an employee non-solicitation covenant
and the removal of a lock-up provision that would restrict transfers of Vanguard units by certain LRE affiliates. Later in the day on April 14,
2015, a Paul Hastings attorney delivered to Andrews Kurth revised drafts of the merger agreement and the voting agreement as well as an
initial draft of a termination and continuing obligations agreement, or the termination agreement. The revised draft of the merger
agreement prepared by Paul Hastings, included a proposed termination fee of 3% of LRE’s equity value and a provision that would
require LRE to reimburse Vanguard’s out-of-pocket expenses, up to a cap equal to 1% of LRE’s equity value, upon a termination of the
merger agreement, subject to certain conditions. In the revised draft of the voting agreement prepared by Paul Hastings, Vanguard
reasserted its desire to include a 120-day lock-up provision applicable to LRE affiliates. Andrews Kurth provided Latham with the latest
drafts of the agreements related to the proposed merger with Vanguard. Also on that day, LRE management received summary reserve
report information and an updated corporate model from Vanguard management.
On April 15, 2015, TPH reviewed for LRE management preliminary financial analyses for the proposed transactions with Vanguard and
Company A. LRE management provided this information to the board of directors of LRE GP. Also on that day, LRE management
provided Mr. Bailey with the current drafts of the agreements that would govern the potential merger between LRE and Vanguard.
On April 15, 2015, the LRE GP conflicts committee engaged Simmons & Company International, or Simmons, as its financial advisor.
On April 16, 2015, Andrews Kurth provided revised drafts of the merger agreement, the voting agreement, the registration rights
agreement and the termination and continuing obligations agreement to Paul Hastings. In the revised draft of the merger agreement, LRE
proposed, among other things, a termination fee equal to 2% of LRE’s equity value and that LRE reimburse Vanguard’s out-of-pocket
expenses in certain termination events of up to a cap equal to 0.5% of LRE’s equity value. On that same day, LRE management provided
the LRE GP conflicts committee and its advisors with the current drafts of the agreements that would govern the potential merger between
LRE and Vanguard.
On April 17, 2015, the board of directors of LRE GP held a special meeting. Representatives from LRE management, TPH, Andrews Kurth
and Richards Layton attended the meeting as invited guests. Mr. Mullins provided the board of directors of LRE GP with an update of the
negotiation process with Vanguard and mentioned that he expected to receive a revised written proposal from Vanguard without a due
diligence contingency soon. The board of directors of LRE GP also discussed and considered the latest proposal from Company A.
Representatives of TPH reviewed for the board of directors of LRE GP preliminary financial analyses for the proposed transactions with
Vanguard and Company A. Mr. Adcock noted that LRE management considered upstream MLPs as potential merger parties. Of the
upstream MLPs, LRE management felt that Vanguard and one other upstream MLP were potentially the best fit for a merger with LRE and
discussed various issues with the board of directors of LRE GP. Richards Layton provided the board of directors of LRE GP with a
presentation summarizing fiduciary duties and responsibilities of the board of directors of LRE GP under Delaware law and discussed the
contractual standards under LRE’s limited partnership agreement. Andrews Kurth then discussed the terms of the merger agreement and
related documents with the board of directors of LRE GP, highlighting the key terms, conditions and provisions of such agreements. The
board of directors of LRE GP unanimously approved a resolution authorizing the LRE GP conflicts committee to review Vanguard’s
current proposal.
Later in the morning on April 17, 2015, the LRE GP conflicts committee met telephonically with its financial and legal advisors. The LRE
GP conflicts committee discussed the qualifications and independence of Simmons and the process undertaken by LRE, with the
assistance of TPH, to evaluate possible business combination transactions. The LRE GP conflicts committee also discussed the impact of
falling commodity prices, expiring commodity hedges and future debt repayment obligations on LRE’s business and prospects. Simmons
provided an overview of the process to be undertaken by Simmons to evaluate the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the terms of
the transaction being proposed by Vanguard to holders of common
71
TABLE OF CONTENTS
units of LRE other than LRM or affiliate entities (the “unaffiliated LRE unitholders”) and the scope of Simmons’ financial due diligence
efforts.
Later in the day on April 17, 2015, representatives of Simmons spoke with LRE and Vanguard on separate calls regarding their financial
projections and key assumptions, and other diligence questions. In the evening on April 17, 2015, Mr. Mullins received a revised non-
binding proposal letter from Mr. Smith at Vanguard that removed the due diligence contingency but left the exchange ratio unchanged at
0.535x. On that same day, Mr. Mullins called Mr. Smith and Mr. Robert to discuss key outstanding items in the merger agreement and
related documents, including the termination fee, lock-up period and LRE’s permitted actions between signing of the merger agreement
and the merger closing.
On the evening of April 17, 2015, a representative of Paul Hastings provided revised drafts of the merger agreement and related
documents to Andrews Kurth. In the revised draft of the merger agreement, Vanguard proposed a termination fee equal to 3% of LRE’s
equity value and the potential reimbursement of transaction expenses upon a termination of the merger agreement up to a maximum
amount equal to 0.5% of LRE’s equity value. In the revised draft of the voting agreement, Vanguard proposed to reduce the lock-up period
from 120 days to 90 days.
On April 18, 2015, the LRE GP conflicts committee met to discuss the proposed business combination transaction with Vanguard. Latham
provided an overview of the fiduciary duties and responsibilities of the LRE GP conflicts committee under Delaware law and discussed
the contractual standards under LRE’s limited partnership agreement. Latham then commented on the draft transaction documents with
respect to the proposed transaction, including a draft merger agreement, a draft voting and support agreement, a draft termination and
continuing obligations agreement and a draft registration rights agreement. Simmons then described the activities being undertaken by
Simmons, including various valuation methodologies being used to assess the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the terms of the
proposed transaction to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders and the scope of its financial due diligence on Vanguard.
On April 18, 2015, a representative of Andrews Kurth provided revised drafts of the merger agreement, the voting agreement, the
registration rights agreement and the termination and continuation of obligations agreement, along with a draft of LRE’s disclosure
schedules to Paul Hastings. In the revised draft of the merger agreement, LRE highlighted that both the termination fee and expenses cap
required further review and discussion.
As of April 19, 2015, LRE’s negotiations with Company A had not resulted in a proposal by Company A reflecting a valuation of Company
A’s business that LRE’s management believed was compelling or in the best interests of LRE unitholders.
On April 19, 2015, Mr. Mullins spoke individually with each LRE GP board member about his plans to send Vanguard a counter-proposal.
Mr. Mullins e-mailed Mr. Smith to inform him that he had spoken with all of the members of the board of directors of LRE GP and that he
should expect a counter proposal letter to be sent to him within a few hours. Later that evening, Mr. Mullins sent Mr. Smith a non-binding
written counter-proposal by email asking for a 0.567x exchange ratio, which was based on a 20% premium to LRE’s 10-day volume-
weighted average price, or VWAP, as of April 17, 2015, which was the same 10-day VWAP premium as Vanguard’s initial proposal on
April 1, 2015. As of April 17, 2015, the implied equity value of the LRE counter-proposal was $250 million, a 14% premium to the closing
price of LRE’s common units on the New York Stock Exchange as of April 17, 2015. Mr. Smith responded to Mr. Mullins by email that
Vanguard’s board would consider the counter-proposal and respond by 10:00 a.m. (Central Time) the following morning.
Also on April 19, 2015, the LRE GP conflicts committee met with its legal and financial advisors. Simmons provided the LRE GP conflicts
committee with an analysis of the proposal from Vanguard and the methodologies undertaken by Simmons in connection with its
evaluation of the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the proposed terms of the merger with Vanguard to the unaffiliated LRE
unitholders. The LRE GP conflicts committee discussed the Partnership’s business and prospects as a stand-alone entity and the merits
of the Vanguard proposal.
72
TABLE OF CONTENTS
On the morning of April 20, 2015, Mr. Smith called Mr. Mullins to inform him that Vanguard’s board had agreed to increase the exchange
ratio to 0.550x and that Mr. Smith would e-mail a revised written proposal letter to Mr. Mullins. Mr. Mullins promptly informed Mr. Bailey of
the revised proposal. Later that morning, Mr. Smith emailed a revised non-binding proposal letter to Mr. Mullins. LRE management then
circulated the revised Vanguard proposal to the board of directors of LRE GP, TPH, Andrews Kurth, the LRE GP conflicts committee,
Simmons and Latham. As of April 17, 2015, the implied equity value of Vanguard’s counter-proposal was $243 million, an 11% premium
to the closing price of LRE’s common units on the New York Stock Exchange on April 17, 2015.
Later on April 20, 2015, the LRE GP conflicts committee met telephonically with its financial and legal advisors. Simmons provided the
LRE GP conflicts committee with an in-depth analysis of the proposal from Vanguard and the methodologies undertaken by Simmons in
connection with its evaluation of the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the terms of the merger with Vanguard. After such
discussion, Simmons delivered its oral opinion, which opinion was later confirmed by delivery of its written opinion dated as of such date
that, based on and subject to the assumptions and limitations set forth therein, the terms of the merger contemplated by the merger
agreement were fair, from a financial point of view, to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders. Representatives of Latham summarized the
material terms of the merger agreement and related agreements. After hearing from their advisors and review and discussion by the LRE
GP conflicts committee, the LRE GP conflicts committee unanimously determined that the merger agreement and related documents to be
entered into by LRE in connection therewith were advisable to and in the best interests of LRE and the unaffiliated LRE unitholders,
approved the merger agreement and the merger and recommended approval of the merger agreement and the merger by the board of
directors of LRE GP. In providing its approval, the LRE GP conflicts committee intended such approval to constitute special approval for
purposes of the LRE partnership agreement.
On the afternoon of April 20, 2015, Paul Hastings provided to LRE management and Andrews Kurth execution versions of the transaction
documents, which were then distributed to the board of directors of LRE GP, the LRE GP conflicts committee, TPH, Simmons, Richards
Layton and Latham. Later that day, a special meeting of the board of directors of LRE GP was held. Representatives from LRE, TPH and
Andrews Kurth attended the meeting as invited guests. Mr. Mullins updated the board of directors of LRE GP on Vanguard’s revised non-
binding proposal, which increased the exchange ratio to 0.550x. Representatives of TPH provided the board of directors of LRE GP with
an analysis of the revised proposal from Vanguard, after which TPH opined orally (subsequently confirmed in a written opinion dated April
20, 2015) that the merger consideration to be received in the merger by the holders of LRE common units pursuant to the merger
agreement was, based upon and subject to the assumptions, qualifications and limitations described in its written opinion, fair, from a
financial point of view, to such unitholders. Andrews Kurth then discussed the significant changes to the purchase agreement and plan of
merger. Mr. Bailey presented a summary of the due diligence review work done by the LRE GP conflicts committee and its advisors. He
noted that the LRE GP conflicts committee received a fairness opinion from Simmons that the terms of the merger contemplated by the
merger agreement were fair, from a financial point of view, to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders. Mr. Mullins requested that Mr. Bailey
provide a summary of the process that the LRE GP conflicts committee undertook with respect to the proposed merger, including the
receipt of the Simmons fairness opinion. He explained that Simmons had access to the VDR and the management teams of LRE and
Vanguard. He noted that Latham provided legal assistance to the LRE GP conflicts committee. Mr. Bailey mentioned that the LRE GP
conflicts committee and its advisors conducted a thorough review of the advisability of the proposed merger, with careful consideration of
any potential conflicts of interest. He then indicated that the LRE GP conflicts committee had unanimously determined that the merger
agreement and related documents to be entered into by LRE in connection therewith were advisable to, and in the best interests of, LRE
and the unaffiliated LRE unitholders, approved the merger agreement and the merger and recommended approval by the board of
directors of LRE GP of the merger agreement and the merger.
There being no further questions, Mr. Mullins then provided a brief summary of each resolution that required approval. The resolutions
related to the approval and authorization to enter into the purchase agreement and plan of merger, the voting and support agreement, the
termination and continuing obligations
73
TABLE OF CONTENTS
agreement, as well as approval and authorization of other ancillary matters. All members of the board of directors of LRE GP approved the
resolutions noted above.
Promptly following the meeting, Mr. Mullins called Mr. Smith and informed him that the board of directors of LRE GP had approved the
merger with Vanguard. LRE management and Vanguard management executed the transaction documents on the afternoon of April 20,
2015. Later that afternoon, the parties issued a joint press release announcing the merger.
LRE’s Consent to the Eagle Rock Merger
On May 4, 2015, Mr. Smith and Mr. Robert informed Mr. Adcock that Vanguard was in discussions with a third party regarding a potential
merger of Vanguard and such third party. Mr. Smith mentioned that pursuant to the terms of the Vanguard and LRE merger agreement,
Vanguard would need the consent of the board of directors of LRE GP before Vanguard could enter into a merger agreement with such
third party.
On May 11, 2015, Mr. Robert informed Mr. Adcock that Vanguard made a formal offer to acquire Eagle Rock. Mr. Robert provided a
background of the historical merger discussions between Vanguard and Eagle Rock. Mr. Robert sent Mr. Adcock a financial analysis of
the potential Vanguard and Eagle Rock merger and a form of proposed consent of LRE pursuant to which LRE would consent to
Vanguard entering into a merger agreement with Eagle Rock.
On May 12, 2015, Mr. Mullins individually updated each of the members of the board of directors of LRE GP and the LRE GP conflicts
committee on the potential merger between Vanguard and Eagle Rock, and the requested consent.
Later on May 12, 2015, Mr. Mullins advised Andrews Kurth and TPH, and Mr. Bailey advised Latham and Simmons of a proposed
business combination transaction between Vanguard and Eagle Rock. The advisors of the board of directors of LRE GP and of the LRE
GP conflicts committee then began an evaluation of the proposed transaction.
On May 13, 2015, LRE and TPH delivered a list of due diligence requests to Vanguard regarding Vanguard’s potential transaction with
Eagle Rock. On that same day, LRE and Eagle Rock signed an acknowledgment to their existing confidentiality agreement to confirm that
it covered information regarding the potential merger between LRE and Vanguard. Later that evening, LRE, TPH and Simmons were
granted access to a VDR created by Eagle Rock to provide relevant non-public data necessary for the evaluation of Eagle Rock. Eagle
Rock was granted access to the VDR that Vanguard used in its analysis of the transaction with LRE.
On May 14, 2015, Mr. Robert informed LRE management that Vanguard and Eagle Rock had agreed to a fixed exchange ratio of 0.185x
but the form of consideration was still being negotiated. Later that afternoon, representatives from LRE, Eagle Rock, Vanguard, TPH and
Simmons met telephonically. Eagle Rock presented a company and asset overview, and discussed current expectations for the timing of
the potential transaction. LRE agreed to provide a management presentation to Eagle Rock at a later date. Vanguard delivered detailed
support for its expected general and administrative expense savings pro forma for the potential combination with both LRE and
subsequently, Eagle Rock.
On May 15, 2015, LRE signed a confidentiality agreement with NGP Energy Capital Management, L.L.C., or NGP, who owned a
significant portion of Eagle Rock’s outstanding common units and was currently evaluating the proposed transaction. That evening,
Vanguard distributed a draft of the Eagle Rock merger agreement to LRE who circulated it to TPH, Simmons and Andrews Kurth.
On May 16, 2015, members of LRE management met telephonically with representatives of Eagle Rock, NGP, Evercore Group, L.L.C.,
financial advisor to Eagle Rock, and Wells Fargo and provided a company and asset overview of LRE.
On May 18, 2015, the board of directors of LRE GP held a special meeting. Representatives from LRE management, TPH, Andrews Kurth
and Richards Layton attended the meeting as invited guests. Mr. Mullins provided the board of directors of LRE GP with an update
regarding the proposed Vanguard and Eagle Rock merger. Representatives of TPH reviewed for the board of directors of LRE GP TPH’s
preliminary financial analyses of the proposed combination of Vanguard, pro forma for Vanguard’s transaction with LRE, with
74
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Eagle Rock. Andrews Kurth then discussed the consent process. Later that day, Andrews Kurth received a revised draft of the Eagle Rock
merger agreement from Paul Hastings and distributed it to LRE, TPH and Simmons.
Also on May 18, 2015, the LRE GP conflicts committee met telephonically with its financial and legal advisors to discuss the proposed
business combination transaction between Vanguard and Eagle Rock. Latham described the consent requirements under the LRE
merger agreement with respect to the proposed Eagle Rock merger, the duties applicable to members of the LRE GP conflicts committee
in connection therewith and related matters. Simmons provided the LRE GP conflicts committee with its preliminary analysis of the impact
of the proposed Eagle Rock merger with Vanguard on the pro forma combined company of LRE and Vanguard. Simmons described,
among other things, the diligence undertaken, the valuation methodologies being used and the other analyses being performed by
Simmons with respect to the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the terms of the proposed Eagle Rock merger to the unaffiliated
LRE unitholders.
On May 19, 2015, an attorney from Paul Hastings delivered a revised draft of the Eagle Rock merger agreement to Andrews Kurth.
On May 20, 2015, a representative from Andrews Kurth delivered a revised consent to Paul Hastings. During that day, representatives of
Andrews Kurth and Paul Hastings negotiated the terms of the consent, the amended and restated voting agreement and the amended and
restated registration rights agreement.
Also on May 20, 2015, the board of directors of LRE GP held a special meeting. Representatives from LRE management, Andrews Kurth
and Richards Layton attended the meeting as invited guests. Mr. Mullins provided the board of directors of LRE GP with an update of the
Vanguard and Eagle Rock merger process. Andrews Kurth and Mr. Casas provided an update on the status of the related merger
documents. The meeting was adjourned as final merger documents were not available. Late that day, Paul Hastings delivered to Mr.
Casas and Andrews Kurth the final versions of all the documents necessary for the proposed transaction including the Eagle Rock merger
agreement, registration rights agreement, voting agreement and disclosure schedules, and the board of directors of LRE GP consent to
the Eagle Rock merger, the amended and restated voting and support agreement, and the amended and restated registration rights
agreement. Mr. Casas delivered these materials to the board of directors of LRE GP, TPH, and Simmons.
Also on May 20, 2015, the LRE GP conflicts committee met telephonically with its financial and legal advisors. Simmons provided the
LRE GP conflicts committee with its final analysis of the impact of the proposed Eagle Rock merger on the pro forma combined company
of LRE and Vanguard. Simmons described the valuation methodologies being employed and the other analyses being performed by
Simmons, and the results thereof, in connection with its evaluation of the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the terms of the Eagle
Rock merger to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders. After discussion, Simmons delivered its oral opinion, which opinion was later confirmed
by delivery of its written opinion dated as of such date, that, based on and subject to the assumptions and limitations set forth therein, the
terms of the Eagle Rock merger contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement were fair, from a financial point of view, to the
unaffiliated LRE unitholders. Representatives of Latham summarized the material terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement and the
related consent. After hearing from its advisors and further review and discussion, the LRE GP conflicts committee unanimously
determined to provide its consent under the LRE merger agreement to the proposed Eagle Rock merger and recommended that the full
LRE Board provide its consent to the Eagle Rock merger. In providing its approval, the LRE GP conflicts committee intended such
approval to constitute special approval for purposes of the LRE partnership agreement.
On May 21, 2015, the board of directors of LRE GP held a special meeting. Representatives from LRE management, TPH, Andrews Kurth
and Richards Layton attended the meeting as invited guests. Mr. Mullins provided the board of directors of LRE GP with a status update of
the Vanguard and Eagle Rock merger process. Representatives of TPH provided the board of directors of LRE GP with an analysis of the
proposed combination of New Vanguard with Eagle Rock, after which TPH opined orally (subsequently confirmed in a written opinion
dated May 21, 2015) that the consideration to be paid by New Vanguard pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement was, based upon
and subject to the assumptions, qualifications and limitations described in its written opinion, fair, from a financial point of view, to New
Vanguard. Andrews Kurth then provided an update of the transaction related documents. There being no further
75
TABLE OF CONTENTS
questions, Mr. Mullins then provided a brief summary of each resolution that required approval. The resolutions related to the approval
and authorization to provide a consent allowing Vanguard to enter in the agreement and plan of merger with Eagle Rock, and to enter into
amended and restated voting and support and registration rights agreements with Vanguard. All members of the board of directors of LRE
GP approved the resolutions noted above.
Recommendation of LRE GP’s Board of Directors and Its Reasons for the Merger
On April 20, 2015, the board of directors of LRE GP unanimously determined that the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement were in the best interests of LRE and its unitholders, declared it advisable to enter into the merger
agreement and approved the execution, delivery and performance of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby.
The board of directors of LRE GP unanimously recommends that the LRE unitholders vote “FOR” the proposal to adopt the merger
agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby at the LRE special meeting.
The board of directors of LRE GP considered many factors in making its determination and approving the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated thereby. The board of directors of LRE GP consulted with LRE’s management, financial advisors and outside
legal counsel regarding its obligations, legal due diligence matters and the terms of the merger agreement, and viewed the following
factors as being generally positive or favorable in coming to its determination and related recommendation:
•
•
•
•
•The aggregate value and composition of the consideration to be received in the merger by holders of LRE common units;
The exchange ratio of 0.550 of a Vanguard common unit for each LRE common unit in the merger represents a premium of approximately
13% above the $7.93 closing price of LRE common units on April 20, 2015 (the last trading date before the execution of the merger
agreement), and a premium of approximately 19% based on the volume weighted average price of LRE’s common units for the last 10
trading days ended April 20, 2015;
The equity exchange ratio is fixed and therefore the value of the consideration payable to LRE unitholders will increase in the event that
the market price of Vanguard common units increases prior to the closing of the merger;
Following the merger, LRE unitholders will have the opportunity as equity holders to participate in the future growth and expected
synergies of the combined entity;
The merger is expected to create some operating efficiencies given overlapping operating areas and cost savings in general and
administrative expenses, as well as other combined benefits such as greater critical mass for negotiating with vendors and service
companies;
The merger provides LRE unitholders equity ownership in an entity with a larger, more diversified asset base and a lower cost of capital,
which is expected to provide greater ability to pursue accretive capital projects and acquisitions that would provide for greater distribution
stability and higher distribution growth;
The belief that the merger should result in an improved potential total return to LRE unitholders, based on the potential future value of the
combined entity and potential greater distribution growth;
Vanguard’s assets, financial condition, prospects and access to capital markets, including the size and scale of the combined entity and
the expected pro forma effect of the proposed transactions on the combined entity;
The merger provides LRE unitholders with increased trading liquidity, as Vanguard’s common units have a larger average daily trading
volume and public float than LRE common units;
Uncertainties regarding LRE unitholder value that might result from other alternatives available to LRE, including the alternative of
entering into a transaction with another third party or remaining an independent public limited partnership, in each case, considering the
potential for LRE unitholders to
•
•
•
•
•
76
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
share in any future earnings growth of LRE’s businesses and continued costs, as well as the risks and uncertainties associated with its
business plans or any alternative thereto and the ability to achieve a higher valuation than the proposed transactions;
The fact that LRE management, with the assistance of the financial advisor to the board of directors of LRE GP, conducted a
comprehensive strategic alternatives process, including solicitation of interests from 52 companies, 31 of which expressed initial interest
in pursuing a transaction with LRE for a potential asset acquisition, joint venture transaction or strategic merger transaction;
The belief of the board of directors of LRE GP, following consultation with its financial advisor, and a comprehensive strategic
alternatives process, that a merger with Vanguard was the best option of all strategic alternatives considered and that it was unlikely that
an alternative bidder would offer LRE unitholders better terms and consideration than offered by Vanguard in the merger;
The support of the merger by LRR A, LRR B, LRR C, LRR II-A, LRR II-C and LRM as evidenced by their execution of the voting and
support agreement;
The unanimous approval of the merger agreement and the related agreements, and recommendation of the merger and the related
transactions, by the LRE GP conflicts committee, and the granting by the LRE GP conflicts committee of “Special Approval” of the merger
agreement and the merger for purposes of the LRE partnership agreement;
The financial presentation and analysis of TPH presented to the board of directors of LRE GP at the meeting held on April 20, 2015 and
the oral opinion of that firm delivered to the board of directors of LRE GP on that date, subsequently confirmed in writing, that, as of the
date of the opinion and based upon and subject to the limitations and assumptions stated in its opinion, the unit consideration to be
•
•
•
received in the merger by the holders of LRE common units pursuant to the merger agreement is fair, from a financial point of view, to
such unitholders as more fully described in the section entitled “Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Board of Directors”;
The review by the board of directors of LRE GP with its legal and financial advisors of the structure of the proposed merger and the
financial and other terms of the merger agreement, including Vanguard’s representations, warranties and covenants, the conditions to its
obligations and the termination provisions, as well as the likelihood of consummation of the proposed merger and the board of directors
of LRE GP’s evaluation of the likely time period necessary to close the merger;
The fact that the merger consideration generally will not be taxable for U.S. federal income tax purposes to LRE’s common unitholders
(except to the extent of cash received in lieu of fractional Vanguard units pursuant to Section 752 of the Internal Revenue Code);
That LRE and Vanguard undertook extensive negotiations, resulting in increased merger consideration for LRE unitholders and the
revision of terms in the merger agreement more favorable to LRE and its unitholders than initially proposed by Vanguard; and
The nature of the closing conditions included in the merger agreement, including the exceptions to the events that would constitute a
material adverse effect on LRE or Vanguard for purposes of the merger agreement.
•
•
•
•
The board of directors of LRE GP considered the following terms of the merger agreement:
•
• LRE’s ability to terminate the merger agreement under certain conditions;
The right of the board of directors of LRE GP to withdraw or change its recommendation of the merger agreement in the event of a
superior proposal or intervening events, subject to certain conditions (including considering any adjustments to the merger agreement
proposed by Vanguard and payment to Vanguard of an approximately $7.3 million termination fee);
LRE’s right to engage in negotiations with, and provide information to, a third party making an unsolicited alternative proposal, which
may, in certain circumstances, result in a transaction that is superior to the proposed transactions with Vanguard;
•
77
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
The right of the board of directors of LRE GP to change its recommendation in favor of the adoption of the merger agreement, subject to
certain conditions, if, in response to a material event that arises after the date of the merger agreement, the board of directors of LRE GP
determines in good faith after consultation with outside counsel, that the failure to take such action would be inconsistent with its duties
under applicable Delaware law, the LRE partnership agreement or the LRE GP company agreement;
That the termination fee of approximately $7.3 million, or the expense reimbursement up to approximately $1.2 million, in each case
payable by LRE to Vanguard under the circumstances specified in the merger agreement, were not unreasonable in the judgment of the
board of directors of LRE GP after consultation with its legal and financial advisors;
That the restrictions contemplated by the merger agreement on LRE’s actions between the date of the merger agreement and the
effective time of the merger are not, in the judgment of the board of directors of LRE GP, unreasonable;
The restrictions contemplated by the merger agreement on Vanguard’s actions between the date of the merger agreement and the
effective time of the merger;
• That LRE unitholder approval is a condition to consummation of the transactions;
•The limited conditions and exceptions to the material adverse effect closing condition and other closing conditions; and
• The consummation of the merger is not conditioned on financing or on a vote of Vanguard unitholders.
•
•
The board of directors of LRE GP considered the following factors to be generally negative or unfavorable in making its determinations
and recommendation with respect to the merger:
•
•
•
That the exchange ratio is fixed and therefore the value of the consideration payable to LRE common unitholders will decrease in the
event that the market price of Vanguard common units decreases relative to any change in the market price of LRE common units prior to
the closing of the merger;
That, while the transactions are expected to be completed, there is no assurance that all conditions to the parties’ obligations to complete
the transactions will be satisfied or waived, and as a result, it is possible that the transactions might not be completed even if approved by
LRE’s unitholders;
That the merger agreement contains restrictions (subject to specific exceptions) on the conduct of LRE’s business prior to completion of
the proposed transactions, including requiring LRE to conduct its business only in the ordinary course, which could delay or prevent LRE
from undertaking business opportunities that may arise pending completion of the transactions and could negatively affect LRE’s ability
to attract and retain employees, customers and vendors;
•That the merger agreement imposes limitations on LRE’s ability to solicit alternative transactions or terminate the merger agreement;
That, if the merger agreement is terminated under certain circumstances, LRE would be required to pay a termination fee of
approximately $7.3 million and reimburse Vanguard for its expenses incurred in connection with the merger up to approximately $1.2
million;
That the merger may be delayed or not be completed in a timely manner, or at all, which could result in significant costs and disruption to
LRE’s normal business;
That Vanguard may not be able to repay or refinance LRE’s credit agreement or term loan indebtedness upon consummation of the
merger, as required by the existing terms of such indebtedness;
•The possibility that the affirmative vote of LRE unitholders might not be obtained for the merger agreement;
•
•
•
78
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
That litigation could occur in connection with the proposed transaction and that such litigation could increase costs and result in a
diversion of management focus;
• That the potential benefits sought in the merger might not be fully realized;
• The transaction costs to be incurred in connection with the proposed transaction; and
• Risks of the type and nature described under the section titled “Risk Factors.”
The board of directors of LRE GP considered all of these factors as a whole and, on balance, concluded that the factors supported a
determination to adopt the merger agreement. In view of the wide variety and complexity of factors considered in connection with its
evaluation of these matters, the board of directors of LRE GP did not consider it practical to, nor did it attempt to, quantify, rank or
otherwise assign relative weights to the specific factors it considered in reaching its decision. The board of directors of LRE GP did not
undertake to make any specific determination as to whether any particular factor, or any aspect of any particular factor, was favorable or
unfavorable to their ultimate determinations. Rather, such recommendations were based on the totality of the information presented and
the investigations conducted. In considering the factors described above and any other factors, individual members of the board of
directors of LRE GP may have given different weight to different factors. The board of directors of LRE GP evaluated the factors described
above, among others, and reached a consensus that the proposed transactions were advisable to and in the best interests of LRE and its
unitholders. The foregoing discussion of the information and factors considered by the board of directors of LRE GP is not exhaustive. In
considering the recommendation of the board of directors of LRE GP that the LRE unitholders vote to adopt the merger agreement, LRE
unitholders should be aware that the executive officers and directors of LRE may have certain interests in the proposed transactions that
may be different from, or in addition to, the interests of LRE unitholders generally. Other than as described in “— Interests of Directors and
Executive Officers of LRE GP in the Merger,” the board of directors of LRE GP was aware of these interests and considered them when
approving the merger agreement and recommending that LRE unitholders vote to adopt the merger agreement. See “— Interests of
Directors and Executive Officers of LRE GP in the Merger.”
Reasons of LRE GP’s Board of Directors for Consenting to the Eagle Rock Merger
On May 21, 2015, the board of directors of LRE GP executed a written consent pursuant to which the board of directors of LRE GP
consented to Vanguard entering into the Eagle Rock merger agreement, performing its obligations thereunder and consummating the
Eagle Rock merger in accordance with the terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement. The board of directors of LRE GP reviewed the
proposed terms and conditions of the Eagle Rock merger agreement and evaluated the financial aspects of the Eagle Rock merger with
its advisors, and authorized the execution of the written consent to the Eagle Rock merger.
The board of directors of LRE GP considered many factors in making its determination to consent to the Eagle Rock merger. The board of
directors of LRE GP consulted with LRE’s management, financial advisors and outside legal counsel regarding its obligations and the
terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, and viewed the following factors as being generally positive or favorable in coming to its
determination to consent:
•
The equity exchange ratio offered in the merger agreement is fixed and therefore the value of the consideration payable to LRE
unitholders will increase in the event that the market price of Vanguard common units increases as a result of the Eagle Rock merger
prior to the closing of the merger;
Following the Eagle Rock merger, Vanguard unitholders (including former LRE unitholders who receive Vanguard common units in the
merger) will have the opportunity as equity holders to participate in the future growth and expected synergies of the combined pro forma
entity;
•As a result of the Eagle Rock merger, Vanguard’s leverage and liquidity metrics are expected to improve;
The Eagle Rock merger adds scale in Vanguard’s existing Arkoma, Permian and Gulf Coast basins and establishes a new operating
area in Alabama;
•
•
79
•
•
•
•
•
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Eagle Rock has a meaningful position in Mid-Continent plays, which will provide the combined entity attractive drilling opportunities for
the next several years;
The benefit from the growth in production and reserves from the drilling of new wells in unconventional plays in the Mid-Continent
outweighed the resulting higher production decline rate for the combined entity;
The Eagle Rock merger is expected to create some operating efficiencies given overlapping operating areas in the Arkoma, Permian and
Gulf Coast basins and cost savings in general and administrative expenses, as well as other combined benefits such as greater critical
mass for negotiating with vendors and service companies;
The Eagle Rock merger provides Vanguard unitholders (including former LRE unitholders who receive Vanguard common units in the
merger) equity ownership in a pro forma entity with a larger, more diversified asset base and a lower cost of capital, which is expected to
provide greater ability to pursue accretive capital projects and acquisitions that would provide for greater distribution stability and higher
distribution growth;
The combined assets, financial condition and prospects of the pro forma entity as a result of the Eagle Rock merger, including the size
•
•
and scale of the combined pro forma entity;
•The opportunity to attract and retain experienced personnel from Eagle Rock to expand the combined pro forma entity’s employee base;
The unanimous approval of the consent to the Eagle Rock merger and the recommendation of the consent by the LRE GP conflicts
committee, and the granting by the LRE GP conflicts committee of “Special Approval” of the consent to the Eagle Rock merger for
purposes of the LRE partnership agreement;
The financial presentation and analysis of TPH presented to the board of directors of LRE GP at the meeting held on May 21, 2015 and
the oral opinion of that firm delivered to the board of directors of LRE GP on that date, subsequently confirmed in writing, that, as of the
date of the opinion and based upon and subject to the limitations and assumptions stated in its opinion, merger consideration to be paid
by New Vanguard pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement is fair, from a financial point of view, to New Vanguard as more fully
described in the section entitled “Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Board of Directors”;
The review by the board of directors of LRE GP with its legal and financial advisors of the Eagle Rock merger and the financial and other
terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement as it relates to Vanguard, including Eagle Rock’s representations, warranties and covenants,
the conditions to its obligations and the termination provisions, as well as the likelihood of consummation of the Eagle Rock merger and
the board of directors of LRE GP’s evaluation of the likely time period necessary for Vanguard to close the Eagle Rock merger;
The nature of the closing conditions included in the Eagle Rock merger agreement, including the exceptions to the events that would
constitute a material adverse effect on Vanguard or Eagle Rock for purposes of the Eagle Rock merger agreement; and
The Eagle Rock merger is a transaction separate and apart from the merger and the completion of the Eagle Rock merger is not a
condition to the completion of the merger, and the completion of the merger is not a condition to the completion of the Eagle Rock merger.
•
•
•
The board of directors of LRE GP considered the following terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement:
• Vanguard’s ability to terminate the Eagle Rock merger agreement under certain conditions;
80
TABLE OF CONTENTS
That the reverse termination fee of $20.0 million, or the expense reimbursement up to approximately $2.3 million, in each case payable
by Vanguard to Eagle Rock under the circumstances specified in the Eagle Rock merger agreement, were not unreasonable in the
judgment of the board of directors of LRE GP after consultation with its legal and financial advisors and would affect LRE unitholders if
the merger is consummated;
That the termination fee of $20.0 million (or in certain circumstances, $10.0 million), or the expense reimbursement up to approximately
$2.3 million, in each case payable by Eagle Rock to Vanguard under the circumstances specified in the Eagle Rock merger agreement,
were reasonable in the judgment of the board of directors of LRE GP after consultation with its legal and financial advisors and would
benefit LRE unitholders if the merger is consummated;
That the restrictions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement on Vanguard’s actions between the date of the Eagle Rock
merger agreement and the effective time of the Eagle Rock merger are not, in the judgment of the board of directors of LRE GP,
unreasonable;
The restrictions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement on Eagle Rock’s actions between the date of the Eagle Rock merger
agreement and the effective time of the Eagle Rock merger are, in the judgment of the LRE Board of Directors, reasonable;
That Vanguard unitholder approval for the issuance of common units of Vanguard in the Eagle Rock merger is a condition to
consummation of the Eagle Rock merger; and
The Eagle Rock merger agreement’s limited conditions and exceptions to the material adverse effect closing condition and other closing
conditions.
•
•
•
•
•
•
The board of directors of LRE GP considered the following factors to be generally negative or unfavorable in making its determination to
consent of the Eagle Rock merger:
The equity exchange ratio offered in the merger agreement is fixed and therefore the value of the consideration payable to LRE
unitholders will decrease in the event that the market price of Vanguard common units decreases as a result of the Eagle Rock merger
prior to the closing of the merger;
That as a result of the Eagle Rock merger, Vanguard management’s focus could be diverted, causing the progress towards and ultimate
consummation of the merger with LRE to be delayed or impaired;
That litigation could occur as a result of the Eagle Rock merger and that such litigation could increase costs and result in a diversion of
Vanguard management’s focus;
That, while the Eagle Rock merger is expected to be completed, there is no assurance that all conditions to the parties’ obligations to
complete the transaction will be satisfied or waived, and as a result, it is possible that the Eagle Rock merger might not be completed
even if approved by Vanguard and Eagle Rock unitholders;
That the Eagle Rock merger agreement contains restrictions (subject to specific exceptions) on the conduct of Vanguard’s business prior
to completion of the Eagle Rock merger, including requiring Vanguard to conduct its business only in the ordinary course, which could
delay or prevent Vanguard from undertaking business opportunities that may arise pending completion of the Eagle Rock merger and
could negatively affect Vanguard’s ability to attract and retain employees, customers and vendors;
That, if the Eagle Rock merger agreement is terminated under certain circumstances, Vanguard would be required to pay to Eagle Rock
a reverse termination fee of $20.0 million and reimburse Eagle Rock for its expenses incurred in connection with the Eagle Rock merger
up to approximately $2.3 million;
That the Eagle Rock merger may be delayed or not be completed in a timely manner, or at all, which could result in significant costs and
disruption to Vanguard’s normal business;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
81
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
That Vanguard may not be able to repay or refinance Eagle Rock’s credit agreement indebtedness upon consummation of the Eagle
Rock merger, as required by the existing terms of such indebtedness;
•The possibility that the affirmative vote of Vanguard and Eagle Rock unitholders might not be obtained;
• That the potential benefits sought in the Eagle Rock merger might not be fully realized;
• The transaction costs to be incurred in connection with the Eagle Rock merger; and
• Risks of the type and nature described under the section titled “Risk Factors.”
The board of directors of LRE GP considered all of these factors as a whole and, on balance, concluded that the factors supported a
determination to approve the consent. In view of the wide variety and complexity of factors considered in connection with its evaluation of
these matters, the board of directors of LRE GP did not consider it practical to, nor did it attempt to, quantify, rank or otherwise assign
relative weights to the specific factors it considered in reaching its decision. The board of directors of LRE GP did not undertake to make
any specific determination as to whether any particular factor, or any aspect of any particular factor, was favorable or unfavorable to their
ultimate determinations. Rather, its determination was based on the totality of the information presented and the investigations conducted.
In considering the factors described above and any other factors, individual members of the board of directors of LRE GP may have given
different weight to different factors. The board of directors of LRE GP evaluated the factors described above, among others, and reached a
consensus that consenting to the Eagle Rock merger was advisable to and in the best interests of LRE and its unitholders. The foregoing
discussion of the information and factors considered by the board of directors of LRE GP is not exhaustive.
Recommendation of the LRE GP Conflicts Committee and its Reasons for the Merger
The LRE GP conflicts committee considered many factors in making its determination and approving the merger. The LRE GP committee
consulted with its financial and legal advisors and viewed the following factors as being generally positive or favorable in coming to its
determination and related recommendation to the board of directors of LRE GP:
The exchange ratio of 0.550 of a Vanguard common unit for each LRE common unit in the merger represents a premium of approximately
11% above the $7.79 closing price of LRE common units on April 17, 2015, based on the $15.72 closing price of Vanguard common
units on April 17, 2015 (the last trading day before the execution and announcement of the merger agreement), and a premium of
approximately 26% based on the average of the closing prices of LRE common units over the 30 trading days ended April 17, 2015;
The financial analysis presented on April 20, 2015 by Simmons, as financial advisor to the LRE GP conflicts committee, and the oral
opinion of Simmons delivered to the LRE GP conflicts committee on April 20, 2015 and subsequently confirmed in writing, that, as of
such date, and based upon and subject to factors, procedures, qualifications and limitations set forth in its written opinion, the terms of the
merger contemplated by the merger agreement were fair, from a financial point of view, to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders;
That, in receiving Vanguard common units in the merger, the unaffiliated LRE unitholders will be provided an opportunity to participate in
the upside of a combined entity that, among other things, will be capable of pursuing larger and more meaningful growth opportunities
than could have been pursued by LRE alone, and will participate in the increased scale, quality and diversification of the assets and
operations of the combined entity compared to LRE as a standalone entity;
The exchange ratio is fixed and, therefore, the value of the consideration payable to LRE unitholders will increase in the event that the
market price of Vanguard common units increases prior to the closing of the merger;
The mitigation of an increasing risk that LRE’s borrowing base under its revolving credit facility would be redetermined to a much lower
level based on the current commodity price environment,
•
•
•
•
•
82
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
which would then require a repayment (possibly with a term loan with much higher interest rates and fees) and/or a reduction or
elimination of LRE’s distribution to its unitholders, which could have materially adversely affected the trading price of the LRE common
units but that would be repaid by Vanguard in connection with the merger;
The mitigation of an increasing risk that LRE would need to further reduce or eliminate its quarterly cash distribution as a result of
difficulties in the business caused by the prevailing commodity price environment;
• The improved liquidity of the combined entity in comparison to LRE as a standalone entity;
The potential interest savings resulting from the repayment of LRE’s revolving credit facility and second lien term loan, which the LRE GP
conflicts committee expects Vanguard to repay in connection with the merger;
The potential synergies from combining the operations of LRE and Vanguard, including decreased general and administrative expenses,
according to estimates provided by management, as well as the elimination of the fees LRE currently pays LRM and Lime Rock
Resources Operating Company, Inc., offset by incremental corporate hires of the combined entity;
•The LRE GP conflict committee’s belief that the combined entity offered better prospects for distribution growth than did LRE;
The LRE GP conflicts committee’s belief that the combined entity’s common units would trade at a lower yield than LRE’s, contributing to
a lower cost of capital than for LRE on a standalone basis;
•
•
•
•
•
•In the merger, LRE unitholders will receive Vanguard common units, which have more trading liquidity than LRE common units because
of the expected larger average daily trading volume and public float of Vanguard common units;
The LRE GP conflicts committee’s awareness that a significant portion of LRE’s commodity hedges, which were entered into at times of
higher commodity prices and would have a positive impact on LRE’s cash flows in 2015, would be expiring in 2016 and would not able
to be replaced with similar favorable commodity hedges, resulting in potential decreases in cash flows in 2016 that could further impair
LRE’s ability to maintain its current level of distributions to unitholders;
The LRE GP conflicts committee’s belief that the aggregate interest of LRE’s unitholders in the combined entity would be greater than the
portion of the combined entity’s distributable cash flow in 2016 brought to the combined entity by LRE;
Through negotiation, LRE was able to increase the merger consideration for LRE unitholders from 0.535 of a Vanguard common unit for
each LRE common unit to 0.550 of a Vanguard common unit for each LRE common units;
The LRE GP conflicts committee’s belief that the merger consideration represented the highest consideration that could be obtained from
a potential business combination transaction with Vanguard, that the merger was more favorable to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders than
continuing to hold their common units, and that the merger presents the best available opportunity to maximize value for the unaffiliated
LRE unitholders;
The LRE GP conflicts committee’s belief that no potential buyers for LRE would pay more than Vanguard, based in part on the fact that
LRE conducted a comprehensive strategic alternatives process, soliciting indications of interest from more than 50 counterparties,
signing confidentiality agreements with 13 counterparties and ultimately receiving only written proposals from two companies, with only
Vanguard’s proposal being viewed as high enough and reasonably certain enough to justify further meaningful discussion;
•
•
83
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
The terms and conditions of the merger agreement allow LRE to continue to pay a regular quarterly distribution of up to $0.1875 per unit
prior to the consummation of the merger and provide that if the record date of an unpaid LRE quarterly distribution is prior to the closing,
such distribution will nevertheless be paid to former LRE unitholders on the scheduled payment date;
The merger consideration to be received by unaffiliated LRE unitholders would be tax-free, except to the extent of any cash received in
lieu of fractional units;
•The fact that Vanguard’s obligation to consummate the merger is not subject to any financing condition;
The support of the merger by LRR A, LRR B, LRR C, LRR II-A, LRR II-C and LRM in their capacity as holders of approximately 30.5% of
the LRE common units (collectively, the “Fund Unitholders”), as evidenced by their execution of the original support agreement, makes
the consummation of the merger more likely;
•That the approval of a meaningful percentage of unaffiliated LRE unitholders is required to consummate the merger; and
The LRE GP conflicts committee’s belief that it was fully informed of the extent to which interests of management and other members of
the board of directors of LRE GP and the Fund Unitholders in the merger differed from those of the unaffiliated LRE unitholders.
•
•
In the course of reaching the determinations and decisions and making the recommendation to the board of directors of LRE GP
described above, the LRE GP conflicts committee also considered the following factors related to procedural safeguards that the LRE GP
conflicts committee believes were and are present to help assure the fairness of the merger agreement and the merger and to permit the
LRE GP conflicts committee to represent the unaffiliated LRE unitholders, each of which factors the LRE GP conflicts committee believed
supported its decision and provided assurance that the merger was in the best interests of the unaffiliated LRE unitholders:
•
•
•
•
That the LRE GP conflicts committee consists solely of directors who are not officers, employees or controlling unitholders of LRE, or
otherwise affiliated with the Fund Unitholders or members of their management;
That the compensation of the LRE GP conflicts committee members was in no way contingent on their approving the merger agreement
and taking other actions described in this proxy statement/prospectus;
That the members of the LRE GP conflicts committee would not personally benefit from completion of the merger in a manner different
from the unaffiliated LRE unitholders, other than through the vesting of units awarded under the LTIP;
The LRE GP conflicts committee retained its own financial and legal advisors with knowledge and experience with respect to MLPs,
public merger and acquisition transactions, and with respect to Vanguard’s and LRE’s industry;
• That the LRE GP conflicts committee had no obligation to recommend any transaction;
That any actions to be taken and decisions to be made by LRE and the board of directors of LRE GP under the merger agreement that
might pose conflicts of interest between the interests of LRE GP and its affiliates, on the one hand, and the unaffiliated LRE unitholders,
on the other hand, would be determined by the LRE GP conflicts committee;
The merger agreement affords LRE GP’s board of directors flexibility to consider, evaluate and accept superior proposals prior to
approval of the merger agreement by LRE unitholders as follows:
the board of directors of LRE GP is permitted, subject to certain limitations, to participate in discussions or negotiations with, or provide
non-public information to, any person in response to an unsolicited written acquisition proposal for LRE, if the board of directors of LRE
GP
º
•
•
84
TABLE OF CONTENTS
º
º
determines, after consultation with outside legal counsel and financial advisors, that such acquisition proposal constitutes, or could
reasonably be expected to lead to or result in, a superior proposal;
the board of directors of LRE GP is permitted, subject to certain limitations, to terminate the merger agreement to enter into an alternative
transaction that is a superior proposal, subject to the payment to Vanguard of a termination fee of $7,288,000, less any Vanguard
expenses that have been reimbursed by LRE up to a maximum of $1,215,000;
the board of directors of LRE GP is permitted, subject to certain limitations, to change its recommendation to unitholders with respect to
the merger in response to an intervening event (as that term is defined in the merger agreement), subject to the payment to Vanguard of a
termination fee of $7,288,000 if Vanguard terminates the merger agreement because of the change in recommendation;
the board of directors of LRE GP is permitted, subject to certain limitations, to take, and disclose to unitholders, a position with respect to
any tender or exchange offer by a third party;
the LRE GP conflicts committee’s belief that the payment of the termination fee of $7,288,000 in specified circumstances is reasonable
and would not be likely to preclude another party that is so inclined from making a superior proposal; and
That the support agreement provides that the Fund Unitholders’ obligation to vote in favor of the merger proposal terminates
automatically upon the board of directors of LRE GP changing its recommendation.
º
º
•
The LRE GP conflicts committee considered the following factors to be generally negative or unfavorable in making its determination and
approval:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
The exchange ratio is fixed and, therefore, the value of the consideration payable to LRE unitholders will decrease in the event that the
market price of Vanguard common units decreases prior to the closing of the merger;
That the merger agreement limited LRE’s ability to refinance the debt incurred under LRE’s credit agreement by limiting the total amount
of indebtedness that LRE could incur and the total amount of fees that could be paid in connection with such refinancing;
That Vanguard may not be able to repay or refinance LRE’s credit agreement or second lien term loan indebtedness upon consummation
of the merger, as required by the existing terms of such indebtedness.
Certain members of LRE management and LRE GP’s board members, including those affiliated with the Fund Unitholders, may have
interests that are different from or in addition to those of the unaffiliated LRE unitholders;
The merger agreement’s limitations on LRE’s ability to solicit or knowingly encourage other offers, and the conditions it places on LRE’s
ability to negotiate or discuss alternative proposals with third parties, to change the recommendation of the board of directors of LRE GP
that LRE unitholders vote to approve the merger agreement or to terminate the merger agreement to accept a superior proposal;
That LRE is generally required to give Vanguard notice of any third party acquisition proposal, and provide Vanguard with three business
days’ notice and negotiate in good faith with Vanguard (to the extent Vanguard desire to negotiate) before the board of directors of LRE
GP changes its recommendation that LRE unitholders vote to approve the merger agreement and/or to terminate the merger agreement
to accept a superior proposal;
The merger agreement restricts the conduct of LRE’s business prior to the completion of the merger, which may delay or prevent LRE
from pursuing business opportunities that may arise pending completion of the merger;
85
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
The risks and costs to LRE if the merger does not close, including the diversion of management and employee attention, the impact on
employee morale and potential employee attrition and the potential effect on business relationships, as well as the possibility that failure
to close the merger could negatively impact the trading price of LRE common units;
• The risk that the potential benefits sought in the merger might not be fully realized;
•Vanguard’s obligation to consummate the merger is subject to some conditions that are outside of LRE’s control;
The risk that the merger might not be completed in a timely manner, or that the merger might not be consummated at all as a result of a
failure to satisfy the conditions contained in the merger agreement, and a failure to complete the merger could negatively affect the
trading price of the LRE common units;
LRE has incurred and will continue to incur significant transaction costs and expenses in connection with the proposed merger, whether
or not the merger is completed;
That litigation could occur as a result of the merger and that such litigation could increase costs and result in a diversion of
management’s focus;
The possibility that, under certain circumstances, LRE will be obligated to pay Vanguard a termination fee of $7,288,000 or reimburse up
to $1,215,000 of Vanguard’s expenses;
The risks of the type and nature described under the heading “Risk Factors” in the LRE Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2014. See “Where You Can Find More Information”; and
• Risks of the type and nature described under the section titled “Risk Factors.”
•
•
•
•
The LRE GP conflicts committee considered all of these factors as a whole and, on balance, concluded that it supported the determination
to approve the merger agreement. The foregoing discussion of the information and factors considered by the LRE GP conflicts committee
includes the material factors considered, but is not exhaustive. In view of the wide variety of factors considered by the LRE GP conflicts
committee in connection with its evaluation of the proposed merger and the complexity of these matters, the LRE GP conflicts committee
did not consider it practicable to, and did not attempt to, quantify, rank or otherwise assign relative weights to the specific factors that it
considered in reaching its decision. The LRE GP conflicts committee evaluated the factors described above, among others, and reached
a consensus that the proposed transaction is advisable to and in the best interests of LRE and the unaffiliated LRE unitholders.
Accordingly, the LRE GP conflicts committee unanimously approved the merger agreement and recommended to the full board of
directors of LRE GP that it approve the merger agreement. In considering the factors described above and any other factors, individual
members of the LRE GP conflicts committee may have viewed factors differently or given different weight or merit to different factors. The
LRE GP conflicts committee approved and recommended the merger to the board of directors of LRE GP based on the totality of the
information presented to and considered by it.
In considering the approval of the merger agreement by the LRE GP conflicts committee and its recommendation to the board of directors
of LRE GP, you should be aware that certain of LRE GP’s executive officers and directors may have had interests in the proposed
transaction that may be different from, or in addition to, the interests of LRE unitholders generally. The LRE GP conflicts committee was
aware of these interests and considered them when approving the merger agreement. See “— Interests of Directors and Executive
Officers of LRE GP in the Merger.”
Reasons of the LRE GP Conflicts Committee for Consenting to the Eagle Rock
Merger
The LRE GP conflicts committee considered many factors in making its determination to provide consent to the Eagle Rock merger under
the merger agreement. The LRE GP conflicts committee consulted with its financial and legal advisors and viewed the following factors as
being generally positive or favorable in coming to its determination to provide consent to the Eagle Rock merger and related
recommendation to the board of directors of LRE GP:
86
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
The current and historical financial condition, results of operations, business and prospects of Eagle Rock and the future prospects of the
combined entity consisting of Vanguard, LRE and Eagle Rock;
The financial analysis presented on May 20, 2015 by Simmons, as financial advisor to the LRE GP conflicts committee, and the oral
opinion of Simmons delivered to the LRE GP conflicts committee on May 20, 2015 and subsequently confirmed in writing, that, as of such
date, and based upon and subject to factors, procedures, qualifications and limitations set forth in its written opinion, the terms of the
Eagle Rock merger contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement were fair, from a financial point of view, to the unaffiliated LRE
unitholders;
The unaffiliated LRE unitholders will be provided an opportunity to participate in the upside of a combined entity with a lower cost of
capital that, among other things, should be capable of pursuing larger and more meaningful growth opportunities;
•The Eagle Rock merger will further increase the scale, quality and diversification of the assets and operations of the combined entity;
Eagle Rock has a meaningful position in Mid-Continent plays, which will provide the combined entity attractive drilling opportunities for
the next several years;
The benefit from the growth in production and reserves from the drilling of new wells in unconventional plays in the Mid-Continent
outweighed the resulting higher production decline rate for the combined entity;
The exchange ratio in the merger is fixed and, therefore, the value of the consideration payable to LRE unitholders in the merger will
increase in the event that the Eagle Rock merger causes the market price of Vanguard common units to increase;
The improved leverage metrics of the combined entity (including Eagle Rock) as compared to LRE on a stand-alone basis and to the
Vanguard-LRE business on a combined basis;
The Eagle Rock merger is expected to create operating efficiencies given overlapping operating areas in the Mid-Continent and Permian
Basin and cost savings in general and administrative expenses, as well as other benefits such as greater critical mass for negotiating
with vendors and service companies;
•The opportunity to attract and retain experienced personnel from Eagle Rock to enhance the combined entity’s employee base;
That the approval of Vanguard unitholders is required to consummate the Eagle Rock merger, which would give the LRE unitholders a
voice in the future direction of Vanguard if LRE’s merger with Vanguard is completed prior to the record date of the Vanguard meeting for
the Eagle Rock merger;
In the Eagle Rock merger, Eagle Rock unitholders will receive Vanguard common units, which, when combined with the currently
outstanding Vanguard common units and the additional Vanguard common units issuable in the merger, should have more trading
liquidity than LRE common units because of the expected larger average daily trading volume and public float of the combined entity;
The fact that the LRE unitholders would be able to participate in the combined entity’s future earnings and growth and possible future
increases in its value following the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement and the Eagle Rock merger
agreement;
•The fact that Vanguard’s obligation to consummate the Eagle Rock merger is not subject to any financing condition;
Under certain circumstances, if the Eagle Rock merger is not consummated, Eagle Rock will have to pay Vanguard a termination fee of
$20,000,000;
Under certain circumstances, if the Eagle Rock merger is not consummated, Eagle Rock will have to reimburse up to $2,317,700 of
Vanguard’s expenses; and
•
•
•
•
•
87
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
The LRE GP conflicts committee’s belief that it was fully informed of the extent to which interests of management and other members of
the board of directors of the LRE GP and the Fund Unitholders in the Eagle Rock merger differed from the interests of the unaffiliated
LRE unitholders.
In the course of reaching the determinations and decisions and making the recommendation described above, the LRE GP conflicts
committee also considered the following factors related to procedural safeguards that the LRE GP conflicts committee believes were and
are present to permit the LRE GP conflicts committee to represent the unaffiliated LRE unitholders, each of which factors the LRE GP
conflicts committee believed supported its decision and provided assurance that the Eagle Rock merger was in the best interests of the
unaffiliated LRE unitholders:
•
•
•
That the LRE GP conflicts committee consists solely of directors who are not officers, employees or controlled unitholders of LRE, or
otherwise affiliated with the Fund Unitholders, Vanguard, Eagle Rock or members of their management teams;
That the compensation of the LRE GP conflicts committee members was in no way contingent on their consenting to the Eagle Rock
merger and taking other actions described in this proxy statement/prospectus;
That the members of the LRE GP conflicts committee would not personally benefit from completion of the Eagle Rock merger in a manner
different from the unaffiliated LRE unitholders;
The LRE GP conflicts committee retained its own financial and legal advisors with knowledge and experience with respect to MLPs,
public merger and acquisition transactions, and with respect to Vanguard’s, LRE’s and Eagle Rock’s industry;
• That the LRE GP conflicts committee had no obligation to consent to the Eagle Rock merger; and
•That the consent requested for the Eagle Rock merger did not otherwise change the terms or conditions of the merger agreement.
•
The LRE GP conflicts committee considered the following factors to be generally negative or unfavorable in making its determination and
approval:
•
•
•
The exchange ratio in the merger is fixed and, therefore, the value of the consideration payable to LRE unitholders in the merger will
decrease in the event that the Eagle Rock merger causes the market price of Vanguard common units to decrease;
That Vanguard may not be able to repay or refinance Eagle Rock’s credit agreement upon consummation of the Eagle Rock merger, as
required by the existing terms of such indebtedness;
The Eagle Rock merger agreement restricts the conduct of Vanguard’s business prior to the completion of the Eagle Rock merger, which
may delay or prevent Vanguard (or the combined entity if the merger is completed prior to the Eagle Rock merger) from pursuing
business opportunities that may arise pending completion of the Eagle Rock merger;
The risks and costs to Vanguard if the Eagle Rock merger does not close, including the diversion of management and employee
attention and the potential effect on business relationships, as well as the possibility that failure to close the Eagle Rock merger could
negatively impact the trading price of Vanguard common units;
• There is risk that the potential benefits sought in the Eagle Rock merger might not be fully realized;
•Eagle Rock’s obligation to consummate the Eagle Rock merger is subject to some conditions that are outside of Vanguard’s control;
There is risk that the Eagle Rock merger might not be completed in a timely manner, or that the Eagle Rock merger might not be
consummated at all as a result of a failure to satisfy the conditions contained in the Eagle Rock merger agreement, and a failure to
complete the Eagle Rock merger could negatively affect the trading price of the Vanguard common units;
•
•
88
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
•
•There is a risk that the Eagle Rock merger might occur prior to the merger or otherwise delay the consummation of the merger;
The fact that Vanguard must obtain the consent of its unitholders before proceeding with the issuance of its common units in connection
with the Eagle Rock merger, which could result in delay and significant expense;
Vanguard has incurred and will continue to incur significant transaction costs and expenses in connection with the proposed Eagle Rock
merger, whether or not the Eagle Rock merger is completed;
That litigation could occur as a result of the Eagle Rock merger and that such litigation could increase costs and result in a diversion of
management’s focus;
The fact that the LRE unitholders will own a lower overall percentage of the combined entity than would be the case in the absence of the
Eagle Rock merger;
If the Vanguard unitholders do not approve the issuance of common units of Vanguard in connection with the Eagle Rock merger,
Vanguard will have to pay Eagle Rock a termination fee of $20,000,000;
Under certain circumstances, if the Eagle Rock merger is not consummated, Vanguard will have to reimburse up to $2,317,700 of Eagle
Rock’s expenses; and
• Risks of the type and nature described under the section titled “Risk Factors.”
•
•
•
The LRE GP conflicts committee considered all of these factors as a whole and, on balance, concluded that they supported the
determination to consent to the Eagle Rock merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby. The foregoing discussion of
the information and factors considered by the LRE GP conflicts committee includes the material factors considered, but is not exhaustive.
In view of the wide variety of factors considered by the LRE GP conflicts committee in connection with its evaluation of the proposed
Eagle Rock merger and the complexity of these matters, the LRE GP conflicts committee did not consider it practicable to, and did not
attempt to, quantify, rank or otherwise assign relative weights to the specific factors that it considered in reaching its decision. The LRE
GP conflicts committee evaluated the factors described above, among others, and reached a consensus that the proposed Eagle Rock
merger is advisable to and in the best interest of LRE and the unaffiliated LRE unitholders. Accordingly, the LRE GP conflicts committee
unanimously consented to Vanguard (a) entering into the Eagle Rock merger agreement, (b) performing its obligations thereunder and (c)
consummating the Eagle Rock merger in accordance with the terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement. In that connection, the LRE GP
conflicts committee recommended that the full board of directors of LRE GP consent to such actions by Vanguard. In considering the
factors described above and any other factors, individual members of the LRE GP conflicts committee may have viewed factors differently
or given different weight or merit to different factors. The LRE GP conflicts committee approved and recommended the Eagle Rock merger
to the board of directors of LRE based on the totality of the information presented to and considered by it.
Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Board of Directors
The board of directors of LRE GP retained TPH as its exclusive financial advisor to provide financial advice and assistance to the board
and to provide an opinion to the board in connection with the merger. TPH evaluated the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the
merger consideration to be received in the merger by the holders of LRE common units. At a meeting of the board of directors of LRE GP
held on April 20, 2015, at the request of the board, TPH orally rendered its opinion to the board that, as of April 20, 2015, based upon and
subject to the assumptions, qualifications, limitations and other matters considered by TPH in connection with the preparation of its
opinion, the merger consideration to be received in the merger by the holders of LRE common units pursuant to the merger agreement
was fair, from a financial point of view, to such unitholders. TPH subsequently confirmed its opinion in writing to the board of directors of
LRE GP (the “LRE Opinion”).
Pursuant to the merger agreement, Vanguard’s entering into and performing the Eagle Rock merger agreement and consummating the
Eagle Rock Transactions, including the Eagle Rock merger, required the
89
TABLE OF CONTENTS
prior consent of the board of directors of LRE GP. Accordingly, in connection with its negotiation of the Eagle Rock merger agreement,
Vanguard sought the Consent of the board of directors of LRE GP. The board of directors of LRE GP retained TPH as its exclusive
financial advisor to provide financial advice and assistance to the board and to provide an opinion to the board in connection with the
board’s consideration of the Consent. TPH evaluated the fairness, from a financial point of view, to New Vanguard, of the Eagle Rock
merger consideration to be paid by New Vanguard pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement. At a meeting of the board of directors of
LRE GP held on May 21, 2015, at the request of the board, TPH orally rendered its opinion to the board that, as of May 21, 2015, based
upon and subject to the assumptions, qualifications, limitations and other matters considered by TPH in connection with the preparation of
its opinion, the Eagle Rock merger consideration to be paid by New Vanguard pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement was fair,
from a financial point of view, to New Vanguard. TPH subsequently confirmed its opinion in writing to the board of directors of LRE GP
(the “Eagle Rock Opinion”).
Each opinion speaks only as of the date it was delivered and not as of the time the merger or the Eagle Rock merger will be consummated
or any other time. Neither opinion reflects changes that may occur or may have occurred after the date it was rendered, which could alter
facts or elements on which the opinions were based.
The full text of the LRE Opinion, dated April 20, 2015, and the Eagle Rock Opinion, dated May 21, 2015, each of which sets forth,
among other things, the assumptions made, procedures followed, matters considered, and qualifications and limitations of the
review undertaken by TPH in rendering such opinions, is attached as Annex C and Annex D to this proxy statement/prospectus.
The summary of the TPH opinions set forth in this proxy statement/prospectus is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full
text of the opinions. LRE unitholders are urged to read each TPH opinion carefully and in its entirety. TPH provided its opinions
for the information and assistance of the board of directors of LRE GP (in its capacity as such) in connection with (i) its
consideration of the merger and (ii) its consideration of the Consent. Neither TPH opinion nor the summaries thereof, nor the
related analyses disclosed in this proxy statement/prospectus, constitutes a recommendation as to how the board of directors
of LRE GP, any holder of securities in LRE, Vanguard or Eagle Rock or any other person should act or vote with respect to the
LRE Transactions, the Eagle Rock Transactions, the Consent or any other matter.
TPH’s opinions to the board of directors of LRE GP were among many factors taken into consideration by the board (i) in approving the
merger agreement and making its recommendation to the holders of LRE common units regarding the merger and (ii) in granting the
Consent.
The LRE Opinion
In connection with rendering the LRE Opinion and performing its related financial analysis, TPH reviewed, among other things:
1. a draft of the merger agreement dated April 20, 2015, circulated the morning thereof;
2.Annual Reports on Form 10-K for each of LRE and Vanguard for each of the three years ended December 31, 2014;
3. certain Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for each of LRE and Vanguard;
4. certain other communications from LRE and Vanguard to their respective equity holders;
estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of December 31, 2014, attributable to
LRE’s net interests in certain properties, leasehold and royalty interests, prepared by Miller and Lents, Ltd., Netherland, Sewell &
5.Associates and Ryder Scott Company (“LRE 2014 SEC Reserve Report”), and estimated proved, probable and possible oil, gas, and
natural gas liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of March 31, 2015, attributable to LRE’s net interests in such
properties, prepared by the management of LRE GP (“LRE Management 3P Reserve Estimates”);
6. estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of
90
TABLE OF CONTENTS
December 31, 2014, attributable to Vanguard’s net interests in certain properties, prepared by the management of Vanguard and audited
by DeGolyer and MacNaughton (“Vanguard 2014 SEC Reserve Report”), and estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves
and projected future net revenues as of March 31, 2015, attributable to Vanguard’s net interests in such properties, prepared by the
management of Vanguard (“Vanguard Management 1P Reserve Estimates”);
7. certain publicly available research analyst reports for LRE and Vanguard; and
8.
certain internal financial, production and pricing information and forecasts for LRE and Vanguard prepared by the managements of LRE
and Vanguard, respectively, as approved for TPH’s use by the management of LRE GP (the “LRE Forecasts”), including certain cost
savings synergies projected by the management of LRE GP to result from the LRE Transactions, as approved for TPH’s use by the
management of LRE GP (the “LRE Synergies”).
TPH also held discussions with members of the senior managements of LRE and Vanguard regarding their assessment of the strategic
rationale for, and the potential benefits of, the LRE Transactions and the past and current business operations, financial condition and
future prospects of LRE and Vanguard, as applicable. In addition, TPH reviewed the reported price and trading activity for the LRE
common units and Vanguard common units, compared certain financial and stock market information for LRE and Vanguard with similar
financial and stock market information for certain other companies the securities of which are publicly traded, reviewed the financial terms
of certain recent business combinations in the upstream energy sector specifically and in the energy industry generally and performed
such other studies and analyses, and considered such other factors, as it considered appropriate.
For purposes of the LRE Opinion, TPH assumed and relied upon, without assuming any responsibility for independent verification, the
accuracy and completeness of all of the financial, accounting, legal, tax and other information provided to, discussed with or reviewed by
or for it, or publicly available. In that regard, TPH assumed with the consent of the board of directors of LRE GP that the LRE Forecasts
and LRE Synergies described above were reasonably prepared on a basis reflecting the best currently available estimates and
judgments of management of LRE GP and Vanguard, and that such LRE Forecasts and LRE Synergies will be realized in the amounts
and time periods contemplated thereby. TPH expressed no view or opinion with respect to such LRE Forecasts or LRE Synergies or the
assumptions on which they were based. Further, TPH assumed that the final form of the merger agreement conformed to the last draft
reviewed by it in all respects material to its analysis and that the LRE Transactions will be consummated on the terms set forth in the
merger agreement without any waiver or modification of any term or condition the effect of which would be in any way meaningful to its
analysis. TPH also assumed that all governmental, regulatory or other consents or approvals necessary for the consummation of the LRE
Transactions will be obtained without any material adverse effect on LRE, Vanguard, Merger Sub, the other parties to the merger
agreement, the unitholders of LRE or the unitholders of Vanguard or the expected benefits of the LRE Transactions in any way meaningful
to its analysis. In addition, TPH did not make an independent evaluation or appraisal of the assets and liabilities (including any
contingent, derivative or off-balance-sheet assets and liabilities) of LRE or any of its subsidiaries or Vanguard or any of its subsidiaries,
and TPH was not furnished with any such evaluation or appraisal. TPH did not express any opinion as to any tax or other consequences
that might result from the LRE Transactions, nor does its opinion address any legal, regulatory or accounting matters.
The LRE Opinion is necessarily based upon economic, monetary, market and other conditions as in effect on, and the information made
available to it as of, April 20, 2015. TPH has assumed no obligation to update, revise or reaffirm the LRE Opinion and expressly
disclaimed any responsibility to do so based on circumstances, developments or events occurring after the date of the LRE Opinion.
The estimates contained in TPH’s analysis and the results from any particular analysis are not necessarily indicative of future results,
which may be significantly more or less favorable than suggested by such analyses. In addition, analyses relating to the value of
businesses or assets neither purport to be appraisals nor do they necessarily reflect the prices at which businesses or assets may actually
be sold. Accordingly, TPH’s analysis and estimates are inherently subject to substantial uncertainty.
91
TABLE OF CONTENTS
In arriving at its opinion, TPH did not attribute any particular weight to any particular analysis or factor considered by it, but rather made
qualitative judgments as to the significance and relevance of each analysis and factor. Several analytical methodologies were employed
by TPH in its analyses, and no one single method of analysis should be regarded as critical to the overall conclusion reached by TPH.
Each analytical technique has inherent strengths and weaknesses, and the nature of the available information may further affect the
significance or utility of particular techniques. Accordingly, TPH believes that its analyses must be considered as a whole, and that
selecting portions of its analyses and of the factors considered by it, without considering all analyses and factors in their entirety, could
create a misleading or incomplete view of the evaluation process underlying its opinion. The conclusion reached by TPH, therefore, is
based on the application of TPH’s own experience and judgment to all analyses and factors considered by TPH, taken as a whole. TPH’s
opinion was reviewed and approved by its fairness opinion committee.
The LRE Opinion addressed only the fairness, from a financial point of view, as of the date of the opinion, of the merger consideration to
be received in the merger by the LRE common unitholders pursuant to the merger agreement. TPH’s opinion did not address the relative
merits of the merger or any of the other LRE Transactions as compared to any alternative transaction that may be available to LRE or
Vanguard, nor did it address the underlying business decision of LRE or Vanguard to engage in the merger or any of the other LRE
Transactions. TPH did not express any view on, and the LRE Opinion did not address, any other term or aspect of the merger agreement
or the LRE Transactions, including, without limitation, (a) the sale of the limited liability company interests in LRE GP, (b) the
consideration to be received for the limited liability company interests in LRE GP, (c) the fairness of the merger to, or any consideration
paid or received in connection therewith by, the holders of any other class of securities, creditors or other constituencies of LRE or
Vanguard, whether relative to the merger consideration pursuant to the merger agreement, the consideration to be received for the limited
liability company interests in LRE GP or otherwise, (d) the allocation of any consideration to be paid by Vanguard or its affiliates in the
LRE Transactions, (e) the fairness of the amount or nature of any compensation to be paid or payable to any of the officers, directors or
employees of LRE GP, Vanguard or any other party, or any class of such persons, in connection with the merger and the LRE
Transactions, whether relative to the merger consideration to be paid to the LRE common unitholders pursuant to the merger agreement
or otherwise, (f) any equity issuances after the date of the LRE Opinion by Vanguard or (g) any voting or other agreement, arrangement or
understanding to be entered into in connection with or contemplated by the LRE Transactions, any related transactions or otherwise. TPH
did not express any opinion as to the price at which Vanguard common units or LRE common units will trade at any time or as to the
impact of the LRE Transactions on the solvency or viability of LRE or Vanguard or the ability of each of LRE or Vanguard to pay its
obligations when they become due.
The following is a summary of the material financial analyses performed by TPH in connection with the preparation of the LRE Opinion
and reviewed with the board of directors of LRE GP on April 20, 2015. Unless the context indicates otherwise, enterprise values and
equity values used in the selected companies analysis described below were calculated using the closing price of the LRE common units,
Vanguard common units and the equity securities of the selected companies listed below as of April 17, 2015, and transaction values for
the selected transactions analysis described below were calculated on an enterprise value basis based on the value of the equity
consideration and other public information available at the time of the relevant transaction’s announcement. The analyses summarized
below include information presented in tabular format. In order to fully understand the financial analyses performed, the tables must be
considered together with the textual summary of the analyses.
For purposes of its analysis, TPH reviewed a number of financial metrics, including:
Enterprise Value — generally the value as of a specified date of the relevant company’s outstanding equity securities (taking into account
its options and other outstanding convertible securities) plus the value as of such date of its net debt (the value of its outstanding
indebtedness, preferred stock, minority interest and capital lease obligations less the amount of cash and short-term investments on its
balance sheet, as applicable);
EBITDA — generally the amount of the relevant company’s earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization for a
specified time period; and
•
•
92
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
Distributable cash flow — generally the amount of after-tax cash flow for a specified time period available to be distributed by the relevant
company, calculated as EBITDA less maintenance capital expenditures and interest expense.
The LRE Forecasts prepared by the management of LRE GP included a base case of financial projections for 2015 through 2019 as well
as a supplemental capital case for 2015 and 2016, which projected reduced capital spending and associated lower results for 2016 than
the base case. TPH performed its analyses using the base case.
Summary of TPH’s Analysis
Commodity Price Assumptions
The commodity price assumptions used by TPH in certain of its analyses are summarized below:
New York Mercantile Exchange (“NYMEX”) Strip Pricing as of April 17, 2015 (“Strip 1”):
Year
2015 (April to December)
2016
2017
2018
WTI
 
Crude
(per Bbl)
 $58.05   $ 2.77
 $ 62.13   $  3.11
 $63.90   $ 3.36
 $64.83   $ 3.48
Henry Hub
 
Gas
(per MMBtu)
2019 and thereafter
$65.49   $ 3.58
Research Consensus per Bloomberg (“Research Consensus 1”):
Year
2015 (April to December)
2016
2017
2018
2019 and thereafter
WTI
 
Crude
(per Bbl)
 $ 57.92   $  3.05
 $69.00   $ 3.75
 $72.50   $ 4.25
 $73.75   $ 4.47
 $73.75   $ 4.47
Henry Hub
 
Gas
(per MMBtu)
10-Year Historical Monthly Average (“Ten-Year Average 1”):
Average (rounded)
Net Asset Value Analysis
WTI
 
Crude
(per Bbl)
 $ 81.57   $  5.35
Henry Hub
 
Gas
(per MMBtu)
TPH performed an illustrative Net Asset Value analysis of LRE. TPH calculated the present value of the pre-tax future cash flows that LRE
could be expected to generate from its existing base of estimated proved, probable and possible (“3P”) reserves, in each case, to the end
of their economic life, as of March 31, 2015, contained in the LRE Management 3P Reserve Estimates. In performing this analysis, TPH
applied discount rates ranging from 8% to 10% to the projected cash flows. TPH estimated Net Asset Value as the sum of (i) the present
value of the cash flows generated by these estimated 3P reserves plus (ii) the present value of the future estimated effects of hedging less
(iii) net debt (total debt less cash). The commodity prices utilized to derive the cash flows through 2019 were based on (i) Strip 1, (ii)
Research Consensus 1 and (iii) Ten-Year Average 1 prices. The commodity prices utilized to derive cash flows in 2019 and beyond were
based on 2019 commodity prices. Taken together, the foregoing sensitivities applied to the Net Asset Value calculation for 3P reserves
resulted in an implied LRE valuation range of $2.27 to $11.24 per unit.
Discounted Cash Flow Analysis
TPH performed a discounted cash flow analysis of LRE using the LRE Forecasts through 2019. The commodity prices utilized to derive
the cash flows were based on (i) Strip 1, (ii) Research Consensus 1 and (iii) Ten-Year Average 1 prices. Terminal values were calculated
at December 31, 2018 using a multiple range
93
TABLE OF CONTENTS
of 5.0x to 8.0x 2019 estimated EBITDA. In performing this analysis, TPH applied discount rates ranging from 8% to 10% to the pre-tax free
cash flows and the terminal value. TPH estimated the common equity value as (i) the present value of the cash flows and terminal value
plus (ii) the present value of the future estimated effects of hedging less (iii) net debt (total debt less cash). Taken together, the foregoing
sensitivities resulted in an implied LRE valuation range of $(1.14) to $8.22 per unit.
Additionally, TPH performed a discounted cash flow analysis of Vanguard using a methodology generally consistent with that used to
calculate the discounted cash flow of LRE using the LRE Forecasts through 2019. TPH estimated the common equity value as the (i)
present value of the cash flows and terminal value plus (ii) the present value of the future estimated effects of hedging less (iii) net debt
(total debt less cash) and (iv) preferred equity. Terminal values were calculated at December 31, 2018 using a multiple range of 6.0x to
9.0x 2019 estimated EBITDA. Taken together, the foregoing sensitivities resulted in an implied Vanguard valuation range of $(2.24) to
$29.05 per unit.
Relative Contribution Analysis
TPH performed an analysis of the relative contributions of LRE and Vanguard to the combined entity resulting from the merger, without
giving effect to any synergies, of select business metrics, including:
•2015 first quarter daily production and full-year 2015 and 2016 estimated daily production based on the LRE Forecasts;
•proved reserves based on the LRE 2014 SEC Reserve Report and the Vanguard 2014 SEC Reserve Report;
•2014 distributable cash flow and 2015 and 2016 estimated distributable cash flow based on the LRE Forecasts;
• 2014 EBITDA and 2015 and 2016 estimated EBITDA based on the LRE Forecasts;
•2014 unhedged EBITDA and 2015 and 2016 estimated unhedged EBITDA based on the LRE Forecasts;
• SEC PV-10 of proved reserves;
•
discounted cash flows; and
•1P Net Asset Value based on the estimated 1P reserves in the LRE Management 3P Reserve Estimates and the Vanguard Management
1P Reserve Estimates.
For commodity price sensitivities, TPH applied (i) Strip 1, (ii) Research Consensus 1 and (iii) Ten-Year Average 1 prices. This
contribution analysis implied a range of exchange ratios from 0.173x to 1.178x.
Selected Companies Analysis
TPH reviewed and compared certain financial, operating and stock market information of LRE and Vanguard to corresponding information
of selected publicly traded MLPs focused in the upstream oil and gas industry: Atlas Resource Partners, L.P., Breitburn Energy Partners
LP, Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P., EV Energy Partners, L.P., Legacy Reserves LP, Linn Energy, LLC, Memorial Production Partners
LP and Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP.
For the public trading analysis, select trading multiples were analyzed, including:
• enterprise value over 2015 estimated and 2016 estimated EBITDA;
• enterprise value over proved reserves;
• enterprise value over first quarter 2015 estimated daily production;
• enterprise value over 2015 estimated daily production;
• enterprise value over 2016 estimated daily production; and
• price over 2015 estimated and 2016 estimated distributable cash flow per unit.
94
Using Wall Street median estimates, the observed multiple ranges from the public trading analysis as compared to the resulting implied
transaction multiples resulting from the proposed merger consideration are summarized below:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Ratio of Enterprise Value Over:
2015 Estimated EBITDA
2016 Estimated EBITDA
Proved Reserves ($/Mcfe)
First Quarter 2015 Estimated Daily
Production
($/Mcfe/d)
2015 Estimated Daily Production
($/Mcfe/d)
2016 Estimated Daily Production
($/Mcfe/d)
Ratio of Unit Price Over:
2015 Estimated DCF/Unit
2016 Estimated DCF/Unit
Range
5.5x to 9.2x     7.7x
   5.1x to 9.2x     7.8x
 $1.28 to $2.74  $1.95
Median
Merger
Consideration
 
   
    6.7x
 
 
    7.5x
  $ 2.61
$
7,494 to
$14,707
$
$
7,018 to
$15,138
5,150 to
$14,742
$11,412  $ 13,470
$11,462  $ 13,609
$11,191  $ 13,594
5.3x to 8.3x     6.8x
   5.5x to 8.7x     6.9x
5.4x
    7.6x
TPH reviewed certain corporate-level transactions in the upstream energy industry with greater than 90% equity consideration announced
since 2010. TPH conducted a comparable transactions analysis to assess how similar transactions were valued.
Selected Transactions Analysis
• QR Energy, LP/Breitburn Energy Partners LP (2014)
• Kodiak Oil & Gas Corp./Whiting Petroleum Corporation (2014)
• Pioneer Southwest Energy Partners L.P./Pioneer Natural Resources Company (2013)
• Crimson Exploration Inc./Contango Oil & Gas Company (2013)
• Berry Petroleum Company/Linn Energy, LLC (2013)
• Encore Energy Partners LP/Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC (2011)
• American Oil & Gas Inc./Hess Corporation (2010)
• Arena Resources, Inc./SandRidge Energy, Inc. (2010)
For the selected transactions analysis, select transaction multiples were analyzed including:
•
the transaction value (defined as the equity purchase price plus assumed net debt, preferred equity and minority interest obligations, if
any) over proved reserves;
the transaction value over daily production; and
•
• the transaction value over last 12 months’, forward year 1 and forward year 2 EBITDA.
The observed multiple ranges from the comparable transaction analysis as compared to the resulting implied transaction multiples
resulting from the proposed merger consideration are summarized below:
Range
Merger
Consideration
  $ 2.61
Median
Proved Reserves ($/Mcfe)
$3.03 to $5.98  $4.18
Daily Production ($/Mcfe/d)
LTM EBITDA
Forward Year 1 EBITDA
Forward Year 2 EBITDA
$
8,779 to
$29,505
$25,897  $ 13,470
5.6x to 11.9x     9.0x
   4.6x to 10.1x     7.2x
   4.6x to 10.0x     6.7x
6.5x
    6.7x
    7.5x
95
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The Eagle Rock Opinion
In connection with rendering the Eagle Rock Opinion and performing its related financial analysis, TPH reviewed, among other things:
1.
a draft of the Eagle Rock merger agreement dated May 21, 2015 and the form of consent of the board of directors of LRE GP with
respect thereto, in each case circulated the morning thereof;
the merger agreement;
2.
3.Annual Reports on Form 10-K for each of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock for each of the three years ended December 31, 2014;
4. certain Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for each of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock;
5. certain other communications from LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock to their respective equity holders;
6.
estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of December 31, 2014, attributable to
Eagle Rock’s net interests in certain properties, prepared by Cawley, Gillespie & Associates, Inc. (“Eagle Rock 2014 SEC Reserve
Report”), and estimated proved, probable and possible oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of
March 31, 2015, attributable to Eagle Rock’s net interests in such properties, prepared by the management of Eagle Rock GP (“Eagle
Rock Management 3P Reserve Estimates”);
7. the Vanguard 2014 SEC Reserve Report and the Vanguard Management 1P Reserve Estimates;
8. the LRE 2014 SEC Reserve Report and the LRE Management 3P Reserve Estimates;
9. certain publicly available research analyst reports for LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock; and
10.
certain internal financial, production and pricing information and forecasts for Eagle Rock and New Vanguard (including Vanguard
management’s most recent projections for New Vanguard, which give pro forma effect to the LRE Transactions as of August 1, 2015),
prepared by the managements of Eagle Rock and Vanguard, respectively, as approved for TPH’s use by the management of LRE GP
(the “Eagle Rock Forecasts”), including certain cost savings synergies projected by the management of Vanguard to result from the
LRE Transactions and the Eagle Rock Transactions, as approved for TPH’s use by the management of LRE GP (the “Eagle Rock
Synergies”).
TPH also held discussions with members of the senior managements of Vanguard and LRE regarding their assessment of the strategic
rationale for, and the potential benefits of, the Eagle Rock Transactions and the Consent and with members of the senior management of
Eagle Rock and Vanguard regarding the past and current business operations, financial condition and future prospects of Eagle Rock and
New Vanguard, as applicable. In addition, TPH reviewed the reported price and trading activity for the Eagle Rock common units and
Vanguard common units, compared certain financial and stock market information for Eagle Rock and Vanguard with similar financial and
stock market information for certain other companies the securities of which are publicly traded, reviewed the financial terms of certain
recent business combinations in the upstream energy sector specifically and in the energy industry generally and performed such other
studies and analyses, and considered such other factors, as it considered appropriate.
For purposes of the Eagle Rock Opinion, TPH assumed and relied upon, without assuming any responsibility for independent verification,
the accuracy and completeness of all of the financial, accounting, legal, tax and other information provided to, discussed with or reviewed
by or for it, or publicly available. In that regard, TPH assumed with the consent of the board of directors of LRE GP that the Eagle Rock
Forecasts and Eagle Rock Synergies described above were reasonably prepared on a basis reflecting the best currently available
estimates and judgments of management of Vanguard and Eagle Rock, and that such Eagle Rock Forecasts and Eagle Rock Synergies
will be realized in the amounts and time periods contemplated thereby. TPH expressed no view or opinion with respect to such Eagle
Rock Forecasts or Eagle Rock Synergies or the assumptions on which they were based. Further, TPH assumed that the final form of the
Eagle Rock merger agreement conformed to the last draft reviewed by it in all respects material to its analysis and that the Eagle
96
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Rock Transactions and the LRE Transactions will be consummated on the terms set forth in the Eagle Rock merger agreement and the
merger agreement, respectively, in each case without any waiver or modification of any term or condition the effect of which would be in
any way meaningful to its analysis. TPH also assumed that all governmental, regulatory or other consents or approvals necessary for the
consummation of the Eagle Rock Transactions and the LRE Transactions will be obtained without any material adverse effect on Eagle
Rock, Vanguard or its affiliates, LRE, LRE GP, the unitholders of Eagle Rock, Vanguard or LRE or the expected benefits of the Eagle
Rock Transactions and the LRE Transactions in any way meaningful to its analysis. In addition, TPH did not make an independent
evaluation or appraisal of the assets and liabilities (including any contingent, derivative or off-balance-sheet assets and liabilities) of
Eagle Rock, Vanguard, LRE or any of their respective subsidiaries, and TPH was not furnished with any such evaluation or appraisal.
TPH did not express any opinion as to any tax or other consequences that might result from the Eagle Rock Transactions or the LRE
Transactions, nor does its opinion address any legal, regulatory or accounting matters.
The Eagle Rock Opinion is necessarily based upon economic, monetary, market and other conditions as in effect on, and the information
made available to it as of, May 21, 2015. TPH has assumed no obligation to update, revise or reaffirm the Eagle Rock Opinion and
expressly disclaimed any responsibility to do so based on circumstances, developments or events occurring after the date of the Eagle
Rock Opinion.
The estimates contained in TPH’s analysis and the results from any particular analysis are not necessarily indicative of future results,
which may be significantly more or less favorable than suggested by such analyses. In addition, analyses relating to the value of
businesses or assets neither purport to be appraisals nor do they necessarily reflect the prices at which businesses or assets may actually
be sold. Accordingly, TPH’s analysis and estimates are inherently subject to substantial uncertainty.
In arriving at its opinion, TPH did not attribute any particular weight to any particular analysis or factor considered by it, but rather made
qualitative judgments as to the significance and relevance of each analysis and factor. Several analytical methodologies were employed
by TPH in its analyses, and no one single method of analysis should be regarded as critical to the overall conclusion reached by TPH.
Each analytical technique has inherent strengths and weaknesses, and the nature of the available information may further affect the
significance or utility of particular techniques. Accordingly, TPH believes that its analyses must be considered as a whole, and that
selecting portions of its analyses and of the factors considered by it, without considering all analyses and factors in their entirety, could
create a misleading or incomplete view of the evaluation process underlying its opinion. The conclusion reached by TPH, therefore, is
based on the application of TPH’s own experience and judgment to all analyses and factors considered by TPH, taken as a whole. TPH’s
opinion was reviewed and approved by its fairness opinion committee.
The Eagle Rock Opinion addressed only the fairness, from a financial point of view, as of the date of the opinion, of the Eagle Rock
merger consideration to be paid by New Vanguard pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement. TPH’s opinion did not address the
relative merits of the Eagle Rock Transactions or the LRE Transactions as compared to any alternative transaction that may be available
to Vanguard, nor did it address the underlying business decision of (i) Vanguard to engage in the Eagle Rock Transactions or the LRE
Transactions, (ii) LRE to provide the Consent or (iii) LRE to engage in the LRE Transactions. TPH did not express any view on, and the
Eagle Rock Opinion did not address, any other term or aspect of the Eagle Rock merger agreement or the Eagle Rock Transactions,
including, without limitation, (a) the fairness of the Eagle Rock Transactions to, or any consideration paid or received in connection
therewith by, the holders of any class of securities, creditors or other constituencies of Eagle Rock or Vanguard, whether relative to the
Eagle Rock merger consideration pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement or otherwise, (b) the fairness of the amount or nature of
any compensation to be paid or payable to any of the officers, directors or employees of Eagle Rock or Vanguard or any other party, or
any class of such persons, in connection with the Eagle Rock Transactions, whether relative to the Eagle Rock merger consideration
pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement or otherwise, or (c) any voting or similar agreement, arrangement or understanding to be
entered into in connection with or contemplated by the Eagle Rock Transactions, any other transactions or otherwise. TPH did not
express any view on, and the Eagle Rock Opinion did not address, any term or aspect of the merger agreement or the LRE Transactions.
TPH did not express any opinion as to the price at which Vanguard common units or Eagle Rock common units will trade at any time or as
to the impact of the Eagle
97
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Rock Transactions and the LRE Transactions on the solvency or viability of Eagle Rock or Vanguard or the ability of each of Eagle Rock
or Vanguard to pay its obligations when they become due.
The following is a summary of the material financial analyses performed by TPH in connection with the preparation of the Eagle Rock
Opinion and reviewed with the board of directors of LRE GP on May 21, 2015. Unless the context indicates otherwise, enterprise values
and equity values used in the selected companies analysis described below were calculated using the closing price of the Eagle Rock
common units, Vanguard common units and the equity securities of the selected companies listed below as of May 20, 2015, and
transaction values for the selected transactions analysis described below were calculated on an enterprise value basis based on the
value of the equity consideration and other public information available at the time of the relevant transaction’s announcement. The
analyses summarized below include information presented in tabular format. In order to fully understand the financial analyses performed,
the tables must be considered together with the textual summary of the analyses.
For purposes of its analysis, TPH reviewed a number of financial metrics, including enterprise value, EBITDA, and distributable cash flow,
each as defined above with respect to the description of the LRE Opinion.
Summary of TPH’s Analysis
Commodity Price Assumptions
The commodity price assumptions used by TPH in certain of its analyses are summarized below:
NYMEX Strip Pricing as of May 20, 2015 (“Strip 2”):
Year
2015 (June to December)
2016
2017
2018
2019 and thereafter
WTI
 
Crude
(per Bbl)
 $ 59.53   $  3.03
 $62.32   $ 3.24
 $64.37   $ 3.36
 $66.02   $ 3.46
 $67.25   $ 3.55
Henry Hub
 
Gas
(per MMBtu)
Research Consensus per Bloomberg (“Research Consensus 2”):
Year
2015 (June to December)
2016
2017
2018
2019 and thereafter
WTI
 
Crude
(per Bbl)
 $ 60.57   $  3.11
 $70.00   $ 3.60
 $73.25   $ 4.13
 $75.00   $ 4.36
 $75.00   $ 4.36
Henry Hub
 
Gas
(per MMBtu)
10-Year Historical Monthly Average (“Ten-Year Average 2”):
Average (rounded)
Net Asset Value Analysis
WTI
 
Crude
(per Bbl)
 $ 81.64   $  5.32
Henry Hub
 
Gas
(per MMBtu)
TPH performed an illustrative Net Asset Value analysis of Eagle Rock. TPH calculated the present value of the pre-tax future cash flows
that Eagle Rock could be expected to generate from its existing base of estimated 3P reserves, in each case, to the end of their economic
life, as of March 31, 2015, contained in the Eagle Rock Management 3P Reserve Estimates. In performing this analysis, TPH applied
discount rates ranging from 8% to 10% to the projected cash flows. TPH estimated Net Asset Value as the sum of (i) the present value of
the cash flows generated by these estimated 3P reserves plus (ii) the present value of the future estimated effects of hedging less (iii) net
debt (total debt less cash and short-term investments). The commodity prices utilized to derive the cash flows through 2019 were based
on (i) Strip 2, (ii) Research
98
Consensus 2 and (iii) Ten-Year Average 2 prices. The commodity prices utilized to derive cash flows in 2019 and beyond were based on
2019 commodity prices. Taken together, the foregoing sensitivities applied to the Net Asset Value calculation for 3P reserves resulted in
an implied Eagle Rock valuation range of $2.71 to $5.21 per unit.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Discounted Cash Flow Analysis
TPH performed a discounted cash flow analysis of Eagle Rock using the Eagle Rock Forecasts through 2019. The commodity prices
utilized to derive the cash flows were based on (i) Strip 2, (ii) Research Consensus 2 and (iii) Ten-Year Average 2 prices. Terminal values
were calculated at December 31, 2018 using a multiple range of 4.5x to 6.5x 2019 estimated EBITDA. In performing this analysis, TPH
applied discount rates ranging from 8% to 10% to the pre-tax free cash flows and the terminal value. TPH estimated the common equity
value as (i) the present value of the cash flows and terminal value plus (ii) the present value of the future estimated effects of hedging less
(iii) net debt (total debt less cash and short-term investments). Taken together, the foregoing sensitivities resulted in an implied Eagle
Rock valuation range of $1.74 to $6.42 per unit.
Additionally, TPH performed a discounted cash flow analysis of New Vanguard using a methodology generally consistent with that used
to calculate the discounted cash flow of Eagle Rock using the Eagle Rock Forecasts through 2019. TPH estimated the common equity
value as the (i) present value of the cash flows and terminal value plus (ii) the present value of the future estimated effects of hedging less
(iii) net debt (total debt less cash) and (iv) preferred equity. Terminal values were calculated at December 31, 2018 using a multiple range
of 6.0x to 9.0x 2019 estimated EBITDA. Taken together, the foregoing sensitivities resulted in an implied Vanguard valuation range of
$(2.16) to $26.13 per unit.
Relative Contribution Analysis
TPH performed an analysis of the relative contributions of Eagle Rock and New Vanguard to the combined entity resulting from the Eagle
Rock merger, without giving effect to any synergies, of select business metrics, including:
•
•
•
2015 first quarter daily production and 2015 (August – December), 2016 and 2017 estimated daily production based on the Eagle Rock
Forecasts;
proved reserves based on the Eagle Rock 2014 SEC Reserve Report, for Eagle Rock’s contribution, and the Vanguard 2014 SEC
Reserve Report and the LRE 2014 SEC Reserve Report, for New Vanguard’s contribution;
2014 distributable cash flow and 2015 (August – December), 2016 and 2017 estimated distributable cash flow based on the Eagle Rock
Forecasts;
•2014 EBITDA and 2015 (August – December), 2016 and 2017 estimated EBITDA based on the Eagle Rock Forecasts;
2014 unhedged EBITDA and 2015 (August – December), 2016 and 2017 estimated unhedged EBITDA based on the Eagle Rock
Forecasts;
• SEC PV-10 of proved reserves;
•
discounted cash flows; and
•
•
1P Net Asset Value based on the estimated 1P reserves in the Eagle Rock Management 3P Reserve Estimates, for Eagle Rock’s
contribution, and the estimated 1P reserves in the LRE Management 3P Reserve Estimates and the Vanguard Management 1P Reserve
Estimates, for New Vanguard’s contribution.
For commodity price sensitivities, TPH applied (i) Strip 2, (ii) Research Consensus 2 and (iii) Ten-Year Average 2 prices. This
contribution analysis implied a range of exchange ratios from 0.117x to 1.076x.
99
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Selected Companies Analysis
TPH reviewed and compared certain financial, operating and stock market information of Eagle Rock and New Vanguard to
corresponding information of selected publicly traded MLPs focused in the upstream oil and gas industry: Atlas Resource Partners, L.P.,
Breitburn Energy Partners LP, EV Energy Partners, L.P., Legacy Reserves LP, Linn Energy, LLC, Memorial Production Partners LP and
Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP.
For the public trading analysis, select trading multiples were analyzed, including:
• enterprise value over fourth quarter annualized 2015 estimated and full-year 2016 estimated EBITDA;
• enterprise value over proved reserves;
• enterprise value over first quarter 2015 daily production;
• enterprise value over 2015 estimated daily production;
• enterprise value over 2016 estimated daily production; and
• price over fourth quarter 2015 estimated and 2016 estimated distributable cash flow per unit.
Using Wall Street median estimates, the observed multiple ranges from the public trading analysis as compared to the resulting implied
transaction multiples resulting from the proposed Eagle Rock merger consideration are summarized below:
Range
Median
Eagle Rock
Merger
Consideration
Ratio of Enterprise Value Over:
Fourth Quarter Annualized 2015
Estimated EBITDA
2016 Estimated EBITDA
Proved Reserves ($/Mcfe)
First Quarter 2015 Daily Production
($/Mcfe/d)
2015 Estimated Daily Production
($/Mcfe/d)
2016 Estimated Daily Production
($/Mcfe/d)
4.9x to 8.5x     7.4x
5.1x
5.4x to 8.6x     7.6x
 $1.20 to $2.69  $1.95
5.0x
  $ 1.87
$
$
$
6,900 to
$14,393
6,502 to
$14,536
4,842 to
$14,205
$11,841  $ 7,484
$11,571  $ 7,730
$10,857  $ 7,843
Ratio of Unit Price Over:
Fourth Quarter 2015 Estimated
DCF/Unit
2016 Estimated DCF/Unit
3.5x to 6.0x     5.3x
8.2x
4.9x to 7.9x     6.5x
7.8x
Selected Transactions Analysis
TPH reviewed certain corporate-level transactions in the upstream energy industry with greater than 90% equity consideration announced
since 2010. TPH conducted a comparable transactions analysis to assess how similar transactions were valued.
• Rosetta Resources Inc./Noble Energy, Inc. (2015)
• LRR Energy, L.P./Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC (2015)
• QR Energy, LP/Breitburn Energy Partners LP (2014)
• Kodiak Oil & Gas Corp./Whiting Petroleum Corporation (2014)
• Pioneer Southwest Energy Partners L.P./Pioneer Natural Resources Company (2013)
• Crimson Exploration Inc./Contango Oil & Gas Company (2013)
• Berry Petroleum Company/Linn Energy, LLC (2013)
• Encore Energy Partners LP/Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC (2011)
• American Oil & Gas Inc./Hess Corporation (2010)
100
• Arena Resources, Inc./SandRidge Energy, Inc. (2010)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
For the selected transactions analysis, select transaction multiples were analyzed including:
•
the transaction value (defined as the equity purchase price plus assumed net debt, preferred equity and minority interest obligations, if
any) over proved reserves;
the transaction value over daily production; and
•
• the transaction value over last 12 months’, forward year 1 and forward year 2 EBITDA.
The observed multiple ranges from the comparable transaction analysis as compared to the resulting implied transaction multiples
resulting from the proposed Eagle Rock merger consideration are summarized below:
Range
Median
Eagle Rock
Merger
Consideration
  $ 1.87
Proved Reserves ($/Mcfe)
$2.30 to $5.98  $3.32
Daily Production ($/Mcfe/d)
LTM EBITDA
Forward Year 1 EBITDA
Forward Year 2 EBITDA
$
8,779 to
$29,505
$20,432  $ 7,484
5.6x to 11.9x     8.8x
   4.6x to 10.1x     7.3x
   4.6x to 10.2x     7.2x
5.0x
    5.8x
    5.0x
General
TPH, as part of its investment banking business, is continually engaged in performing financial analyses with respect to businesses and
their securities in connection with mergers and acquisitions, negotiated underwritings, competitive biddings, secondary distributions of
listed and unlisted securities, private placements and other transactions, as well as for estate, corporate and other purposes.
TPH and its affiliates also engage in securities trading and brokerage, private equity and investment management activities, equity
research and other financial services, and in the ordinary course of these activities, TPH and its affiliates may from time to time acquire,
hold or sell, for their own accounts and for the accounts of their customers, (i) equity, debt and other securities (or related derivative
securities) and financial instruments (including bank loans and other obligations) of any of the companies that may be involved in the LRE
Transactions or the Eagle Rock Transactions, including the parties to the merger agreement and the Eagle Rock merger agreement, and
any of their respective affiliates, and (ii) any currency or commodity that may be involved in the LRE Transactions or the Eagle Rock
Transactions and the other matters contemplated by the merger agreement and the Eagle Rock merger agreement, respectively.
In addition, TPH, its affiliates and certain of their employees, including members of the team performing services in connection with the
LRE Transactions and the Eagle Rock Transactions, as well as certain private equity and investment management funds associated or
affiliated with TPH or its affiliates in which they may have financial interests, may from time to time acquire, hold or make direct or indirect
investments in or otherwise finance a wide variety of companies, including LRE, Vanguard, any of the other companies that may be
involved in the LRE Transactions or the Eagle Rock Transactions, including the parties to the merger agreement and the Eagle Rock
merger agreement, other prospective counterparties and any of their respective affiliates.
The board of directors of LRE GP selected TPH to provide financial advice and assistance to the board and to provide a fairness opinion
in connection with the merger and the Consent because of TPH’s expertise, reputation and familiarity with the oil and gas industry
generally and the upstream oil and gas industry specifically and because its investment banking professionals have substantial
experience in transactions comparable to the merger and are regularly engaged in the analysis of businesses in connection with mergers
and acquisitions, leveraged buyouts, competitive biddings, private placements and for corporate and other purposes.
TPH has previously performed various investment banking and financial services for the LRE GP conflicts committee and for portfolio
companies of certain affiliates of LRE GP for which it has received or
101
TABLE OF CONTENTS
may receive compensation. In the past two years, these services included advising Lime Rock Management LP and its portfolio
companies in various transactions, including PDC Mountaineer, LLC in a sale transaction with a third party. TPH was also previously
engaged by Vanguard in 2014 with respect to a potential acquisition of assets from a third party, for which TPH received compensation. In
addition, TPH has previously performed various investment banking and financial services, and is currently providing certain of such
services, for affiliates of NGP Energy Capital Management, a private equity firm that indirectly owns a significant minority equity interest in
Eagle Rock (“NGP”), for which TPH has received or may receive compensation. In the past two years, these services included (i) acting
as a financial advisor to certain NGP portfolio companies in connection with sales of upstream and midstream assets; (ii) acting as a
financial advisor to a public company in which NGP had an interest in connection with an acquisition of upstream assets; (iii) acting as an
underwriter for an NGP portfolio company in connection with its initial public offering; and (iv) acting as a financial advisor to an NGP
portfolio company in connection with its investigation of strategic alternatives. TPH was also previously engaged by Eagle Rock with
respect to an acquisition, for which it received compensation. TPH or its affiliates may in the future provide investment banking or other
financial services to parties to the merger agreement, the Eagle Rock merger agreement or any of the other companies involved in the
LRE Transactions, the Eagle Rock Transactions or their respective unitholders, members, affiliates or portfolio companies. In connection
with such investment banking or other financial services, TPH or its affiliates may receive compensation.
The description set forth above constitutes a summary of the analyses employed and factors considered by TPH in rendering the LRE
Opinion and the Eagle Rock Opinion to the board of directors of LRE GP. TPH believes that its analyses in connection with each of the
LRE Opinion and the Eagle Rock Opinion must be considered as a whole and that selecting portions of its analyses, without considering
all analyses and factors, could create an incomplete view of the process underlying each opinion. The preparation of a fairness opinion is
a complex, analytical process involving various determinations as to the most appropriate and relevant methods of financial analysis and
the application of those methods to the particular circumstances and is not necessarily susceptible to partial analysis or summary
description.
No company or transaction used in the analyses of comparable transactions summarized above is identical or directly comparable to
LRE, Vanguard, Eagle Rock or the merger or the Eagle Rock merger. Accordingly, these analyses must take into account differences in
the financial and operating characteristics of the selected publicly traded companies and differences in the structure and timing of the
selected transactions and other factors that would affect the public trading value and acquisition value of the companies considered.
Pursuant to the terms of the engagement of TPH, TPH received a total of $1.6 million for the rendering of its fairness opinions described
above. TPH is entitled to receive additional fees of $3.425 million, contingent upon closing of the LRE Transactions. In addition, LRE has
agreed to reimburse TPH for its reasonable out-of-pocket, reasonably documented expenses incurred in connection with the engagement,
including fees and disbursements of its legal counsel. LRE has also agreed to indemnify TPH, its affiliates and their respective officers,
directors, partners, agents, employees and controlling persons for liabilities arising in connection with or as a result of its rendering of
services under its engagement, including liabilities under the federal securities laws or to contribute to payments TPH may be required to
make in respect of these liabilities.
TPH’s opinions will be made available for inspection and copying at the principal executive offices of LRE during regular business hours
by any interested LRE unitholder or such unitholder’s representative who has been so designated in writing
Opinions of the Financial Advisor to the LRE GP Conflicts Committee
Opinion Dated April 20, 2015
In connection with Vanguard’s merger proposal to LRE, the LRE GP conflicts committee retained Simmons & Company International
(“Simmons”) to provide financial advisory services and render an opinion, if requested, as to the fairness from a financial point of view of
the consideration to be received by the unaffiliated LRE unitholders in the merger. On April 20, 2015, Simmons rendered its oral opinion,
which was subsequently confirmed in writing, to the LRE GP conflicts committee to the effect that, as of that date,
102
TABLE OF CONTENTS
and based upon and subject to the assumptions, limitations and qualifications set forth in its opinion, that the terms of the merger
contemplated by the merger agreement were fair from a financial point of view to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders.
Pursuant to the merger agreement, the merger consideration consists of the right to receive 0.550 Vanguard common units per LRE
common unit. Based on Vanguard’s closing unit price of $15.72 per unit on April 17, 2015, Simmons calculated the implied value of the
unit consideration to be $8.65 per LRE common unit as of that date. In the analyses described below, the term “implied exchange ratio”
means an exchange ratio derived by dividing the unit price of LRE common units implied by the various analyses outlined below by
Vanguard’s common unit price implied by the same analyses as of or for a period ending on the close of business on April 17, 2015.
The full text of Simmons’ written opinion, dated April 20, 2015, which sets forth, among other things, certain assumptions made,
procedures followed, matters considered, and qualifications and limitations of the review undertaken by Simmons in rendering
its opinion, is attached as Annex E to this proxy statement/prospectus and is incorporated herein by reference. The summary of
the Simmons opinion set forth in this document is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the opinion. LRE
unitholders are urged to read the Simmons opinion carefully and in its entirety. Simmons delivered its opinion to the LRE GP
conflicts committee for the benefit and use of the LRE GP conflicts committee in connection with and for purposes of its
evaluation of the merger consideration from a financial point of view to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders. Simmons’ opinion does
not constitute a recommendation as to how any holder of interests in LRE should vote or act with respect to the merger or any
other matter.
Simmons’ opinion and its presentation to the LRE GP conflicts committee were among many factors taken into consideration by the LRE
GP conflicts committee in approving the merger agreement and making its recommendation to the board of directors of LRE GP regarding
the merger agreement.
In connection with rendering its opinion, Simmons, among other things:
i. reviewed a draft of the Purchase Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of April 18, 2015;
ii. reviewed a draft of the Voting and Support Agreement dated as of April 18, 2015;
iii.reviewed certain publicly available financial statements of each of LRE and Vanguard that Simmons deemed relevant;
iv.
v.
vi.
reviewed certain other publicly available business, operating and financial information relating to each of LRE and Vanguard that
Simmons deemed relevant;
reviewed certain internal information, including financial and production forecasts and other financial and operating data concerning
each of LRE and Vanguard, prepared by the management of each of LRE and Vanguard, respectively;
reviewed certain estimates of LRE’s and Vanguard’s oil and gas production and reserves prepared and provided by the management of
LRE and Vanguard, respectively, and contained in provided economic databases;
vii. reviewed certain other information and presentations prepared by the management of LRE and its advisors;
viii.reviewed publicly available information concerning the trading of, and the trading market for, the securities of LRE and Vanguard;
ix.
x.
reviewed the historical exchange ratio based upon the closing trading prices of the units for both LRE and Vanguard over several time
periods, which were then compared to the exchange ratio;
derived a relevant premium range from a list of historical transactions to compute an exchange ratio range which was then compared to
the exchange ratio;
103
TABLE OF CONTENTS
xi.
xii.
compared LRE’s ownership in the pro forma combined company with the relative contribution of LRE to the pro forma combined
company based upon certain metrics that Simmons deemed relevant, which were then used to derive an implied exchange ratio range
which was compared to the exchange ratio;
derived a net asset value range for both LRE and Vanguard by discounting future cash flows derived from LRE and Vanguard
economic databases at discount rates which Simmons deemed appropriate, and used the net asset value ranges to derive an implied
exchange ratio range which was compared to the exchange ratio;
derived a unit value range based on the trading valuations of certain publicly traded partnerships in the oil and gas exploration and
production sector for both LRE and Vanguard, and used these unit value ranges to derive an implied exchange ratio range which was
compared to the exchange ratio;
reviewed the range of Wall Street analyst price targets for both LRE and Vanguard, and used such price targets to derive an implied
exchange ratio range which was compared to the exchange ratio; and
reviewed the financial metrics of certain historical corporate transactions in the oil and gas exploration and production sector, and
applied such financial metrics to LRE’s projected results to compute an exchange ratio which was then compared to the exchange
ratio.
xiii.
xiv.
xv.
In addition, Simmons held discussions with certain officers and employees of LRE and Vanguard to discuss the foregoing, as well as
other matters believed to be relevant to its analysis, and considered such other information, financial studies, analyses and investigations,
and financial, economic, and market criteria which it deemed relevant.
In connection with its review, Simmons did not independently verify any of the foregoing information and relied on it being complete and
accurate in all material respects. With respect to production and financial forecasts, Simmons assumed that they were reasonably
prepared on bases reflecting the best currently available estimates and judgments of LRE’s and Vanguard’s management as to the future
financial and operational performance of LRE and Vanguard, respectively. In rendering its opinion, Simmons assumed that the execution
version of the merger agreement was substantially the same as the draft dated April 18, 2015 that Simmons reviewed and that the merger
would be consummated in accordance with the terms set forth in the merger agreement without any waiver, amendment or delay of any
material terms or conditions. Simmons assumed that in connection with the receipt of all necessary governmental, regulatory or other
approvals and consents required for the merger, no delays, limitations, conditions or restrictions would be imposed that would have a
material adverse effect on the receipt of the merger consideration by the unitholders of LRE. Simmons is not a legal, tax or regulatory
advisor and has relied upon, without independent verification, the assessment of LRE and its legal, tax and regulatory advisors with
respect to such matters. Simmons did not conduct any tax analysis, and Simmons assumed, with the conflict committee’s consent, that the
merger will be treated as a tax-free reorganization for federal income tax purposes. Simmons expressed no opinion as to the price at
which LRE common units or Vanguard common units will trade at any time. In addition, Simmons was not requested to make, and did not
make, an independent evaluation or appraisal of the assets of LRE or Vanguard. Simmons was not requested to, and did not, solicit
indications of interest or proposals from third parties regarding a possible acquisition of all or any part of LRE or any alternative
transaction.
The opinion speaks only as of the date and the time it was delivered and not as of the time the merger may be consummated. The opinion
does not reflect changes that may occur or may have occurred after April 20, 2015, which could significantly alter the value of LRE or
Vanguard or the respective trading prices of their common units, which are factors on which Simmons’ opinion was based. Simmons’
opinion was necessarily based upon conditions as they existed and could be evaluated on, and on the information made available at April
20, 2015. Events occurring after April 20, 2015 may affect Simmons’ opinion and the assumptions used in preparing it, and Simmons has
disclaimed and does not assume any obligation to update, revise or reaffirm its opinion, including with respect to circumstances,
developments or events that occur after the rendering of its opinion.
104
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Simmons’ opinion was provided for the information and assistance of the LRE GP conflicts committee in connection with its consideration
of the merger. Simmons’ opinion did not address LRE’s underlying business decision to pursue the merger or the relative merits of the
merger as compared to any alternative business strategies or transactions that might be available for LRE. Simmons’ opinion did not
address the fairness of the amount or nature of the compensation to any of LRE’s or Vanguard’s officers, directors or employees, or class
of such persons, relative to the compensation to the public unitholders of LRE. Simmons’ opinion does not constitute a recommendation to
any unitholder as to how such unitholder should vote on the merger.
The following represents a summary of the material financial analyses presented by Simmons to the LRE GP conflicts committee in
connection with its opinion. The following summary, however, does not purport to be a complete description of the financial analyses
performed by Simmons. The order of analyses described does not represent relative importance or weight given to those analyses by
Simmons. Some of the summaries of the financial analyses include information presented in tabular format. The tables must be read
together with the full text of each summary and are alone not a complete description of Simmons’ financial analyses. Considering the
summary data and tables alone without considering the full narrative description of the financial analyses, including the methodologies
and assumptions underlying the analyses, could create a misleading or incomplete view of the financial analyses performed by Simmons.
Except as otherwise noted, the following quantitative information, to the extent that it is based on market data, is based on market data as
it existed on or before April 17, 2015 and is not necessarily indicative of current market conditions. For purposes of its analysis, Simmons
defined (i) EBITDA as net income plus or minus income taxes, interest expense (less interest income), depreciation, depletion and
amortization expense, impairment of oil and natural gas properties, net loss (gain) on commodity derivative instruments, and commodity
derivative net cash settlements, and (ii) EBITDAX as net income plus or minus income taxes, interest expense (less interest income),
depreciation, depletion, amortization and exploration expense, impairment of oil and natural gas properties, net loss (gain) on commodity
derivative instruments, and commodity derivative net cash settlements. Based on these definitions, the difference between EBITDA and
EBITDAX is the addition of exploration expense for those companies that record it. For those companies that record little or no exploration
expense, such as LRR, Vanguard, Eagle Rock and many of their MLP peers, EBITDA and EBITDAX result in the same figures and
Simmons believes the definitions can be used interchangeably. The financial forecasts prepared by LRE and provided to Simmons
included both a base capital case for the years 2015 through 2019, and a reduced capital case for the years 2015 and 2016, which
projected reduced capital spending for LRE in 2016 and a reduction in LRE’s 2016 revenue and EBITDA. In conducting the financial
analysis described below, Simmons used the reduced capital case provided by LRE. Simmons’ opinion was reviewed and approved by
its fairness opinion committee.
Commodity Price Assumptions
Simmons utilized two commodity price assumptions in certain of its analyses: (1) NYMEX calendar strip prices as of April 17, 2015 (and
utilizing historical actual commodity prices for the period prior to April 17, 2015), and (2) research analyst consensus commodity pricing
per Bloomberg as of April 17, 2015. The commodity price assumptions utilized in Simmons’ analyses were as follow:
NYMEX Strip Prices:
WTI
 
Crude
Henry Hub
 
Gas
Year
105
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019 and Thereafter
(per Bbl) (per MMBtu)
 
 $ 56.02   $ 2.80
 
 $ 62.30   $ 3.11
 
 $ 63.92   $ 3.36
 $ 64.90   $ 3.48
 
 
 $ 65.50   $ 3.58
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Research Consensus Prices per Bloomberg:
Year
2015
2016
2017
2018 and Thereafter
WTI
 
Crude
(per Bbl)
 $ 55.00   $ 3.09
 $ 69.00   $ 3.75
 $ 72.50   $ 4.25
 $ 73.75   $ 4.47
Henry Hub
 
Gas
(per MMBtu)
Historical Unit Price Exchange Ratio Analysis
Simmons reviewed the historical daily ratio of the closing price of LRE common units to the closing price of Vanguard common units over
several time periods, and compared those ratios to the exchange ratio in the merger consideration to be received by LRE unitholders. The
following table sets forth the results of this analysis:
Time Period
Spot (April 17, 2015)
10-Day Average
30-Day Average
90-Day Average
Implied
 
Exchange
Ratio
  0.496x
  0.486x
  0.469x
  0.463x
These results provide an implied exchange ratio range of 0.463x to 0.496x, which was compared to the exchange ratio of 0.550x.
Premiums Paid Analyses
MLP-to-MLP Transactions Premiums Analysis
Simmons performed an analysis of the premiums paid in precedent MLP-to-MLP business combinations since January 1, 2010, which
included MLPs in both the midstream sector and in the upstream oil & gas sector. Although Simmons analyzed the premiums implied by
the selected transactions, none of these transactions or associated companies is identical to the merger or to LRE or Vanguard.
Using publicly available information at the time of the announcement of the relevant transaction, including company filings and third-party
transaction databases, Simmons reviewed the consideration paid in the transactions and analyzed the premium of each such transaction
over the trading price on the last trading day and the average trading price over the 30 days and 60 days before the announcement of the
applicable transaction.
The following table identifies the twelve MLP-to-MLP transactions reviewed by Simmons in this analysis:
Announcement
Date
Target
11/12/2014
Oiltanking Partners, L.P.
10/26/2014
Williams Partners L.P.
QR Energy, LP
 PVR Partners, L.P.
7/24/2014
10/10/2013
8/27/2013
5/7/2013
Acquiror
Enterprise Products Partners
 
L.P.
Access Midstream Partners,
 
L.P.
 Breitburn Energy Partners L.P.
 Regency Energy Partners LP
Plains All American Pipeline,
L.P.
Pioneer Natural Resources
 
USA, Inc.
PAA Natural Gas Storage, L.P.
Pioneer Southwest Energy
 
Partners L.P.
5/6/2013
3/25/2011
Crestwood Midstream Partners
LP
 Encore Energy Partners LP
2/23/2011
Duncan Energy Partners L.P.
Inergy Midstream, L.P.
Vanguard Natural Resources,
 
LLC
Enterprise Products Partners
 
L.P.
9/21/2010
8/6/2010
6/11/2010
Penn Virginia GP Holdings,
 
L.P.
 Inergy Holdings, L.P.
 Buckeye GP Holdings L.P.
Penn Virginia Resource
 
Partners, L.P.
 Inergy, L.P.
 Buckeye Partners, L.P.
106
The implied premiums derived from the MLP-to-MLP transactions listed above are summarized below, and were compared to the
premiums over the same applicable time periods that were implied by the value of the merger consideration to be received by LRE
unitholders:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
High
Median
Low
Merger Consideration
1-Day
30-Day
 
 
Premium
Premium
  34 % 
  35 % 
  16 % 
  10 % 
  4 % 
  3 % 
  25 % 
  11 %
60-Day
 
Premium
  35 % 
  21 % 
  1 % 
  20 %
U.S. Upstream Oil & Gas Corporate Transactions Premiums Analysis
Simmons reviewed publicly available data from nineteen transactions involving U.S. listed target companies since 2010 in the upstream
oil & gas sector, which transactions included both MLP targets and C-corporation targets. Within this set of transactions, Simmons focused
its analysis on the eight transactions where the merger consideration consisted entirely of equity in the acquirer due to Simmons deeming
those to be most comparable to the merger. For those transactions, Simmons analyzed the premium of each such transaction over the
trading price on the last trading day and the average trading price over the 30 days and 60 days before the announcement of the
applicable transaction.
The following table identifies the eight U.S. upstream oil & gas corporate transactions reviewed by Simmons in this analysis:
Announcement
Date
7/24/2014
7/13/2014
4/30/2013
5/7/2013
2/21/2013
Target
QR Energy, LP
 Kodiak Oil & Gas Corp.
 Crimson Exploration Inc.
Pioneer Southwest Energy
 
Partners L.P.
 Berry Petroleum Co., LLC
3/25/2011
Encore Energy Partners LP
1/19/2011
Nuloch Resources, Inc.
Acquiror
Breitburn Energy Partners L.P.
 Whiting Petroleum Corporation
 Contango Oil & Gas Co.
Pioneer Natural Resources
 
USA, Inc.
 Linn Energy, LLC
Vanguard Natural Resources,
 
LLC
Magnum Hunter Resources
 
Corporation
7/27/2010
American Oil & Gas Inc.
Hess Corporation
The implied premiums derived from the U.S. oil & gas upstream corporate transactions listed above are summarized below, and were
compared to the premiums over the same applicable time periods that were implied by the value of the merger consideration to be
received by LRE unitholders:
High
Median
Low
Merger Consideration
1-Day
 
Premium
  23 % 
  14 % 
  (2 )% 
  11 %
30-Day
 
Premium
  28 % 
  18 % 
  (2 )% 
  25 %
60-Day
 
Premium
  34 % 
  18 % 
  3 % 
  20 %
Based upon the analysis of MLP-to-MLP transactions and U.S. upstream oil & gas corporate transactions above, Simmons used a range
of a 10% to 25% premium to LRE’s 30-day average price to derive an implied value range of $7.64 to $8.68 per LRE unit. Simmons then
compared the implied value range to Vanguard’s unit price of $15.72 as of April 17, 2015 to derive an implied exchange ratio range of
0.486x to 0.552x. These metrics were compared to the exchange ratio of 0.550x.
Contribution Analysis
Simmons examined the implied contribution of each of LRE and Vanguard to the combined entity’s financial and operating statistics,
including: (1) distributable cash flow and EBITDAX for the years 2015 and 2016, in each case using projections derived from LRE’s and
Vanguard’s management forecasts and adjusted for NYMEX Strip Prices and Bloomberg Consensus Prices as of April 17, 2015; (2)
fourth quarter 2014 actual production and 2015 and 2016 estimated production derived from LRE’s and Vanguard’s management
forecasts (assuming 6:1 oil-to-gas energy equivalent ratio); (3) proved and proved developed reserves as of
107
TABLE OF CONTENTS
year-end 2014 estimated by LRE and Vanguard management and contained in provided economic databases (assuming 6:1 oil-to-gas
energy equivalent ratio); and (4) proved and proved developed PV-10 derived from the LRE and Vanguard management estimates per the
provided economic databases and assuming NYMEX Strip Prices as of April 17, 2015. For the analyses utilizing 2015 and 2016
EBITDAX estimates, Simmons examined the relative contribution both including LRE’s and Vanguard’s hedge positions and adjusted to
exclude LRE’s and Vanguard’s hedge positions.
Simmons derived the implied exchange ratio for unitholders of LRE and Vanguard for each metric based on their relative contributions of
LRE and Vanguard to each metric for the combined company, and then made appropriate adjustments for each of LRE’s and Vanguard’s
net debt and units outstanding. The following table sets forth the results of this analysis:
Contribution
 
from
LRE
     
   18 % 
   13 %
13 % 
   11 %
Contribution
 
from
Vanguard
     
   82 % 
   87 % 
     
   87 % 
   89 %
Implied
 
Exchange
Ratio
    
 
  1.152x  
  0.576x  
    
 
  0.650x  
  0.518x
17 % 
   12 %
83 % 
   88 %
1.132x  
  0.490x
EBITDAX including Hedges (Strip Prices)
2015P
2016P
EBITDAX excluding Hedges (Strip Prices)      
2015P
2016P
EBITDAX including Hedges (Consensus
Prices)
2015P
2016P
EBITDAX excluding Hedges (Consensus
Prices)
2015P
2016P
Production
Fourth Quarter 2014
2015P
2016P
Proved Reserves (Bcfe)
Proved
Proved Developed
Proved PV-10
Proved
Proved Developed
Distributable Cash Flow
2015P
2016P
12 % 
   11 % 
 
     
% 
   9
% 
   9
% 
   9
 
     
   9
% 
   11 % 
     
   11 % 
   13 % 
     
   24 % 
   15 %
88 % 
   89 % 
     
   91 % 
   91 % 
   91 % 
     
   91 % 
   89 % 
     
   89 % 
   87 % 
     
   76 % 
   85 %
0.595x  
  0.483x  
    
 
  0.164x  
  0.195x  
  0.145x  
    
 
  0.164x  
  0.367x  
    
 
  0.389x  
  0.568x  
    
 
  0.950x  
  0.526x
Simmons calculated the summary statistics for the implied exchange ratio for the above ratios excluding those ratios derived from
production and proved reserves operational metrics, which were deemed less relevant than financial metrics such as EBITDAX, PV-10
and distributable cash flow due to the differences in LRE and Vanguard’s relative weighting of their asset bases to natural gas versus oil
and natural gas liquids. Excluding the production and proved reserve metrics, the above analysis resulted in a minimum exchange ratio of
0.389x, a maximum of 1.152x and a median of 0.572x. From this total range, Simmons used a range of 0.389x to 0.650x, which excludes
those results that are based on 2015E EBITDAX and Distributable Cash Flow when including LRE and Vanguard’s hedge positions due
to the large non-recurring impact of those hedge positions in 2015. This range was compared to the exchange ratio of 0.550x.
108
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Proved Net Asset Value Analysis
Simmons performed an illustrative proved net asset value analysis for LRE and Vanguard. Simmons calculated the present value of the
future cash flows that LRE and Vanguard could be expected to generate from their existing estimated proved reserves as of year-end
2014, as estimated by the management of LRE and Vanguard and contained in provided economic databases. Simmons estimated Net
Asset Value by adding (i) the present value of the cash flows generated by these estimated proved reserves, plus (ii) the present value of
existing hedges, less (iii) the present value of projected general & administrative expenses, less (iv) other corporate adjustments including
net debt (total debt less cash) and preferred equity. All cash flows were discounted at rates of 8% and 10%. The proved net asset value
analysis was performed assuming both NYMEX Strip Pricing and Bloomberg Consensus Pricing as of April 17, 2015.
The ratio of proved net asset value per unit for both LRE and Vanguard resulted in an implied exchange ratio range of 0.317x to 0.374x.
These metrics were compared to the exchange ratio of 0.550x.
Comparable Company Analyses
Simmons examined the trading valuations of certain publicly traded partnerships in the upstream oil & gas exploration and production
sector and derived a unit value range for each of LRE and Vanguard. The upstream MLP companies included in the analysis are as
follows:
Atlas Resource Partners, LP
•
• Breitburn Energy Partners L.P.
•
•
•
• Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP
• Memorial Production Partners LP
EV Energy Partners, L.P.
Legacy Reserves LP
Linn Energy, LLC
For each of the companies selected, Simmons reviewed the ratio of unit price to distributable cash flow per unit (“DCFPU”) and enterprise
value, which was calculated as equity value based on closing unit prices on April 17, 2015, plus book value of debt and liquidation value
of preferred equity, less cash and cash equivalents, as a multiple of estimated EBITDAX in calendar years 2015 and 2016, and as a
multiple of 2014 SEC PV-10. The EBITDAX projections for this analysis were derived from Wall Street consensus forecast estimates as
well as LRE’s and Vanguard’s management forecasts adjusted for Bloomberg Consensus Commodity Prices. The 2014 SEC PV-10
estimates utilized were those included in year-end 2014 SEC filings. The following table sets forth the results of this analysis:
Ratio of Unit Price To:
2015P DCFPU
2016P DCFPU
Ratio of Enterprise Value To:
2015P EBITDAX
2016P EBITDAX
2014 SEC PV-10
Median
 Range
    
 
     
  5.1x – 8.6x    6.9x  
  5.0x – 13.8x   8.1x  
    
 
  5.2x – 9.2x    7.8x  
  6.5x – 8.9x    7.5x  
  0.6x – 1.4x    1.2x
Following these analyses, Simmons applied certain forward-looking comparable company trading multiples to Wall Street consensus
DCF per unit, and both Wall Street consensus forecast estimates and management forecasts applying Bloomberg Consensus Commodity
Pricing for LRE’s and Vanguard’s
109
estimated 2015 and 2016 EBITDAX, as well as to 2014 SEC PV-10 estimates utilized in LRE’s and Vanguard’s year-end 2014 SEC
filings. A summary of this analysis is set forth below.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Ratio of Equity Value To:
2015P DCFPU
2016P DCFPU
Ratio of Enterprise Value To:
Implied
 
Exchange Ratio
Reference
 
Range
    
 
  6.0x – 8.0x   0.976x – 0.976x 
  7.0x – 9.0x   0.724x – 0.724x
Wall Street Consensus
2015P EBITDAX
2016P EBITDAX
Management with Consensus Pricing
2015P EBITDAX
2016P EBITDAX
2014 SEC PV-10
7.0x – 9.0x   1.596x – 0.990x 
  6.5x – 8.5x   1.430x – 0.831x 
    
 
  7.0x – 9.0x   1.863x – 1.092x 
  6.5x – 8.5x   0.542x – 0.468x 
  1.1x – 1.4x   0.559x – 0.511x
Based on the comparable company analyses above, Simmons derived a total range of implied exchange ratios of 0.468x to 1.863x, with a
median of 0.903x. From this total range, Simmons used a range of 0.511x to 0.831x, which excludes results based on 2015E estimates
due to the non-recurring hedge component. This range was compared to the exchange ratio of 0.550x.
Analyst Price Target Analysis
Simmons determined a range of Wall Street price targets for each of LRE and Vanguard based on the mean, median, low and high targets
of the analysts considered. A summary of this analysis is set forth below.
Price Target
High
Median
Mean
Low
LRE
Vanguard
Implied
Exchange
Ratio
$10.00  $ 25.00    0.400x  
 $8.00   $ 17.50    0.457x  
 $7.80   $ 17.58    0.444x  
 $5.00   $ 13.00    0.385x
These results provide an implied exchange ratio range of 0.385x to 0.457x, which was compared to the exchange ratio of 0.550x.
Comparable Transactions Analysis
Simmons reviewed publicly available data from thirteen transactions involving U.S. listed target companies since 2010 in the upstream oil
& gas sector where a significant component of the consideration consisted of stock of the acquiror. For these transactions, Simmons
analyzed the transaction value at the time of the announcement as a ratio of estimated EBITDA for the current year in which the
transaction was announced and the future year after the transaction was announced. EBITDA estimates were based on Wall Street
analyst consensus estimates for the target companies as of the time of the transaction announcements.
Announcement
Date
7/24/2014
7/13/2014
3/12/2014
4/30/2013
5/7/2013
2/21/2013
12/5/2012
110
Target
QR Energy, LP
 Kodiak Oil & Gas Corp.
 EPL Oil & Gas, Inc.
 Crimson Exploration Inc.
Pioneer Southwest Energy
 
Partners L.P.
 Berry Petroleum Co.
Plains Exploration &
 
Production Company
Acquiror
Breitburn Energy Partners L.P.
 Whiting Petroleum Corporation
 Energy XXI Ltd.
 Contango Oil & Gas Co.
Pioneer Natural Resources
 
USA, Inc.
 Linn Energy, LLC/LinnCo
Freeport-McMoRan Inc.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Announcement
Date
4/25/2012
Target
GeoResources Inc.
3/25/2011
Encore Energy Partners LP
1/19/2011
Nuloch Resources, Inc.
7/27/2010
4/15/2010
4/4/2010
American Oil & Gas Inc.
 Mariner Energy, Inc.
 Arena Resources Inc.
Acquiror
Halcon Resources Corp.
Vanguard Natural Resources
 
LLC
Magnum Hunter Resources
 
Corporation
 Hess Corporation
 Apache Corp.
 Sandridge Energy, Inc.
Based on the transactions listed above, Simmons derived a transaction value to EBITDA ratio range of 4.8x to 10.1x with a median value
of 7.5x for the current year EBITDA estimates, and 4.4x to 8.5x with a median value of 5.7x for the future year EBITDA estimates.
Simmons applied a selected range of EBITDA multiples to LRE’s EBITDA for the years 2015 and 2016 using projections derived from
LRE’s management forecasts and adjusted for NYMEX Strip Prices, and to LRE’s 2015 and 2016 EBITDA estimates using Wall Street
consensus estimates. Simmons then made adjustments for LRE’s net debt and units outstanding to derive an implied equity value per
unit:
Reference
 
Range
Implied LRE
 
Equity
Value Per Unit
6.0x – 9.0x  $6.94 – $15.52 
  5.0x – 7.0x    N/A – $3.96  
    
 
  6.0x – 9.0x  $6.22 – $14.44 
  5.0x – 7.0x  $2.59 – $7.71
Ratio of Enterprise Value To:
Management with NYMEX Pricing
2015P EBITDA
2016P EBITDA
Wall Street Consensus
2015P EBITDA
2016P EBITDA
Simmons divided the implied LRE equity values per unit calculated above by Vanguard’s closing price on April 17, 2015 of $15.72 per
unit to derive a range of implied exchange ratios of 0.165x to 0.987x, with a median of 0.441x. From this total range, Simmons used a
range of 0.252x to 0.491x, which excludes results based on 2015E estimates due to the non-recurring hedge component. This range was
compared to the exchange ratio of 0.550x.
Other Factors
Simmons analyzed the pro forma impact of the merger on the distributable cash flow per unit attributable to LRE common unitholders for
2015 and 2016 assuming a January 1, 2015 close date and using projections for each year derived from LRE and Vanguard’s
management forecast adjusted for NYMEX strip pricing and Bloomberg Consensus pricing and incorporating estimated interest expense
savings and LRE management’s estimate of general and administrative expense savings to be realized from the merger. That analysis
indicated that, under both NYMEX strip and Bloomberg Consensus pricing, the transaction would be dilutive on a pro forma basis to the
distributable cash flow per unit attributable to LRE common unitholders in 2015 and accretive in 2016.
General
The summary set forth above does not purport to be a complete description of the analyses performed by Simmons, but simply describes,
in summary form, the material analyses that Simmons conducted in connection with rendering its opinion. The preparation of a fairness
opinion is a complex process involving various quantitative and qualitative judgments and determinations with respect to the financial,
comparative and other analytic methods employed and the adaptation and application of those methods to the unique facts and
circumstances presented. As a consequence, neither Simmons’s opinion nor the analyses underlying its opinion are readily susceptible
to partial analysis or summary description. Simmons arrived at its opinion based on the results of all analyses undertaken by it and
assessed as a whole and did not draw, in isolation, conclusions from or with regard to any individual analysis, analytic method or factor.
Accordingly, Simmons believes that its analyses must be considered as a whole and that selecting portions of its analyses, analytic
methods and factors, without considering all analyses and factors or the narrative description of the analyses, could create a misleading or
incomplete view of the processes underlying its analyses and opinion.
111
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Simmons based its analyses on assumptions that it deemed reasonable, including assumptions concerning general business and
economic conditions and industry-specific factors. Analyses based on forecasts or projections of future results are inherently uncertain, as
they are subject to numerous factors or events beyond the control of the parties or their advisors. Accordingly, Simmons’ analyses are not
necessarily indicative of actual values or actual future results that might be achieved, which values may be higher or lower than those
indicated or implied. The implied exchange ratio reference ranges indicated by Simmons’ analyses are illustrative and not necessarily
indicative of actual values nor predictive of future results or values, which may be significantly more or less favorable than those
suggested by the analyses. Moreover, Simmons’ analyses are not and do not purport to be appraisals or otherwise reflective of the prices
at which businesses actually could be bought or sold. In addition, no company or transaction used in Simmons’ analysis as a comparison
is directly comparable to LRE or Vanguard or the contemplated merger. Because these analyses are inherently subject to uncertainty,
being based upon numerous factors or events beyond the control of the parties or their respective advisors, none of LRE or Simmons or
any other person assumes responsibility if future results are materially different from those forecasts or projections.
Simmons’ opinion was one of many factors taken into consideration by the LRE GP conflicts committee in making its determination to
recommend the merger and should not be considered determinative of the views of the LRE GP conflicts committee or management with
respect to the merger or the merger consideration.
No company or transaction used in the analyses of comparable transactions summarized above is identical or directly comparable to
LRE, Vanguard, or the merger. Accordingly, these analyses must take into account differences in the financial and operating
characteristics of the selected publicly traded companies and differences in the structure and timing of the selected transactions and other
factors that would affect the public trading value and acquisition value of the companies considered.
The financial terms of the merger were determined through arms-length negotiations between LRE and Vanguard and were approved by
each of them, and Simmons did not recommend any specific financial terms for the merger consideration to the LRE GP conflicts
committee or assert that any specific financial terms of the merger constituted the only appropriate financial terms of the merger
consideration.
Simmons was selected by the LRE GP conflicts committee based on Simmons’ qualifications, expertise and reputation. Simmons is an
internationally recognized investment banking firm that specializes in the energy industry and is continually engaged in the valuation of
businesses and their securities in connection with mergers and acquisitions, leveraged buyouts, negotiated underwritings, secondary
distributions of listed and unlisted securities and private placements. In the ordinary course of its business, Simmons may trade the
securities of LRE and Vanguard for its own account and for the accounts of customers and may at any time hold a long or short position in
such securities.
Pursuant to the terms of the LRE GP conflicts committee’s engagement of Simmons, LRE agreed to pay Simmons an initial advisory fee of
$450,000 payable on the date of engagement, and an additional fee of $450,000 payable upon Simmons’ delivery of its fairness opinion
to the LRE GP conflicts committee. In addition, LRE agreed to reimburse Simmons for its reasonably incurred out-of-pocket expenses
incurred in connection with the engagement, including fees and disbursements of its legal counsel. LRE also agreed to indemnify
Simmons, its affiliates and their respective directors, officers, shareholders, agents, employees and controlling persons for liabilities
related to or arising out of Simmons’ engagement or its role in connection therewith, including liabilities under the federal securities laws,
or to contribute to payments Simmons may be required to make in respect of these liabilities.
In the past two years, (i) Simmons’ oil field services and equipment group has advised a portfolio company of Lime Rock Partners, an
affiliate of Lime Rock Management LP, in connection with a previous, unrelated transaction for which Simmons received aggregate
compensation of approximately $0.9 million, and (ii) Simmons, through the oil field services and equipment group of its subsidiary
Simmons & Company International Limited, also advised on a separate, unrelated transaction for a portfolio company of Lime Rock
Partners for which Simmons received aggregate compensation of approximately $1.8 million. The aggregate compensation received by
Simmons in connection with these transactions was not material to Simmons. Simmons is currently advising a portfolio company of Lime
Rock Partners in connection with an unrelated
112
TABLE OF CONTENTS
transaction, for which it has received approximately $75,000 in compensation to date and will be entitled to receive additional customary
compensation if a transaction is ultimately consummated. Simmons and its affiliates may provide investment banking or other financial
services to LRE, Vanguard, Lime Rock Management or their respective shareholders, affiliates or portfolio companies in the future. In
connection with such investment banking or other financial services, Simmons or its affiliates, as applicable, may receive compensation.
Opinion Dated May 20, 2015
In connection with Vanguard’s proposal to Eagle Rock with respect to the Eagle Rock merger, the LRE GP conflicts committee retained
Simmons to provide financial advisory services and render an opinion, if requested, as to the fairness from a financial point of view of the
terms of the Eagle Rock merger to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders. On May 20, 2015, Simmons rendered its oral opinion, which was
subsequently confirmed in writing, to the LRE GP conflicts committee to the effect that, as of that date, and based upon and subject to the
assumptions, limitations and qualifications set forth in its opinion, that the terms of the Eagle Rock merger contemplated by the Eagle
Rock merger agreement were fair from a financial point of view to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders.
Pursuant to the Eagle Rock merger agreement, the consideration to be received by Eagle Rock common unitholders consists of the right
to receive 0.185 Vanguard common units per Eagle Rock common unit (the “Eagle Rock merger consideration”, and such ratio, the “Eagle
Rock exchange ratio”). Based on Vanguard’s closing unit price of $15.79 per unit on May 19, 2015, Simmons calculated the implied value
of the unit consideration to be $2.92 per Eagle Rock common unit as of that date. In the analyses described below, the term “Eagle Rock
implied exchange ratio” means an exchange ratio derived by dividing the unit price of Eagle Rock common units implied by the various
analyses outlined below by Vanguard’s common unit price implied by the same analyses as of or for a period ending on the close of
business on May 19, 2015.
The full text of Simmons’ written opinion, dated May 20, 2015, which sets forth, among other things, certain assumptions made,
procedures followed, matters considered, and qualifications and limitations of the review undertaken by Simmons in rendering
its opinion, is attached as Annex F to this proxy statement/prospectus and is incorporated herein by reference. The summary of
the Simmons opinion set forth in this document is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the opinion. LRE
unitholders are urged to read the Simmons opinion carefully and in its entirety. Simmons delivered its opinion to the LRE GP
conflicts committee for the benefit and use of the LRE GP conflicts committee in connection with and for purposes of its
evaluation of the Eagle Rock merger consideration from a financial point of view to the unaffiliated LRE unitholders in
connection with its determination of whether to consent to the Eagle Rock merger. Simmons’ opinion does not constitute a
recommendation as to how any holder of interests in LRE should vote or act with respect to the merger or any other matter.
Simmons’ opinion and its presentation to the LRE GP conflicts committee were among many factors taken into consideration by the LRE
GP conflicts committee in consenting to the Eagle Rock merger agreement and making its recommendation to the Board of Directors of
the general partner of LRE regarding the Eagle Rock merger.
In connection with rendering its opinion, Simmons, among other things:
i. reviewed a draft of the Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of May 19, 2015;
ii.reviewed a draft of the Letter Agreement regarding Written Consent to the Proposed Merger Transaction as of May 19, 2015;
iii.reviewed certain publicly available financial statements of each of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock that Simmons deemed relevant;
reviewed certain other publicly available business, operating and financial information relating to each of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle
Rock that Simmons deemed relevant;
iv.
113
TABLE OF CONTENTS
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.
ix.
x.
xi.
reviewed certain internal information, including financial and production forecasts and other financial and operating data concerning
each of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock, prepared by the management of each of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock, respectively;
reviewed certain estimates of LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s oil and gas production and reserves prepared and provided by the
management of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock, respectively, and contained in provided economic databases;
reviewed certain other information and presentations prepared by the management of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock and certain of
their advisors;
reviewed publicly available information concerning the trading of, and the trading market for, the securities of LRE, Vanguard and
Eagle Rock;
reviewed the historical exchange ratio based upon the closing trading prices of the units for both Vanguard and Eagle Rock over
several time periods, which were then compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio;
derived a relevant premium range from a list of historical transactions to compute an exchange ratio range which was then compared to
the Eagle Rock exchange ratio;
compared the ownership of Vanguard, pro forma for its merger with LRE (“Pro Forma Vanguard”), in the combined company pro forma
for the subsequent Eagle Rock merger (the “Pro Forma Combined Entity”) with the relative contribution of Pro Forma Vanguard to the
Pro Forma Combined Entity based upon certain metrics that Simmons deemed relevant, which were then used to derive an Eagle Rock
implied exchange ratio range which was compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio;
derived a net asset value range for both Pro Forma Vanguard and Eagle Rock by discounting future cash flows derived from the LRE,
Vanguard and Eagle Rock economic databases at discount rates which Simmons deemed appropriate, and used the net asset value
ranges to derive an Eagle Rock implied exchange ratio range which was compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio;
derived a unit value range based on the trading valuations of certain publicly traded partnerships in the oil and gas exploration and
production sector for both Pro Forma Vanguard and Eagle Rock, and used these unit value ranges to derive an Eagle Rock implied
exchange ratio range which was compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio;
reviewed the range of Wall Street analyst price targets for both Vanguard and Eagle Rock, and used such price targets to derive an
Eagle Rock implied exchange ratio range which was compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio; and
reviewed the financial metrics of certain historical corporate transactions in the oil and gas exploration and production sector, and
applied such financial metrics to Eagle Rock’s projected results to compute an exchange ratio which was then compared to the Eagle
Rock exchange ratio.
xii.
xiii.
xiv.
xv.
In addition, Simmons held discussions with certain officers and employees of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock to discuss the foregoing, as
well as other matters believed to be relevant to its analysis and considered such other information, financial studies, analyses and
investigations, and financial, economic, and market criteria which it deemed relevant.
In connection with its review, Simmons did not independently verify any of the foregoing information and relied on its being complete and
accurate in all material respects. With respect to production and financial forecasts, Simmons assumed that they were reasonably
prepared on bases reflecting the best currently available estimates and judgments of LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s management
as to the future financial and operational performance of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock, respectively. In rendering its opinion, Simmons
assumed that the execution version of the Agreement and Plan of Merger was substantially the same as the draft dated May 19, 2015 that
Simmons reviewed and that the Eagle Rock merger would be consummated in accordance with the terms set forth in the Agreement and
Plan of Merger without any waiver,
114
TABLE OF CONTENTS
amendment or delay of any material terms or conditions. Simmons assumed that in connection with the receipt of all necessary
governmental, regulatory or other approvals and consents required for the Eagle Rock merger, no delays, limitations, conditions or
restrictions would be imposed that would have a material adverse effect on the closing of either the LRE merger with Vanguard or the
Vanguard merger with Eagle Rock. Simmons is not a legal, tax or regulatory advisor and has relied upon, without independent
verification, the assessment of LRE and its legal, tax and regulatory advisors with respect to such matters. Simmons did not conduct any
tax analysis, and Simmons assumed, with the LRE GP conflicts committees consent, that the Eagle Rock merger will be treated as a tax-
free reorganization for federal income tax purposes. Simmons expressed no opinion as to the price at which LRE common units,
Vanguard common units or Eagle Rock common units will trade at any time. In addition, Simmons was not requested to make, and did not
make, an independent evaluation or appraisal of the assets of LRE, Vanguard or Eagle Rock. Simmons was not requested to, and did not,
solicit indications of interest or proposals from third parties regarding a possible acquisition of all or any part of LRE or any alternative
transaction.
The opinion speaks only as of the date and the time it was delivered and not as of the time the Eagle Rock merger may be consummated.
The opinion does not reflect changes that may occur or may have occurred after May 20, 2015, which could significantly alter the value of
LRE, Vanguard or Eagle Rock or the respective trading prices of their common units, which are factors on which Simmons’ opinion was
based. Simmons’ opinion was necessarily based upon conditions as they existed and could be evaluated on, and on the information
made available at May 20, 2015. Events occurring after May 20, 2015 may affect Simmons’ opinion and the assumptions used in
preparing it, and Simmons has disclaimed and does not assume any obligation to update, revise or reaffirm its opinion, including with
respect to circumstances, developments or events that occur after the rendering of its opinion.
Simmons’ opinion was provided for the information and assistance of the LRE GP conflicts committee in connection with its consideration
of whether to consent to the Eagle Rock merger. Simmons’ opinion did not address LRE’s underlying business decision to consent to the
Eagle Rock merger or the relative merits of the Eagle Rock merger as compared to any alternative business strategies or transactions that
might be available for LRE. Simmons’ opinion did not address the fairness of the amount or nature of the compensation to any of LRE’s,
Vanguard’s or Eagle Rock’s officers, directors or employees, or class of such persons, relative to the compensation to the public
unitholders of LRE. Simmons’ opinion does not constitute a recommendation to any unitholder as to how such unitholder should vote on
the merger or the Eagle Rock merger.
The following represents a summary of the material financial analyses presented by Simmons to the LRE GP conflicts committee in
connection with its opinion. The following summary, however, does not purport to be a complete description of the financial analyses
performed by Simmons. The order of analyses described does not represent relative importance or weight given to those analyses by
Simmons. Some of the summaries of the financial analyses include information presented in tabular format. The tables must be read
together with the full text of each summary and are alone not a complete description of Simmons’ financial analyses. Considering the
summary data and tables alone without considering the full narrative description of the financial analyses, including the methodologies
and assumptions underlying the analyses, could create a misleading or incomplete view of the financial analyses performed by Simmons.
Except as otherwise noted, the following quantitative information, to the extent that it is based on market data, is based on market data as
it existed on or before May 19, 2015 and is not necessarily indicative of current market conditions. For purposes of its analysis, Simmons
defined (i) EBITDA as net income plus or minus income taxes, interest expense (less interest income), depreciation, depletion and
amortization expense, impairment of oil and natural gas properties, net loss (gain) on commodity derivative instruments, and commodity
derivative net cash settlements, and (ii) EBITDAX as net income plus or minus income taxes, interest expense (less interest income),
depreciation, depletion, amortization and exploration expense, impairment of oil and natural gas properties, net loss (gain) on commodity
derivative instruments, and commodity derivative net cash settlements. Based on these definitions, the difference between EBITDA and
EBITDAX is the addition of exploration expense for those companies that record it. For those companies that record little or no exploration
expense, such as LRR, Vanguard, Eagle Rock and many of their MLP peers, EBITDA and EBITDAX result in the same figures and
Simmons believes the definitions can be used interchangeably. Simmons’ opinion was reviewed and approved by its fairness opinion
committee.
115
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Commodity Price Assumptions
Simmons utilized two commodity price assumptions in certain of its analyses: (1) NYMEX calendar strip prices as of May 18, 2015 (and
utilizing historical actual commodity prices for the period prior to May 18, 2015), and (2) research analyst consensus commodity pricing
per Bloomberg as of May 18, 2015. The commodity price assumptions utilized in Simmons’ analyses were as follow:
NYMEX Strip Prices:
Year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019 and Thereafter
WTI
 
Crude
(per Bbl)
 $ 59.97   $ 3.03
 $ 63.20   $ 3.27
 $ 65.16   $ 3.37
 $ 66.68   $ 3.47
 $ 67.65   $ 3.56
Henry Hub
 
Gas
(per MMBtu)
Research Consensus Prices per Bloomberg:
Year
2015
2016
2017
2018 and Thereafter
WTI
 
Crude
(per Bbl)
 $ 59.00   $ 3.01
 $ 70.00   $ 3.60
 $ 73.25   $ 4.13
 $ 75.00   $ 4.36
Henry Hub
 
Gas
(per MMBtu)
Historical Unit Price Exchange Ratio Analysis
Simmons reviewed the historical daily ratio of the closing price of Eagle Rock common units to the closing price of Vanguard common
units over several time periods, and compared those ratios to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio in the Eagle Rock merger consideration to
be received by Eagle Rock unitholders. The following table sets forth the results of this analysis:
Time Period
Spot (May 19, 2015)
10-Day Average
30-Day Average
90-Day Average
Implied
 
Exchange
Ratio
  0.153x
  0.150x
  0.151x
  0.157x
These results provide an implied exchange ratio range of 0.150x to 0.157x, which was compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio of
0.185x.
Premiums Paid Analyses
MLP-to-MLP Transactions Premiums Analysis
Simmons performed an analysis of the premiums paid in precedent MLP-to-MLP business combinations since January 1, 2010, which
included MLPs in both the midstream sector and in the upstream oil & gas sector. Although Simmons analyzed the premiums implied by
the selected transactions, none of these transactions or associated companies is identical to the Eagle Rock merger or to Eagle Rock or
Vanguard.
Using publicly available information at the time of the announcement of the relevant transaction, including company filings and third-party
transaction databases, Simmons reviewed the consideration paid in the transactions and analyzed the premium of each such transaction
over the trading price on the last trading day and the average trading price over the 30 days and 60 days before the announcement of the
applicable transaction.
116
The following table identifies the fourteen MLP-to-MLP transactions reviewed by Simmons in this analysis:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Announcement
Date
5/13/2015
Target
Williams Partners L.P.
4/20/2015
LRR Energy, L.P.
11/12/2014
Oiltanking Partners, L.P.
10/26/2014
Williams Partners L.P.
7/24/2014
QR Energy, LP
10/10/2013
PVR Partners, L.P.
8/27/2013
PAA Natural Gas Storage, L.P.
5/7/2013
5/6/2013
Pioneer Southwest Energy
 
Partners L.P.
Crestwood Midstream Partners
 
LP
3/25/2011
Encore Energy Partners LP
Acquiror
Williams Companies, Inc.
Vanguard Natural Resources,
 
LLC
Enterprise Products Partners
 
L.P.
Access Midstream Partners,
 
L.P.
Breitburn Energy Partners
 
L.P.
 Regency Energy Partners LP
Plains All American Pipeline,
 
L.P.
Pioneer Natural Resources
 
USA, Inc.
Inergy Midstream, L.P.
Vanguard Natural Resources,
2/23/2011
Duncan Energy Partners L.P.
9/21/2010
8/6/2010
6/11/2010
Penn Virginia GP Holdings, L.P.
Inergy Holdings, L.P.
 Buckeye GP Holdings L.P.
LLC
Enterprise Products Partners
 
L.P.
Penn Virginia Resource
Partners, L.P.
 Inergy, L.P.
 Buckeye Partners, L.P.
The implied premiums derived from the MLP-to-MLP transactions listed above are summarized below, and were compared to the
premiums over the same applicable time periods that were implied by the value of the Eagle Rock merger consideration to be received by
Eagle Rock unitholders:
High
Median
Low
Eagle Rock Merger Consideration
1-Day
30-Day
 
 
Premium
Premium
  34 % 
  35 % 
  16 % 
  12 % 
  3 % 
  4 % 
  21 % 
  18 %
60-Day
 
Premium
  35 % 
  21 % 
  1 % 
  19 %
U.S. Upstream Oil & Gas Corporate Transactions Premiums Analysis
Simmons reviewed publicly available data from twenty-one transactions involving U.S. listed target companies since 2010 in the
upstream oil & gas sector, which transactions included both MLP targets and C-corporation targets. Within this set of transactions,
Simmons focused its analysis on the ten transactions where the merger consideration consisted entirely of equity in the acquirer due to
Simmons deeming those to be most comparable to the Eagle Rock merger. For those transactions, Simmons analyzed the premium of
each such transaction over the trading price on the last trading day and the average trading price over the 30 days and 60 days before the
announcement of the applicable transaction.
The following table identifies the ten U.S. Upstream Oil & Gas Corporate transactions reviewed by Simmons in this analysis:
Announcement
Date
5/11/2015
Target
Rosetta Resources, Inc.
4/20/2015
LRR Energy, L.P.
7/24/2014
7/13/2014
4/30/2013
5/7/2013
2/21/2013
QR Energy, LP
 Kodiak Oil & Gas Corp.
 Crimson Exploration Inc.
Pioneer Southwest Energy
 
Partners L.P.
 Berry Petroleum Co., LLC
3/25/2011
Encore Energy Partners LP
1/19/2011
Nuloch Resources, Inc.
7/27/2010
American Oil & Gas Inc.
Acquiror
Noble Energy, Inc.
Vanguard Natural Resources,
 
LLC
 Breitburn Energy Partners L.P.
 Whiting Petroleum Corporation
 Contango Oil & Gas Co.
Pioneer Natural Resources
 
USA, Inc.
 Linn Energy, LLC
Vanguard Natural Resources,
 
LLC
Magnum Hunter Resources
 
Corporation
 Hess Corporation
117
The implied premiums derived from the U.S. Oil & Gas Upstream Corporate transactions listed above are summarized below, and were
compared to the premiums over the same applicable time periods that were implied by the value of the Eagle Rock merger consideration
to be received by Eagle Rock unitholders:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
High
Median
Low
Eagle Rock Merger Consideration
1-Day
 
Premium
  38 % 
  15 % 
  (2 %) 
  21 %
30-Day
 
Premium
  30 % 
  21 % 
  (2 %) 
  18 %
60-Day
 
Premium
  35 % 
  23 % 
  3 % 
  19 %
Based upon the analysis of MLP-to-MLP transactions and U.S. Upstream Oil & Gas Corporate transactions above, Simmons used a range
of a 10% to 25% premium to Eagle Rock’s 30-day average price to derive an implied value range of $2.71 to $3.08 per Eagle Rock unit.
Simmons then compared the implied value range to Vanguard’s unit price of $15.79 as of May 19, 2015 to derive an Eagle Rock implied
exchange ratio range of 0.172x to 0.195x. These metrics were compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio of 0.185x.
Contribution Analysis
Simmons examined the implied contribution of each of Pro Forma Vanguard and Eagle Rock to the Pro Forma Combined Entity’s
financial and operating statistics, including: (1) distributable cash flow and EBITDA for the years 2015 and 2016, in each case using
projections derived from LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s management forecasts and adjusted for NYMEX Strip Prices and
Bloomberg Consensus Prices as of May 18, 2015; (2) first quarter 2015 actual production and full year 2015 and 2016 estimated
production derived from LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s management forecasts (assuming 6:1 oil-to-gas energy equivalent ratio);
(3) proved and proved developed reserves as of March 31, 2015 estimated by LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock management and
contained in provided economic databases (assuming 6:1 oil-to-gas energy equivalent ratio); and (4) proved and proved developed PV-
10 derived from the LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock management estimates per the provided economic databases and assuming
NYMEX Strip Prices as of May 18, 2015. For 2015 distributable cash flow, EBITDA and production, statistics for Pro Forma Vanguard
assume the LRE and Vanguard merger was completed as of January 1, 2015. For the analyses utilizing 2015 and 2016 EBITDA
estimates, Simmons examined the relative contribution both including Pro Forma Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s hedge positions and
adjusted to exclude Pro Forma Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s hedge positions.
Simmons derived the Eagle Rock implied exchange ratio for unitholders of Eagle Rock and Pro Forma Vanguard for each metric based
on their relative contributions of Eagle Rock and Pro Forma Vanguard to each metric for the Pro Forma Combined Entity, and then made
appropriate adjustments for each of Eagle Rock’s and Pro Forma Vanguard’s net debt and units outstanding. The following table sets
forth the results of this analysis:
Contribution
from
 
Eagle Rock
Contribution
from
 
Pro Forma
Vanguard
18 % 
   17 % 
     
   16 % 
   16 %
82 % 
   83 % 
     
   84 % 
   84 %
Implied
Exchange
 
Ratio
0.351x  
  0.321x  
    
 
  0.302x  
  0.299x
18 % 
   16 %
82 % 
   84 %
0.353x  
  0.306x
16 % 
   16 %
84 % 
   84 %
0.302x  
  0.304x
EBITDA including Hedges (Strip Prices)
2015P
2016P
EBITDA excluding Hedges (Strip Prices)
2015P
2016P
EBITDA including Hedges (Consensus
Prices)
2015P
2016P
EBITDA excluding Hedges (Consensus
Prices)
2015P
2016P
118
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Contribution
 
from
Eagle Rock
Production
First Quarter 2015
2015P
2016P
Q1 2015 Proved Reserves (Bcfe)
Proved
Proved Developed
Q1 2015 Proved PV-10
Proved
Proved Developed
Distributable Cash Flow
2015P
2016P
15 % 
   16 % 
   17 % 
     
   13 % 
   14 % 
     
   15 % 
   15 % 
     
   18 % 
   16 %
Contribution
from
 
Pro Forma
Vanguard
     
   85 % 
   84 % 
   83 % 
     
   87 % 
   86 % 
     
   85 % 
   85 % 
     
   82 % 
   84 %
Implied
 
Exchange
Ratio
0.278x  
  0.294x  
  0.323x  
    
 
  0.207x  
  0.246x  
    
 
  0.265x  
  0.276x  
    
 
  0.146x  
  0.124x
Simmons calculated the summary statistics for the Eagle Rock implied exchange ratio for the above ratios excluding those ratios derived
from production and proved reserves operational metrics, which were deemed less relevant than financial metrics such as EBITDA, PV-
10 and distributable cash flow due to the differences in Eagle Rock and Pro Forma Vanguard’s relative weighting of their asset bases to
natural gas versus oil and natural gas liquids. Excluding the production and proved reserve metrics, the above analysis resulted in a
minimum exchange ratio of 0.124x, a maximum of 0.353x and a median of 0.302x. From this total range, Simmons used a range of 0.124x
to 0.321x, which excludes those results that are based on 2015E EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow when including Eagle Rock and
Pro Forma Vanguard’s hedge positions due to the large non-recurring impact of those hedge positions in 2015. This range was compared
to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio of 0.185x.
Proved NAV Analysis
Simmons performed an illustrative Proved Net Asset Value analysis for Eagle Rock and Pro Forma Vanguard. Simmons calculated the
present value of the future cash flows that Eagle Rock and Pro Forma Vanguard could be expected to generate from their existing
estimated proved reserves as of March 31, 2015, as estimated by the management of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock and contained in
provided economic databases. Simmons estimated Net Asset Value by adding (i) the present value of the cash flows generated by these
estimated proved reserves, plus (ii) the present value of existing hedges, less (iii) the present value of projected general & administrative
expenses, less (v) other corporate adjustments including net debt (total debt less cash) and preferred equity. All cash flows were
discounted at rates of 8% and 10%. The Proved Net Asset Value Analysis was performed assuming both NYMEX Strip Pricing and
Bloomberg Consensus Pricing as of May 18, 2015.
The ratio of proved net asset value per unit for both Eagle Rock and Pro Forma Vanguard resulted in an Eagle Rock implied exchange
ratio range of 0.214x to 0.474x. These metrics were compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio of 0.185x.
Comparable Company Analyses
Simmons examined the trading valuations of certain publicly traded partnerships in the upstream oil & gas exploration and production
sector and derived a unit value range for each of Eagle Rock and Pro Forma Vanguard. The upstream MLP companies included in the
analysis are as follows:
Atlas Resource Partners, LP
•
• Breitburn Energy Partners L.P.
•
EV Energy Partners, L.P.
119
Legacy Reserves LP
Linn Energy, LLC
•
•
• Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP
• Memorial Production Partners LP
TABLE OF CONTENTS
For each of the companies selected, Simmons reviewed the ratio of unit price to distributable cash flow per unit (“DCFPU”) and enterprise
value, which was calculated as equity value based on closing unit prices on May 19, 2015, plus book value of debt and liquidation value
of preferred equity, less cash and cash equivalents, as a multiple of estimated EBITDA in calendar years 2015 and 2016, and as a
multiple of 2014 SEC PV-10. The EBITDA projections for this analysis were derived from Wall Street consensus forecast estimates as
well as LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s management forecasts adjusted for Bloomberg Consensus Commodity Prices. The 2014
SEC PV-10 estimates utilized were those included in year-end 2014 SEC filings. The following table sets forth the results of this analysis:
Ratio of Unit Price To:
2015P DCFPU
2016P DCFPU
Ratio of Enterprise Value To:
2015P EBITDA
2016P EBITDA
2014 SEC PV-10
Median
 Range
    
     
 
  5.3x – 8.6x   6.5x  
  5.5x – 9.1x   7.1x  
    
 
  7.8x – 8.9x   7.9x  
  7.5x – 8.7x   8.2x  
  0.6x – 1.6x   1.1x
Following these analyses, Simmons applied certain forward-looking comparable company trading multiples to Wall Street consensus
DCF per unit, and both Wall Street consensus forecast estimates and management forecasts applying Bloomberg Consensus Commodity
Pricing for Eagle Rock’s and Pro Forma Vanguard’s estimated 2015 and 2016 EBITDA, as well as to 2014 SEC PV-10 estimates utilized
in Eagle Rock’s and Pro Forma Vanguard’s year-end 2014 SEC filings. A summary of this analysis is set forth below.
Ratio of Equity Value To:
Reference
 
Range
Implied
 
Exchange Ratio
2015P DCFPU
2016P DCFPU
Ratio of Enterprise Value To:
Wall Street Consensus
2015P EBITDA
2016P EBITDA
Management with Consensus Pricing
2015P EBITDA
2016P EBITDA
2014 SEC PV-10
5.5x – 7.5x   0.165x – 0.165x 
  6.0x – 8.0x   0.169x – 0.169x 
 
    
    
 
  7.0x – 9.0x   0.552x – 0.322x 
  7.0x – 9.0x   0.593x – 0.349x 
    
 
  7.0x – 9.0x   0.539x – 0.313x 
  7.0x – 9.0x   0.449x – 0.272x 
  1.0x – 1.3x   0.347x – 0.223x
Based on the comparable company analyses above, Simmons derived a total range of Eagle Rock implied exchange ratios of 0.165x to
0.593x, with a median of 0.317x. From this total range, Simmons used a range of 0.223x to 0.449x, which excludes results based on
2015E estimates due to the non-recurring hedge component. This range was compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio of 0.185x.
120
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Analyst Price Target Analysis
Simmons determined a range of Wall Street price targets for each of Eagle Rock and Vanguard based on the mean, median, low and high
targets of the analysts considered. A summary of this analysis is set forth below.
Price Target
High
Median
Mean
Low
Eagle
 
Rock
Vanguard
Implied
Exchange
Ratio
$3.00   $ 25.00    0.120x  
 $3.00   $ 18.00    0.167x  
 $3.00   $ 18.00    0.167x  
 $3.00   $ 15.00    0.200x
These results provide an implied exchange ratio range of 0.120x to 0.200x, which was compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio of
0.185x.
Comparable Transactions Analysis
Simmons reviewed publicly available data from fifteen transactions involving U.S. listed target companies since 2010 in the upstream oil
& gas sector where a significant component of the consideration consisted of stock of the acquiror. For these transactions, Simmons
analyzed the transaction value at the time of the announcement as a ratio of estimated EBITDA for the current year in which the
transaction was announced and the future year after the transaction was announced. EBITDA estimates were based on Wall Street
analyst consensus estimates for the target companies as of the time of the transaction announcements.
Announcement
Date
5/11/2015
Target
Rosetta Resources, Inc.
4/20/2015
LRR Energy, L.P.
7/24/2014
QR Energy, LP
7/13/2014
Kodiak Oil & Gas Corp.
3/12/2014
4/30/2013
5/7/2013
2/21/2013
12/5/2012
4/25/2012
EPL Oil & Gas, Inc.
 Crimson Exploration Inc.
Pioneer Southwest Energy
 
Partners L.P.
 Berry Petroleum Co.
Plains Exploration & Production
 
Company
 GeoResources Inc.
3/25/2011
Encore Energy Partners LP
1/19/2011
Nuloch Resources, Inc.
7/27/2010
American Oil & Gas Inc.
Acquiror
Noble Energy, Inc.
Vanguard Natural Resources,
 
LLC
Breitburn Energy Partners
 
L.P.
Whiting Petroleum
 
Corporation
 Energy XXI Ltd.
 Contango Oil & Gas Co.
Pioneer Natural Resources
 
USA, Inc.
 Linn Energy, LLC/LinnCo
Freeport-McMoRan Inc.
Halcon Resources Corp.
Vanguard Natural Resources
 
LLC
Magnum Hunter Resources
 
Corporation
 Hess Corporation
4/15/2010
4/4/2010
Mariner Energy, Inc.
 Arena Resources Inc.
Apache Corp.
 Sandridge Energy, Inc.
121
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Based on the transactions listed above, Simmons derived a transaction value to EBITDA ratio range of 4.8x to 10.1x with a median value
7.5x for the current year EBITDA estimates, and 4.4x to 9.3x with a median value of 6.0x for the future year EBITDA estimates. Simmons
applied a selected range of EBITDA multiples to Eagle Rock’s EBITDA for the years 2015 and 2016 using projections derived from Eagle
Rock’s management forecasts and adjusted for NYMEX Strip Prices, and to Eagle Rock’s 2015 and 2016 EBITDA estimates using Wall
Street consensus estimates. Simmons then made adjustments for Eagle Rock’s net debt and units outstanding to derive an implied equity
value per unit:
Reference
 
Range
Implied Eagle
Rock
 
Equity Value
Per Unit
Ratio of Enterprise Value To:
Management with NYMEX Pricing
2015P EBITDA
2016P EBITDA
Wall Street Consensus
2015P EBITDA
2016P EBITDA
6.0x – 9.0x   $2.98 – $4.93  
  5.0x – 7.0x   $2.01 – $3.18  
    
 
  6.0x – 9.0x   $3.12 – $5.14  
  5.0x – 7.0x   $2.73 – $4.18
Simmons divided the implied Eagle Rock equity values per unit calculated above by Vanguard’s closing price on May 19, 2015 of $15.79
per unit to derive a range of Eagle Rock implied exchange ratios of 0.127x to 0.325x, with a median of 0.200x. From this total range,
Simmons used a range of 0.127x to 0.265x, which excludes results based on 2015E estimates due to the non-recurring hedge
component. This range was compared to the Eagle Rock exchange ratio of 0.185x.
Other Factors
Simmons analyzed the pro forma impact of the Eagle Rock merger on the distributable cash flow per unit attributable to Pro Forma
Vanguard common unitholders for 2015 and 2016 assuming a January 1, 2015 close date and using projections for each year derived
from LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock’s management forecasts adjusted for NYMEX strip pricing and Bloomberg Consensus pricing and
incorporating Vanguard management’s estimate of general and administrative expense savings to be realized from the Eagle Rock
merger. That analysis indicated that the impact of the transaction on a pro forma basis to the distributable cash flow per unit attributable to
Pro Forma Vanguard common unitholders was slightly accretive in both 2015 and 2016 assuming NYMEX strip pricing, and was slightly
accretive in 2015 and neutral in 2016 assuming Bloomberg Consensus pricing.
General
The summary set forth above does not purport to be a complete description of the analyses performed by Simmons, but simply describes,
in summary form, the material analyses that Simmons conducted in connection with rendering its opinion. The preparation of a fairness
opinion is a complex process involving various quantitative and qualitative judgments and determinations with respect to the financial,
comparative and other analytic methods employed and the adaptation and application of those methods to the unique facts and
circumstances presented. As a consequence, neither Simmons’ opinion nor the analyses underlying its opinion are readily susceptible to
partial analysis or summary description. Simmons arrived at its opinion based on the results of all analyses undertaken by it and assessed
as a whole and did not draw, in isolation, conclusions from or with regard to any individual analysis, analytic method or factor.
Accordingly, Simmons believes that its analyses must be considered as a whole and that selecting portions of its analyses, analytic
methods and factors, without considering all analyses and factors or the narrative description of the analyses, could create a misleading or
incomplete view of the processes underlying its analyses and opinion.
Simmons based its analyses on assumptions that it deemed reasonable, including assumptions concerning general business and
economic conditions and industry-specific factors. Analyses based on forecasts or projections of future results are inherently uncertain, as
they are subject to numerous factors or events beyond the control of the parties or their advisors. Accordingly, Simmons’ analyses are not
necessarily indicative of actual values or actual future results that might be achieved, which values may be higher or lower than those
indicated or implied. The implied exchange ratio reference ranges indicated by Simmons’ analyses are
122
TABLE OF CONTENTS
illustrative and not necessarily indicative of actual values nor predictive of future results or values, which may be significantly more or less
favorable than those suggested by the analyses. Moreover, Simmons’ analyses are not and do not purport to be appraisals or otherwise
reflective of the prices at which businesses actually could be bought or sold. In addition, no company or transaction used in Simmons’
analysis as a comparison is directly comparable to LRE, Vanguard or Eagle Rock or the contemplated Eagle Rock merger. Because
these analyses are inherently subject to uncertainty, being based upon numerous factors or events beyond the control of the parties or
their respective advisors, none of LRE or Simmons or any other person assumes responsibility if future results are materially different from
those forecasts or projections.
Simmons’ opinion was one of many factors taken into consideration by the LRE GP conflicts committee in making its determination to
consent to the Eagle Rock merger and should not be considered determinative of the views of the LRE GP conflicts committee or
management with respect to the Eagle Rock merger or the Eagle Rock merger consideration.
No company or transaction used in the analyses of comparable transactions summarized above is identical or directly comparable to
LRE, Vanguard, Eagle Rock or the Eagle Rock merger. Accordingly, these analyses must take into account differences in the financial
and operating characteristics of the selected publicly traded companies and differences in the structure and timing of the selected
transactions and other factors that would affect the public trading value and acquisition value of the companies considered.
The financial terms of the Eagle Rock merger were determined through arms-length negotiations between Vanguard and Eagle Rock and
were approved by each of them, and Simmons did not recommend any specific financial terms for the Eagle Rock merger consideration to
the LRE GP conflicts committee or assert that any specific financial terms of the Eagle Rock merger constituted the only appropriate
financial terms of the Eagle Rock merger consideration.
Simmons was selected by the LRE GP conflicts committee based on Simmons’ qualifications, expertise and reputation. Simmons is an
internationally recognized investment banking firm that specializes in the energy industry and is continually engaged in the valuation of
businesses and their securities in connection with mergers and acquisitions, leveraged buyouts, negotiated underwritings, secondary
distributions of listed and unlisted securities and private placements. In the ordinary course of its business, Simmons may trade the
securities of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle Rock for its own account and for the accounts of customers and may at any time hold a long or
short position in such securities.
Pursuant to the terms of the LRE GP conflicts committee’s engagement of Simmons, LRE agreed to pay Simmons an initial advisory fee of
$225,000 payable on the date of engagement, and an additional fee of $225,000 payable upon Simmons’ delivery of its fairness opinion
to the LRE GP conflicts committee. In addition, LRE agreed to reimburse Simmons for its reasonably incurred out-of-pocket expenses
incurred in connection with the engagement, including fees and disbursements of its legal counsel. LRE also agreed to indemnify
Simmons, its affiliates and their respective directors, officers, shareholders, agents, employees and controlling persons for liabilities
related to or arising out of Simmons’ engagement or its role in connection therewith, including liabilities under the federal securities laws,
or to contribute to payments Simmons may be required to make in respect of these liabilities.
In the past two years, Simmons’ has advised and has acted as an underwriter on public equity offerings for certain portfolio companies
controlled by NGP Energy Capital Management, whose certain affiliated funds have a substantial ownership interest in Eagle Rock’s
common units. Simmons earned aggregate consideration of approximately $2.8 million in connection with these assignments over the
past two years, which aggregate compensation was not material to Simmons. Simmons and its affiliates may provide investment banking
or other financial services to LRE, Vanguard, NGP Energy Capital Management, Eagle Rock or their respective shareholders, affiliates or
portfolio companies in the future. In connection with such investment banking or other financial services, Simmons or its affiliates, as
applicable, may receive compensation.
Voting and Support Agreement
Simultaneous with the execution of the merger agreement, Vanguard entered into a Voting and Support Agreement (the “original support
agreement”) with each of LRR A, LRR B and LRR C, as holders of certain of the issued and outstanding LRE common units (collectively,
the “Holders”), LRE, LRE GP, and, solely for
123
TABLE OF CONTENTS
certain restrictions on the sale of Vanguard common units, LRM, LRR II-A and LRR II-C (the “Non-Fund I GP Sellers”). On May 21, 2015,
in connection with the execution of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, the parties to the original support agreement entered into an
Amended and Restated Voting and Support Agreement (the “amended and restated support agreement”). Collectively, the Holders hold
LRE common units representing approximately 30.5% of the votes of LRE’s outstanding common units as of July 31, 2015.
Covenants of Supporting Unitholders
Under the amended and restated support agreement, each of the Holders agreed, among other things, to the following covenants:
Voting.  Each Holder has agreed to vote or cause to be voted, subject to the terms of the amended and restated support agreement, all
units of LRE that such Holder owns, either beneficially or of record (the “covered units”) (i) in favor of the merger and any other matter
presented or proposed as to approval of the merger and any other matter necessary or desirable to the consummation of the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement, and (ii) against the approval or adoption of (A) any alternative proposal or any other transaction,
proposal, agreement or action made in opposition to adoption of the merger, (B) any action, agreement or transaction that is intended,
that could reasonably be expected, or the effect of which could reasonably be expected, to materially impede, interfere with, delay,
postpone, discourage or adversely affect the merger or any of the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement or the
performance by such Holder of its obligations under the amended and restated support agreement, including certain specified categories
of actions specified therein and (C) any action, proposal, transaction or agreement that would reasonably be expected to result in a
breach in any respect of any covenant, representation or warranty or other obligation or agreement of LRE, LRE GP or any Holder
contained in the merger agreement or of any Holder contained in the amended and restated support agreement.
Irrevocable Proxy.  Each Holder irrevocably granted to, and appointed, Vanguard and any of its designees as such Holder’s proxy and
attorney-in-fact (with full power of substitution) to vote or cause to be voted such Holder’s covered units in accordance with the voting
provisions summarized above.
Restrictions on Transfer.  Each Holder has agreed not to (i) sell, transfer, assign, tender, pledge, encumber, hypothecate or otherwise
dispose of such covered units (except in connection with the merger), provided that prior to the earlier of the completion of the merger and
the termination of the merger agreement, each Holder may sell up to 15% of the covered units it held as of May 21, 2015, or (ii) enter into
a voting agreement or arrangement or grant any proxy, consent or power of attorney with respect to such covered units that is inconsistent
with the amended and restated support agreement.
No Solicitation.  Each Holder has agreed not to (i) initiate, solicit, knowingly encourage or knowingly facilitate any inquiry, proposal or
offer that would reasonably be expected to lead to an alternative proposal; (ii) enter into or participate in any discussions or negotiations
regarding, or furnish to any third party any non-public information with respect to, or that could reasonably be expected to lead to, any
alternative proposal; (iii) take any action to release or permit the release of any person from, or amend, waive or permit the amendment or
waiver of any provision of, any “standstill” or similar agreement or provision to which LRE is or becomes a party or under which LRE has
any rights; or (iv) resolve or agree to do any of the foregoing.
Notification of Alternative Proposal.  Each Holder has agreed to (i) immediately cease and cause to be terminated any discussions or
negotiations with any third party conducted heretofore with respect to an alternative proposal, (ii) promptly advise Vanguard in writing of
any alternative proposal it receives and provide Vanguard with copies of all related written proposals or draft agreements and (iii) keep
Vanguard reasonably informed of all material developments with respect to the status and terms of any such alternative proposal, offers,
inquiries or requests.
Employee Non-Solicitation.  Each Holder has agreed that, during the two-year period following the effective time, it will not (and will
cause its controlled affiliates not to) hire, engage or solicit,
•
•
•
•
•
•
124
anywhere in North America, certain persons who commence employment with Vanguard or one of its affiliates. Vanguard also agreed to
(and agreed to cause its controlled affiliates to) refrain from soliciting or hiring, anywhere in North America, any person employed, as of
immediately following the closing of the merger, by or on behalf of the Holders or their respective affiliates.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Partnership Change in Recommendation
Upon a partnership change in recommendation, the voting and irrevocable proxy covenants described above will have no further effect.
The other covenants described above shall continue in full force and effect until the amended and restated support agreement is validly
terminated.
Volume Limitation
Subject to certain exceptions in the amended and restated support agreement, each Holder and Non-Fund I GP Seller has agreed not to,
without Vanguard’s prior consent, for a period commencing on the closing date of the merger and continuing for 90 days thereafter (the
“Limitation Period”), (i) offer, pledge, sell, contract to sell, sell any option or contract to purchase, purchase any option or contract to sell,
grant any option, right or warrant to purchase, or otherwise transfer or dispose of, directly or indirectly, any Vanguard common units or any
securities convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for Vanguard common units (including without limitation, Vanguard common
units or such other securities which may be deemed to be beneficially owned by such Holders in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the SEC and securities which may be issued upon exercise of an option or warrant) (collectively, the “Restricted Securities”)
or publicly disclose the intention to make any offer, sale, pledge or disposition, (ii) enter into any swap or other agreement that transfers, in
whole or in part, any of the economic consequences of ownership of the Vanguard common units or such other securities, whether any
such transaction described in clause (i) or (ii) above is to be settled by delivery of Vanguard common units or such other securities, in
cash or otherwise, (iii) make any demand for or exercise any right with respect to the registration of any of the Restricted Securities except
in accordance with the registration rights agreement or (iv) sell or dispose of any Restricted Securities in an underwritten offering except in
accordance with the amended and restated support agreement or the registration rights agreement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, on each trading day during the Limitation Period, the Holders and Non-Fund I GP Sellers may offer,
pledge, sell, contract to sell, sell any option or contract to purchase, purchase any option or contract to sell, grant any option, right or
warrant to purchase, or otherwise transfer or dispose of, directly or indirectly, an aggregate number of Restricted Securities, on a daily
basis, not to exceed 10% of the average daily trading volume of Vanguard common units during the four weeks immediately prior to the
first day of the calendar month in which such transaction occurs.
Termination of Support Agreement
The amended and restated support agreement will terminate upon the earlier to occur of (i) the consummation of the merger or (ii) the valid
termination of the merger agreement in accordance with its terms.
Consent Required for Amendment of Eagle Rock Support Agreement
Pursuant to the amended and restated support agreement, Vanguard also agrees not to amend, without the consent of the Holders, the
Voting and Support Agreement, dated May 21, 2015, by and among Vanguard, Montierra Minerals & Production, L.P., Montierra
Management LLC, Natural Gas Partners VII, L.P., Natural Gas Partners VIII, L.P., NGP Income Management L.L.C., Eagle Rock Holdings
NGP 7, LLC, Eagle Rock Holdings NGP 8, LLC, ERH NGP 7 SPV, LLC, ERH NGP 8 SPV, LLC, NGP Income Co-Investment
Opportunities Fund II, L.P. and NGP Energy Capital Management, L.L.C., as holders of certain of the issued and outstanding Eagle Rock
common units, and, solely for the waiver of an existing voting agreement and termination and other miscellaneous provisions, Eagle Rock
and Eagle Rock GP.
125
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Registration Rights Agreement
Simultaneous with the execution of the merger agreement, Vanguard entered into a Registration Rights Agreement (the “original
registration rights agreement”) with the Holders and Non-Fund I GP Sellers. On May 21, 2015, in connection with the execution of the
Eagle Rock merger agreement, the parties to the original registration rights agreement entered into an Amended and Restated
Registration Rights Agreement (the “amended and restated registration rights agreement”). The registration rights agreement will become
effective automatically upon, and only upon, the closing of the merger. Pursuant to the amended and restated registration rights
agreement, Vanguard will, in its sole discretion, prepare and file with the SEC either (i) a shelf registration statement under Rule 415 of
the Securities Act providing for the public resale and distribution of the Vanguard common units received by the Holders and Non-Fund I
GP Sellers as consideration in the merger and the acquisition of LRE GP or (ii) a post-effective amendment to Vanguard’s existing
automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3. Vanguard is required to file or cause to be filed such shelf registration statement within
14 days following the closing of the merger and is required to cause the registration statement to become effective as soon as reasonably
practicable thereafter but in no event later than 120 days after the closing of the merger. Subject to certain conditions, at the election of the
Holders, Vanguard will initiate an underwritten offering under the shelf registration statement to dispose of the Holders’ Vanguard
common units. The Holders will also receive “piggyback” rights under the registration rights agreement to participate in future underwritten
public offerings of Vanguard common units effected under a registration statement other than the registration statement required under the
registration rights agreement.
Pursuant to the registration rights agreement, Vanguard also agrees not to amend, without the consent of the Holders, the Registration
Rights Agreement, dated May 21, 2015, by and among Vanguard, Montierra Minerals & Production, L.P., Montierra Management LLC,
Natural Gas Partners VII, L.P., Natural Gas Partners VIII, L.P., NGP Income Management L.L.C., Eagle Rock Holdings NGP 7, LLC, Eagle
Rock Holdings NGP 8, LLC, ERH NGP 7 SPV, LLC, ERH NGP 8 SPV, LLC, NGP Income Co-Investment Opportunities Fund II, L.P. and
NGP Energy Capital Management, L.L.C.
Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement
As a condition to closing of transactions contemplated under the merger agreement, the parties have agreed to execute and deliver a
Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement (the “termination agreement”) substantially in the form attached as an exhibit to the
merger agreement. Pursuant to the termination agreement, (i) that certain Omnibus Agreement, entered into, and effective as of,
November 16, 2011 (the “Omnibus Agreement”), by and among LRE, LRE GP, OLLC, the Holders, LRR GP, LLC, a Delaware limited
liability company and the ultimate general partner of each of the Holders, and LRM, will be terminated and (ii) the Holders, severally and
in proportion to each entity’s Property Contributor Percentage (as defined in the Omnibus Agreement), will agree to indemnify LRE, LRE
GP, OLLC and all of their respective subsidiaries from and against any losses arising out of any federal, state or local income tax liabilities
attributable to the ownership or operation of the oil and natural gas properties owned or leased by any of LRE, LRE GP, OLLC or their
respective subsidiaries prior to the closing of the LRE’s initial public offering. The indemnification obligations of the Holders under the
termination agreement will survive until the first anniversary of the closing date of the merger.
Unaudited Prospective Financial and Operating Information of LRE, Vanguard and
Eagle Rock
None of Vanguard, LRE or Eagle Rock as a matter of course makes public long-term projections as to its future revenues, production,
earnings or other results due to, among other reasons, the uncertainty of the underlying assumptions and estimates. However, LRE is
including the following summaries of the unaudited prospective financial and operating information solely because such information was
made available to the board of directors of LRE GP, the LRE GP conflicts committee, TPH and Simmons in connection with their
respective evaluations of the merger and the Eagle Rock merger, and each of TPH and Simmons were authorized by LRE to rely upon
such information for purposes of its analyses and opinions. The inclusion of this information should not be regarded as an indication that
any of the board of directors of LRE GP, the LRE GP conflicts committee, TPH, Simmons or any other recipient of this information
considered, or now considers, it to be necessarily predictive of actual future results.
126
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The unaudited prospective financial and operating information prepared by the respective managements of LRE, Vanguard and Eagle
Rock was, in general, prepared solely for LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s internal use and is subjective in many respects. As a
result, there can be no assurance that the prospective results will be realized or that actual results will not be significantly higher or lower
than estimated. Since the unaudited prospective financial and operating information covers multiple years, such information by its nature
becomes less predictive with each successive year. LRE unitholders are urged to review LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s SEC
filings for a description of risk factors with respect to LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s business, respectively, as well as the section of
this proxy statement/prospectus entitled “Risk Factors.” See also “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and
“Where You Can Find More Information.” The unaudited prospective financial and operating information was not prepared with a view
toward public disclosure, nor was it prepared with a view toward compliance with GAAP, published guidelines of the SEC or the
guidelines established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants for preparation and presentation of prospective financial
and operating information. In addition, the unaudited prospective financial and operating information requires significant estimates and
assumptions that make it inherently less comparable to the similarly titled GAAP measures in the historical GAAP financial statements of
LRE, Vanguard or Eagle Rock. The prospective financial information of LRE included in this proxy statement/prospectus has been
prepared by, and is the responsibility of, LRE’s management, and the prospective financial information of Vanguard included in this proxy
statement/prospectus has been prepared by, and is the responsibility of, Vanguard’s management. The prospective financial information
of New Vanguard (as defined below), has been prepared by, and is the responsibility of, Vanguard management and the prospective
financial information of Eagle Rock included in this proxy statement/prospectus has been prepared by, and is the responsibility of, Eagle
Rock’s management. None of Vanguard’s independent registered public accounting firm, LRE’s independent registered public
accounting firm, Eagle Rock’s independent registered public accounting firm, or any other independent accountants has compiled,
examined or performed any procedures with respect to the unaudited prospective financial and operating information contained herein;
accordingly they have not expressed any opinion or any other form of assurance on such information. The report of the independent
registered public accounting firm of LRE in its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 relates to LRE’s
historical financial information. The report of the independent registered public accounting firm of Vanguard in its Annual Report on Form
10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 relates to Vanguard’s historical financial information. The report of the independent
registered public accounting firm of Eagle Rock in its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 relates to Eagle
Rock’s historical financial information. None of these reports extends to the unaudited prospective financial and operating information
presented below and should not be read to do so. Furthermore, the following unaudited prospective financial and operating information
does not take into account any circumstances or events occurring after the date such information was prepared.
The following tables reflect the material unaudited prospective financial and operating data regarding LRE’s operations provided to the
board of directors of LRE GP, the LRE GP conflicts committee, TPH and Simmons in connection with their evaluations of the merger. The
data reflects certain oil and gas pricing assumptions of LRE. The Base Capital and Reduced Capital Cases were based on LRE’s internal
estimates of reserves, production, costs and capital expenditures. The Reduced Capital Case had less capital expenditures in 2016
compared to the Base Capital Case due to the assumption of capital constraints in the Reduced Capital Case.
2016
Base Capital Case
 2015
  
  39,461   38,519   38,687   37,998   38,024  
Average daily production (Mcfe/d)
 
  124
Total revenue ($in millions)
 
EBITDA ($in millions)
  80
 
Total Capital Expenditures ($in millions)   21
Key Assumption
    
 
  55.69    62.13    63.90    64.83    65.49  
Oil Price ($/Bbl)
Gas Price ($/Mcf)
  2.82
104
   60
   35
101
   56
   26
88
   42
   20
97
   52
   27
3.11
3.36
3.48
3.58
2017
2018
2019
127
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Reduced Capital Case
  
Average daily production (Mcfe/d)
Total revenue ($in millions)
EBITDA ($in millions)
2016
2015
  39,470   36,208 
 
  124
  80
100
   57
Total Capital Expenditures ($in millions)
Key Assumption
Oil Price ($/Bbl)
Gas Price ($/Mcf)
22
21
    
 
  55.69    62.13  
  2.82
3.11
For purposes of the tables set forth above, EBITDA, which LRE refers to as Adjusted EBITDA, is defined as net income from which LRE
adds or subtracts the following:
income tax expense;
depletion and depreciation;
amortization of equity awards;
•
• interest expense-net, including loss (gain) on interest rate derivative instruments, net;
•
• accretion of asset retirement obligations;
•
• loss (gain) on settlement of asset retirement obligations;
• loss (gain) on commodity derivative instruments, net;
• commodity derivative instrument net cash settlements;
• impairment of oil and natural gas properties; and
• other non-recurring items that LRE deems appropriate.
The following table reflects the material unaudited prospective financial and operating data regarding Vanguard’s operations provided to
the board of directors of LRE GP, the LRE GP conflicts committee, TPH and Simmons in connection with their evaluations of the merger.
The data reflects certain oil and gas pricing assumptions of Vanguard.
2017
2016
2015
Average daily production (Mcfe/d)
  380,258   375,965   374,959   376,178   378,828 
 
Total revenue ($in millions)
  564
EBITDA ($in millions)
  373
 
 
Distributable cash flow ($in millions)  147
 
Key Assumption
 
Oil Price ($/Bbl)
Gas Price ($/Mcf)
573
   372
   136
     
   62.13
   3.11
550
   326
   83
     
   63.90
   3.36
540
   309
   60
     
   64.83
   3.48
556
   319
   65
     
   65.49
   3.58
55.69
  2.82
2018
2019
128
The following table reflects the material unaudited prospective financial and operating data regarding the operations of New Vanguard,
provided to the board of directors of LRE GP, the LRE GP conflicts committee, TPH and Simmons in connection with their evaluations of
the Eagle Rock merger. The data reflects certain oil and gas pricing assumptions of Vanguard.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
2016
2017
2018
2019
August 1 to
December
 
31,
2015
Average daily production (Mcfe/d)  416,135    407,372   402,841   400,024   401,617 
 
Total revenue ($in millions)
EBITDA ($in millions)
 
Distributable cash flow ($in
millions)
Key Assumption
Oil Price ($/Bbl)
Gas Price ($/Mcf)
62.32
   3.24
64.37
   3.36
66.02
   3.46
67.25
   3.55
60.01
  3.05
670
   437
631
   379
594
   341
610
   351
184
120
75
278
  197
101
81
For purposes of the tables set forth above, EBITDA, which Vanguard refers to as Adjusted EBITDA, is defined as net income (loss) plus
the following adjustments:
net interest expense;
impairment of oil and natural gas properties;
•
• depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion;
•
• net gains or losses on commodity derivative contracts;
• cash settlements on matured commodity derivative contracts;
• net gains or losses on interest rate derivative contracts;
• gain on acquisition of oil and natural gas properties;
•
Texas margin taxes; and
compensation related items, which include unit-based compensation expense and unrealized fair value of phantom units granted to
•Vanguard’s officers.
The following table reflects the material unaudited prospective financial and operating data regarding Eagle Rock’s operations provided
to the board of directors of LRE GP, the LRE GP conflicts committee, TPH and Simmons in connection with their evaluations of the Eagle
Rock merger. The data reflects certain oil and gas pricing assumptions of Vanguard.
August 1 to
December
 
31,
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
74
  40
Average daily production (Mcfe/d)   78,915
Total revenue ($in millions)
EBITDA ($in millions)
Distributable cash flow ($in
millions)
Key Assumption
Oil Price ($/Bbl)
Gas Price ($/Mcf)
60.01
  3.05
18
82,280   102,703   99,990   107,942 
 
    172
    89
187
   101
188
   100
212
   122
35
41
44
64
62.32    64.37
    3.24
   3.36
66.02    67.25
   3.46
   3.55
For purposes of the table set forth above, EBITDA, which Eagle Rock refers to as Adjusted EBITDA, is defined as net income from which
Eagle Rock adds or subtracts:
income tax provision (benefit);
•
•interest-net, including gains and losses from interest rate risk management instruments that settled during the period and other expense;
129
TABLE OF CONTENTS
impairment expense;
• depreciation, depletion and amortization expense;
•
• other operating expense, non-recurring;
other non-cash operating and general and administrative expenses, including non-cash compensation related to Eagle Rock’s equity-
based compensation program;
•mark-to-market (gains) losses on commodity and interest rate risk management related instruments; and
• gains (losses) on discontinued operations and other (income) expense.
•
No assurances can be given that the assumptions made in preparing the above unaudited prospective financial and operating information
will accurately reflect future conditions. The estimates and assumptions underlying the unaudited prospective financial and operating
information involve judgments with respect to, among other things, future economic, competitive, regulatory and financial market
conditions and future business decisions that may not be realized and that are inherently subject to significant business, economic,
competitive and regulatory uncertainties and contingencies, including, among others, risks and uncertainties described under “Risk
Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” all of which are difficult to predict and many of which are
beyond the control of Vanguard, LRE and Eagle Rock and will be beyond the control of the combined entity resulting from the merger.
There can be no assurance that the underlying assumptions will prove to be accurate or that the projected results will be realized, and
actual results likely will differ, and may differ materially, from those reflected in the unaudited prospective financial and operating
information, regardless of whether the merger is completed.
In addition, although presented with numerical specificity, the above unaudited prospective financial and operating information reflects
numerous assumptions and estimates as to future events made by LRE management, Vanguard management and Eagle Rock
management that each believed were reasonable at the time the respective unaudited prospective financial and operating information
was prepared. Except for information relating to New Vanguard, the above unaudited prospective financial and operating information does
not give effect to the merger or related transactions. LRE unitholders are urged to review LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s most
recent SEC filings for a description of LRE’s, Vanguard’s and Eagle Rock’s reported results of operations and financial condition and
capital resources, respectively, during 2014 and 2015, including “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and
Results of Operations” in LRE’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, Vanguard’s Annual Report on Form 10-K and Eagle Rock’s Annual Report
on Form 10-K, each for the year ended December 31, 2014, and LRE’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, Vanguard’s Quarterly Report on
Form 10-Q and Eagle Rock’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, each for the quarterly periods ended March 31, 2015 and June 30, 2015.
Readers of this proxy statement/prospectus are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the unaudited prospective financial and
operating information set forth above. No representation is made by Vanguard, LRE, Eagle Rock, their respective financial advisors,
auditors or any other person to any LRE unitholder regarding the ultimate performance of LRE, Vanguard or Eagle Rock compared to the
information included in the above unaudited prospective financial and operating information. The inclusion of unaudited prospective
financial and operating information in this proxy statement/prospectus should not be regarded as an indication that such prospective
financial and operating information will be an accurate prediction of future events, and such information should not be relied on as such.
VANGUARD, LRE AND EAGLE ROCK DO NOT INTEND TO UPDATE OR OTHERWISE REVISE THE ABOVE UNAUDITED
PROSPECTIVE FINANCIAL AND OPERATING INFORMATION TO REFLECT CIRCUMSTANCES EXISTING AFTER THE DATE
WHEN MADE OR TO REFLECT THE OCCURRENCE OR NON-OCCURRENCE OF FUTURE EVENTS, EVEN IN THE EVENT THAT
ANY OR ALL OF THE ASSUMPTIONS UNDERLYING SUCH PROSPECTIVE FINANCIAL AND OPERATING INFORMATION ARE NO
LONGER APPROPRIATE, EXCEPT AS MAY BE REQUIRED BY LAW.
130
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard’s Reasons for the Merger
Vanguard believes the merger, with or without the Eagle Rock merger, will create enhanced long-term value for its unitholders. Key
strategic benefits include the following:
•
•
•
•
•
Long-Lived Assets.  LRE’s assets represent a portfolio of long-life, low-decline, mature oil and natural gas exploration and production
assets that are well-suited for Vanguard’s upstream MLP model and its stated corporate strategy to grow via accretive acquisitions.
Vanguard believes these assets will provide consistent and predictable cash flow volumes that will enable Vanguard to continue to make
consistent monthly cash distributions to its unitholders and, over time, improve equity valuation.
Additional Scale and Efficiencies in Permian and Arkoma Basins.  LRE’s assets add additional scale in two prolific oil and gas
producing regions where Vanguard currently operates — the Permian Basin in West Texas and Southeast New Mexico and the Arkoma
Basin in the Mid-Continent region. As a result, upon the completion of the merger, Vanguard and its subsidiaries will have a larger asset
base in these regions that Vanguard believes will permit more efficient operations and reduce per unit field expenses.
Scale of Operations.  Vanguard believes that the combined business (with or without the completion of the Eagle Rock merger) will
permit it to compete more effectively and facilitate future development projects and acquisitions through increased cash flow and lower
cost of capital investment in the current reduced commodity price environment. As a result of this larger size, Vanguard should be able to
consider and more effectively pursue additional types of opportunities, including acquisitions and financing alternatives. In addition,
Vanguard expects the combined business (with or without the completion of the Eagle Rock merger) to realize substantial operating and
administrative synergies.
Balanced Product Mix.  LRE’s assets represent a balanced production and reserves product mix of 39% oil; 48% natural gas and 13%
NGLs that Vanguard believes provides an advantage in light of the better expected profit margins for oil and NGLs production than
natural gas production as reflected in the short-term and long-term market prices for oil versus natural gas.
Financial Ratios and Credit Rating.  Vanguard expects to improve a number of its financial ratios commonly used to assess its credit
rating. The predominantly unit-for-unit nature of the transaction is expected to allow Vanguard to reduce leverage and strengthen its
balance sheet. In addition, because size is a key contributor to credit ratings for oil and natural gas exploration and production
companies, increased scale could result in improved credit ratings for the combined entity, in particular if both the merger and the Eagle
Rock merger are consummated.
The explanation of the reasoning of Vanguard and certain information presented in this section are forward-looking in nature and,
therefore, this section should be read in light of the factors discussed in the section titled “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-
Looking Statements.”
Interests of Directors and Executive Officers of LRE GP in the Merger
In considering the recommendation of the board of directors of LRE GP that you vote to approve the merger agreement, you should be
aware that aside from their interests as unitholders of LRE, LRE GP’s directors and executive officers have interests in the merger that are
different from, or in addition to, those of other unitholders of LRE generally. Except as noted below, the members of the board of directors
of LRE GP were aware of and considered these interests, among other matters, in evaluating and negotiating the merger agreement and
the merger, and in recommending to the unitholders of LRE that the merger agreement be approved. See “— Background of the Merger”
and “— Recommendation of the LRE GP Board of Directors and Its Reasons for the Merger.” LRE unitholders should take these interests
into account in deciding whether to vote “FOR” the approval of the merger agreement. These interests are described in more detail below,
and certain of them are quantified in the narrative and the tables below.
131
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Treatment of LTIP Restricted Unit Awards
Under the merger agreement, each LRE restricted unit that is outstanding and unvested immediately prior to the effective time will,
automatically and without any action on the part of the holder of such LRE restricted unit, vest in full and the restrictions with respect
thereto will lapse, and such LRE restricted unit shall be deemed to be LRE common units for purposes of the merger. For an estimate of
the amounts that would be payable to the Vice President and Chief Financial Officer and the independent directors of LRE GP upon the
settlement of their unvested LRE restricted units, see the table below entitled “Quantification of Payments for LTIP Restricted Unit
Awards”.
Quantification of Payments for LTIP Restricted Unit Awards.
The following table sets forth, as of April 20, 2015, for each of LRE GP’s directors and executive officers, the aggregate number of LRE
restricted units held by such individuals and the estimated value payable in the merger with respect to such awards. For purposes of this
table, the per unit value of the Merger Consideration was estimated to be equal to $8.95, determined by multiplying the exchange ratio by
$16.28, the average closing price of Vanguard common units over the first five business days following the first public announcement of
the transaction.
Name
Position
Number
of
 
Restricted
Units
Value
 
($)
—
Eric Mullins
Charles W. Adcock
Christopher A. Butta
Jaime R. Casas
C. Timothy Miller
John A. Bailey
Jonathan Carroll
Jonathan C. Farber
Robert T.
O’Connell(1)
Townes G. Pressler
Jr.
$—
  $—
Co-Chief Executive Officer and Chairman    —
  Co-Chief Executive Officer and Director
   —
Senior Vice President of Engineering and
Chief Engineer
  Vice President and Chief Financial Officer    100,892   $903,387 
Executive Vice President and Chief
  
Operating Officer
  Director
  Director
  Director
20,863   $186,807 
   16,956   $151,824 
   —
$—
$—
—
$—
Director
Director
20,863   $186,807
—
$—
(1) Robert T. O’Connell passed away on May 9, 2015; as a result, all of his restricted units vested upon his death.
Other Equity Interests
Currently, Eric Mullins and Charles W. Adcock, LRE GP’s Co-Chief Executive Officers, own 5,840 and 2,250 Vanguard common units,
respectively. These ownership interests are equal to $95,075 and $36,630, respectively, based on a per unit price of $16.28, the average
closing price of Vanguard common units over the first five business days following the first public announcement of the transaction. The
board of directors of LRE GP did not consider this ownership of Vanguard common units when it evaluated and negotiated the merger
agreement and the merger or when it recommended to LRE’s unitholders that the merger agreement be approved.
Severance Arrangements
None of LRE GP’s executive officers or directors is currently party to any plan or contractual arrangement that would provide for severance
benefits upon such officer or director’s termination of employment or service with LRE or its affiliates in connection with the merger.
However, it is currently anticipated that the employment of LRE GP’s Chief Financial Officer, Jaime R. Casas, will be terminated in
connection with the merger, and he will receive a severance payment of $750,000 immediately prior to the closing of the merger, as well
as other cash bonuses in an aggregate amount equal to the sum of $250,000 plus a pro rated portion of a $250,000 annual cash bonus.
No other executive officer or director of LRE GP is entitled to or expected to receive any severance payments in connection with the
merger.
132
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Indemnification and Insurance
The LRE partnership agreement requires LRE, among other things, to indemnify the directors and executive officers of LRE GP against
certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their service as directors or officers; provided, that such director or officer shall not be
indemnified and held harmless if there has been a final and non-appealable judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction
determining that, in respect of the matter for which the director or officer is seeking indemnification, the director or officer acted in bad faith
or engaged in fraud, willful misconduct or, in the case of a criminal matter, acted with knowledge that the director’s or officer’s conduct was
unlawful.
In addition, the merger agreement provides that, for a period of six years from the effective time, Vanguard shall indemnify, defend and
hold harmless an officer, director or employee of LRE GP, LRE or any of its subsidiaries and also with respect to any such person, in his
capacity as a director, officer, employee, member, trustee or fiduciary of another corporation, foundation, partnership, joint venture, trust,
pension or other employee benefit plan or enterprise (whether or not such other entity or enterprise is affiliated with LRE) serving at the
request of or on behalf of LRE GP, LRE or any of its subsidiaries and together with such person’s heirs, executors or administrators
against any cost or expenses (including attorneys’ fees), judgments, fines, losses, claims, damages or liabilities and amounts paid in
settlement in connection with any actual or threatened claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation, whether civil, criminal,
administrative, investigative or otherwise and whether or not such claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation results in a formal civil or
criminal litigation or regulatory action.
In addition, pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement, LRE GP’s directors and executive officers will be entitled to certain ongoing
indemnification and coverage under directors’ and officers’ liability insurance policies from the surviving entity. Such indemnification and
insurance coverage is further described in the section entitled “The Merger Agreement — Indemnification and Insurance.”
Quantification of Payments and Benefits to LRE’s Named Executive Officers
The table set forth below details the amount of payments and benefits that each of LRE’s named executive officers would receive in
connection with the merger. These payments are comprised of the payments described above, are not in addition to those described in
previous sections, but are specifically identified in this fashion to allow for a non-binding advisory vote of LRE’s unitholders regarding
these payments and benefits. For purposes of this table, the per unit value of the merger consideration was estimated to be equal to $8.95,
determined by multiplying the exchange ratio by $16.28, the closing price of Vanguard’s common units over the first five business days
following the first public announcement of the transaction.
Golden Parachute Compensation
Name
Eric Mullins
Charles W. Adcock
Jaime R. Casas
Christopher A. Butta
C. Timothy Miller
Equity
 
($)(2)
  $—
  $—
Cash
 
($)(1)
 
 $—
 $—
 
 $ 1,167,000  $ 903,387  $ 2,070,387 
 
 $—
 $—
$—
  $—
Total
 
($)
  $—
  $—
$—
  $—
Represents estimated lump sum cash severance payments Mr. Casas is expected to receive immediately prior to the closing of the
merger based on an assumed closing date of September 1, 2015. This aggregate amount is comprised of a $750,000 cash severance
payment, as well as cash bonuses in an aggregate amount equal to the sum of $250,000 plus a pro rated portion of a $250,000 annual
cash bonus. This benefit is “single trigger” in nature, because it will be paid immediately prior to the effective time of the merger without
regard to whether the named executive officer experiences a termination of employment.
Represents the value of unvested LRE restricted units held by LRE’s named executive officers that will be converted into the merger
consideration immediately prior to the effective time of the merger. These amounts are “single trigger” because they will be paid upon or
following the effective time of the merger without regard to whether the named executive officer experiences a termination of
employment.
(1)
(2)
133
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No Appraisal Rights
Appraisal rights are not available in connection with the merger under the Delaware LP Act or under the LRE partnership agreement.
Accounting Treatment of the Merger
In accordance with GAAP and in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification Topic
805 — Business Combinations, Vanguard will account for the merger as an acquisition of a business.
Regulatory Approvals and Clearances Required for the Merger
Vanguard and LRE are not required to file notifications with the Federal Trade Commission and the Antitrust Division of the Department of
Justice or observe a mandatory pre-merger waiting period before completing the merger under the HSR Act. Vanguard and LRE cannot
assure you, however, that other government agencies or private parties will not initiate actions to challenge the merger before or after it is
completed. Any such challenge to the merger could result in a court order enjoining the merger or in restrictions or conditions that would
have a material adverse effect on the combined company following the merger if the merger is completed.
Listing of Vanguard Common Units
It is a condition to closing that the common units to be issued in the merger to LRE unitholders be approved for listing on the NASDAQ,
subject to official notice of issuance.
Delisting and Deregistration of LRE Common Units
If the merger is completed, LRE common units will cease to be listed on the NYSE and will be deregistered under the Exchange Act.
Vanguard Unitholder Approval is Not Required
Vanguard unitholders are not required to approve the merger agreement or approve the merger or the issuance of Vanguard common
units in connection with the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
Ownership of Vanguard After the Merger
Vanguard will issue approximately 15.44 million Vanguard common units to former LRE unitholders (which does not include the 12,320
Vanguard common units to be issued to the former members of LRE GP) pursuant to the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement. Additionally, if the Eagle Rock merger is consummated, Vanguard will issue approximately 28.75 million Vanguard units to
former Eagle Rock unitholders pursuant to the transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement. Further, the number of
Vanguard common units outstanding will increase after the date of this proxy statement/prospectus if Vanguard sells additional common
units to the public.
If the Eagle Rock merger is consummated pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, based on the
number of Vanguard common units outstanding as of July 31, 2015, immediately following the later to occur of the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement and the Eagle Rock merger agreement, Vanguard expects to have approximately 130.80 million
common units outstanding (including the 12,320 Vanguard common units issued to members of LRE GP). Under this scenario, LRE
unitholders would be expected to hold approximately 11.8% of the aggregate number of Vanguard common units outstanding immediately
after the merger and the Eagle Rock merger. Holders of Vanguard common units have only limited voting rights on matters affecting
Vanguard’s business.
If, however, the Eagle Rock merger is not consummated, based on the number of Vanguard common units outstanding as of July 31,
2015, immediately following completion of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, Vanguard expects to have
approximately 102.06 million common units outstanding (including the 12,320 Vanguard common units issued to members of LRE GP).
Under this scenario, LRE unitholders would be expected to hold approximately 15.1% of the aggregate number of Vanguard common
units outstanding immediately after the completion of the merger.
134
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Restrictions on Sales of Vanguard Common Units Received in the Merger
Vanguard common units issued in the merger will not be subject to any restrictions on transfer arising under the Securities Act or the
Exchange Act, except for Vanguard common units issued to any LRE unitholder who may be deemed to be an “affiliate” of Vanguard after
the completion of the merger. This proxy statement/prospectus does not cover resales of Vanguard common units received by any person
upon the completion of the merger, and no person is authorized to make any use of this proxy statement/prospectus in connection with
any resale.
Board of Directors and Executive Officers Following the Merger
The directors and executive officers of Vanguard prior to the merger will continue as the directors and executive officers of Vanguard
immediately after the merger. The following table sets forth certain information with respect to the members of the board of directors and
the executive officers of Vanguard. Executive officers and directors of Vanguard will serve until their successors are duly appointed or
elected.
Name
Scott W. Smith
Age  Position with Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC
 57  President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
Richard A. Robert  49
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, Secretary
and Director
W. Richard
Anderson
Loren Singletary
61  Independent Director and Chairman
67  Independent Director
Bruce W.
McCullough
Britt Pence
66  Independent Director
54  Executive Vice President of Operations
Litigation Relating to the Merger
A putative class action was filed on June 3, 2015 in connection with the merger by a purported LRE unitholder (the “Delaware Plaintiff”)
against LRE, LRE GP, the members of the LRE GP board of directors, Vanguard, Merger Sub and the other parties to the merger
agreement (the “Defendants”). The lawsuit was styled Barry Miller v. LRR Energy, L.P. et al., Case No. 11087-VCG, in the Court of
Chancery of the State of Delaware (the “Delaware Lawsuit”). On July 23, 2015, the Delaware Plaintiff voluntarily dismissed the Delaware
Lawsuit without prejudice.
On July 10, 2015 and July 13, 2015, two additional purported LRE unitholders (the “Texas Plaintiffs”) filed putative class action lawsuits
against the Defendants. These lawsuits were styled (a) Christopher Tiberio v. Eric Mullins et al., Cause No. 2015-39864, in the District
Court of Harris County, Texas, 334th Judicial District; and (b) Eddie Hammond v. Eric Mullins et al., Cause No. 2015-40154, in the District
Court of Harris County, Texas, 295th Judicial District (the “Texas Lawsuits”). On July 28, 2015, the Texas Lawsuits were nonsuited
without prejudice.
On July 14, 2015, another purported LRE unitholder (the “Federal Plaintiff”) filed a putative class action lawsuit against the Defendants.
This lawsuit was styled Ronald Krieger v. LRR Energy, L.P. et al., Civil Action No. 4:15-cv-2017, in the United States District Court for the
Southern District of Texas, Houston Division (the “Federal Lawsuit”). On July 17, 2015, the Federal Plaintiff voluntarily dismissed the
Federal Lawsuit without prejudice.
135
TABLE OF CONTENTS
THE MERGER AGREEMENT
The following describes the material provisions of the merger agreement, which is attached as Annex A to this proxy statement/prospectus
and incorporated by reference herein. The description in this section and elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus is qualified in its
entirety by reference to the merger agreement. This summary does not purport to be complete and may not contain all of the information
about the merger agreement that is important to you. Vanguard and LRE encourage you to read carefully the merger agreement in its
entirety before making any decisions regarding the merger as it is the legal document governing the merger.
The merger agreement and this summary of its terms have been included to provide you with information regarding the terms of the
merger agreement. Factual disclosures about Vanguard, LRE or any of their respective subsidiaries or affiliates contained in this proxy
statement/prospectus or their respective public reports filed with the SEC may supplement, update or modify the factual disclosures about
Vanguard, LRE or their respective subsidiaries or affiliates contained in the merger agreement and described in this summary. The
representations, warranties and covenants made in the merger agreement by Vanguard and LRE were qualified and subject to important
limitations agreed to by Vanguard and LRE in connection with negotiating the terms of the merger agreement. In particular, in your review
of the representations and warranties contained in the merger agreement and described in this summary, it is important to bear in mind
that the representations and warranties were negotiated with the principal purposes of allocating risk between the parties to the merger
agreement, rather than establishing matters as facts. The representations and warranties may also be subject to a contractual standard of
materiality different from those generally applicable to unitholders and reports and documents filed with the SEC and in some cases were
qualified by confidential disclosures that were made by each party to the other, which disclosures are not reflected in the merger
agreement or otherwise publicly disclosed. Moreover, information concerning the subject matter of the representations and warranties
may have changed since the date of the merger agreement and subsequent developments or new information qualifying a representation
or warranty may have been included in this proxy statement/prospectus. For the foregoing reasons, the representations, warranties and
covenants or any descriptions of those provisions should not be read alone.
The Merger
Subject to the terms and conditions of the merger agreement and in accordance with Delaware law, the merger agreement provides for
the merger of Merger Sub with and into LRE, with LRE continuing as the surviving entity, and, at the same time, the acquisition by
Vanguard of LRE GP, resulting in both LRE and LRE GP becoming wholly owned subsidiaries of Vanguard. LRE will cease to be a
publicly traded limited partnership following completion of the merger. After the effective time of the merger, the certificate of limited
partnership of LRE in effect immediately prior to the effective time will be the certificate of limited partnership of the surviving entity, until
amended in accordance with applicable law, and the LRE partnership agreement in effect immediately prior to the effective time will be
the agreement of limited partnership of the surviving entity, until amended in accordance with its terms and applicable law. The general
partner interest in LRE issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time will remain outstanding in the surviving entity, and
LRE GP, as the holder of such general partner interest, will continue as the sole general partner of the surviving entity.
Effective Time; Closing
The effective time will be at such time that LRE files with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware a certificate of merger, executed
in accordance with the relevant provisions of Delaware law, or at such other date or time as is agreed to by LRE and Vanguard and
specified in the certificate of merger in accordance with Delaware law.
The closing of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, will occur at 10:00 a.m. (central time), on the
third business day after the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions to the merger provided in the merger agreement (other than conditions
that by their nature are to be satisfied at the closing of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, but subject to the
satisfaction or waiver of
136
TABLE OF CONTENTS
those conditions), or at such other date or time as Vanguard and LRE agree in writing. For further discussion of the conditions to the
merger, see “— Conditions to Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated by the Merger Agreement.”
Vanguard and LRE currently expect to complete the merger in the third quarter of 2015, subject to receipt of required unitholder approval
and to the satisfaction or waiver of the other conditions to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement described below.
Merger Consideration
The merger agreement provides that, at the effective time of the merger, each LRE common unit issued and outstanding immediately prior
to the effective time will be converted into the right to receive 0.550 Vanguard common units. Any LRE common units that are owned by
LRE or Vanguard or any of their respective wholly owned subsidiaries immediately prior to the effective time will be cancelled and cease
to exist without any conversion or payment of consideration in respect thereof.
Vanguard will not issue any fractional units in the merger. Instead, each holder of LRE common units that are converted pursuant to the
merger agreement who otherwise would have received a fraction of a Vanguard common unit will be entitled to receive, from the
exchange agent appointed by Vanguard pursuant to the merger agreement, a cash payment in lieu of such fractional units in an amount
equal to the product of (i) the average trading prices of the Vanguard common units for the ten consecutive full trading days ending on the
full trading day immediately preceding the closing date of the transactions and (ii) the fraction of the Vanguard unit that such holder would
otherwise be entitled to receive based on the exchange ratio discussed above.
Consideration to Be Paid to Members of LRE GP
The merger agreement provides that Vanguard will issue and deliver 12,320 Vanguard common units to the members of LRE GP in
exchange for all of the limited liability company interests in LRE GP. The number of Vanguard common units to be issued to the members
of LRE GP was determined based upon the 0.550 exchange ratio for the merger consideration.
Treatment of LRE Restricted Units
Under the merger agreement, each LRE restricted unit that is outstanding and unvested immediately prior to the effective time of the
merger will, at the effective time, vest in full and the restrictions with respect thereto will lapse and such LRE restricted unit shall be
deemed to be an LRE common unit for purposes of the merger.
Adjustments to Prevent Dilution
In the event the outstanding LRE common units or Vanguard common units are changed into a different number of units or a different
class after the date of the merger agreement by reason of any subdivisions, reclassifications, splits, unit distributions, combinations or
exchanges of LRE common units or Vanguard common units, the exchange ratio will be correspondingly adjusted to provide to the
holders of LRE common units the same economic effect as contemplated by the merger agreement prior to such event.
Withholding
Vanguard and the exchange agent are entitled to deduct and withhold from the consideration otherwise payable pursuant to the merger
agreement to any holder of LRE common units such amounts as Vanguard or the exchange agent reasonably deems to be required to
deduct and withhold under the Code or any provision of state, local, or foreign tax law, with respect to the making of such payment;
provided, however, that Vanguard or the exchange agent, as applicable, will provide reasonable notice to the applicable holders of LRE
common units prior to deducting and withholding any amounts. To the extent that amounts are so deducted and withheld such amounts
will be treated for all purposes of the merger agreement as having been paid to the holder of LRE common units in respect of whom such
deduction and withholding was made by Vanguard or the exchange agent. LRE intends to deliver to Vanguard a valid certificate of non-
foreign status such that no withholding will be required pursuant to Section 1445 of the Code.
137
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Distributions
No distributions declared or made with respect to Vanguard common units with a record date after the effective time of the merger will be
paid to the holder of any LRE common units with respect to the Vanguard common units that such holder would be entitled to receive in
accordance with the merger agreement and no cash payment in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units will be paid to any such holder
until such holder has delivered the required documentation and surrendered any certificates or book-entry units as contemplated by the
merger agreement. Subject to applicable law, each such holder, following compliance with the requirement to deliver the required
documentation and surrender any certificates or book-entry units as contemplated by the exchange procedures set forth in the merger
agreement, there will be paid to such holder, without interest, promptly after the time of such compliance, the amount of any cash payable
in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units to which such holder is entitled and the amount of distributions with a record date after the
effective time theretofore paid with respect to Vanguard common units and payable with respect to such Vanguard common units, and
promptly after such compliance, or, if later, at the appropriate payment date, the amount of distributions with a record date after the
effective time but prior to such delivery and surrender and a payment date subsequent to such compliance payable with respect to such
Vanguard common units.
Conditions to Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated by the Merger
Agreement
The obligations of each of Vanguard and LRE to effect the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement are subject to the
satisfaction or waiver of the following conditions:
•
•
the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby must have been approved by the affirmative vote or consent of the
holders, as of the record date for the LRE special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units;
• all waiting periods applicable to the merger under the HSR Act must have been terminated or expired;
no law, order, judgment or injunction (whether preliminary or permanent) issued, enacted, promulgated, entered or enforced by any a
court of competent jurisdiction or other governmental authority restraining, prohibiting or rendering illegal the consummation of the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement (brought by a third party) is in effect;
the registration statement of which this proxy statement/prospectus forms a part must have become effective and must not be subject to
any stop order suspending its effectiveness or proceedings for that purpose initiated or threatened by the SEC; and
the Vanguard common units to be issued in the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement must have been approved for listing
on the NASDAQ, subject to official notice of issuance.
•
•
The obligations of Vanguard to effect the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement are subject to the satisfaction or waiver of
the following additional conditions:
•
the representations and warranties of LRE, LRE GP and the sellers of LRE GP in the merger agreement being true and correct as of the
date of the merger agreement and as of the closing date of the merger (except to the extent expressly made as of an earlier date, in which
case as of such date), except where the failure of such representations and warranties to be so true and correct (without giving effect to
any limitation as to material adverse effect or materiality contained in any individual representation or warranty) would not reasonably be
expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a material adverse effect on LRE; provided that: (i) the representation and warranty of
LRE and the sellers of LRE GP with respect to the capitalization of LRE and LRE GP must be true and correct in all respects except any
de minimis inaccuracies as of the date of the merger agreement and as of the closing date of the merger (except to the extent expressly
made as of an earlier date, in which case as of such date) and (ii) the representation and warranty of LRE, LRE GP and the sellers of
LRE GP that there has not been any change, event, development, circumstance,
138
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
condition, occurrence or effect that has had or would reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a material adverse
effect on LRE must be true and correct in all respects as of the date of the merger agreement and as of the closing date of the merger.
LRE, LRE GP and the sellers of LRE GP having performed and complied with, in all material respects, all agreements and covenants
required to be performed by them under the merger agreement;
the receipt of an officer’s certificate executed by the Chief Executive Officer of LRE GP certifying that the two preceding conditions (the
“Additional Vanguard Conditions”) have been satisfied;
the receipt from Paul Hastings LLP, tax counsel to Vanguard, of a written opinion dated as of the closing date of the merger to the effect
that for U.S. federal income tax purposes (i) neither Vanguard nor Merger Sub will recognize any income or gain as a result of the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement other than any gain resulting from any decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant to
Section 752 of the Code; (ii) a holder of Vanguard common units will not recognize gain or loss as a result of the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement other than any gain resulting from any decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752
•
•
of the Code; and (iii) at least 90% of the combined gross income of each of Vanguard and LRE for the most recent four complete calendar
quarters ending before the closing date of the transactions for which the necessary financial information is available is from sources
treated as “qualifying income” within the meaning of Section 7704(d) of the Code;
the receipt of the written resignation of each member of the board of directors and each officer of LRE GP, dated to be effective as of the
effective time;
• the receipt of an assignment of the membership interests in LRE GP; and
the receipt of a counterpart of the termination and continuing obligations agreement, which terminates the provisions of LRE’s existing
omnibus agreement with the exception of certain tax indemnification, from LRE, LRE GP and the sellers of LRE GP.
•
The obligations of the sellers of LRE GP and LRE to effect the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement are subject to the
satisfaction or waiver of the following additional conditions:
the representations and warranties of Vanguard in the merger agreement being true and correct as of the date of the merger agreement
and as of the closing date of the merger (except to the extent expressly made as of an earlier date, in which case as of such date), except
where the failure of such representations and warranties to be so true and correct (without giving effect to any limitation as to material
adverse effect or materiality contained in any individual representation or warranty) would not reasonably be expected to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a material adverse effect on Vanguard; provided that: (i) the representation and warranty of Vanguard
with respect to its capitalization must be true and correct in all respects except any de minimis inaccuracies as of the date of the merger
agreement and as of the closing date of the merger (except to the extent expressly made as of an earlier date, in which case as of such
date) and (ii) the representation and warranty of Vanguard that there has not been any change, event, development, circumstance,
condition, occurrence or effect that has had or would reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a material adverse
effect on Vanguard must be true and correct in all respects as of the date of the merger agreement and as of the closing date of the
merger.
Vanguard and Merger Sub having performed and complied with, in all material respects, all agreements and covenants required to be
performed by them under the merger agreement;
the receipt of an officer’s certificate executed by the Chief Executive Officer of Vanguard certifying that the two preceding conditions (the
“Additional LRE Conditions”) have been satisfied;
the receipt from Andrews Kurth LLP, tax counsel to LRE, of a written opinion dated as of the closing date of the merger to the effect that
for U.S. federal income tax purposes, (i) except to the extent any cash received in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units is treated as
proceeds from a
•
•
•
•
139
TABLE OF CONTENTS
disguised sale transaction described in Section 707(a)(2)(B) (a “Disguised Sale”), or is otherwise taxable, LRE will not recognize any
income or gain as a result of the merger (other than any gain resulting from any actual or constructive distribution of cash, including as a
result of any decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code); (ii) except to the extent any cash received in lieu of
fractional Vanguard common units is treated as a Disguised Sale, holders of LRE common units will not recognize any income or gain as
a result of the merger (other than any gain resulting from any actual or constructive distribution of cash, including as a result of any
decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code); provided that such opinion shall not extend to any holder who
acquired common units from LRE in exchange for property other than cash; and (iii) at least 90% of the gross income of LRE for the most
recent four complete calendar quarters ending before the closing date of the merger for which the necessary financial information is
available is from sources treated as “qualifying income” within the meaning of Section 7704(d) of the Code; and
the receipt of a counterpart of the termination and continuing obligations agreement, which terminates the provisions of LRE’s existing
omnibus agreement with the exception of certain tax indemnification, from Vanguard.
•
For purposes of the merger agreement, the term “material adverse effect” means, when used with respect to a party to the merger
agreement, any change, event, development, circumstance, condition (financial or otherwise), occurrence or effect that, individually or in
the aggregate, would reasonably be expected to have a material adverse effect on the business assets, liabilities, condition (financial or
otherwise) or results of operations of such party and its subsidiaries taken as a whole, but none of the following changes, events,
developments, conditions, occurrences or effects (either alone or in combination) will be taken into account for purposes of determining
whether a material adverse effect has occurred:
(i)
changes in the general economic, financial, credit or securities markets, including prevailing interest rates or currency rates, or
regulatory or political conditions and changes in oil, natural gas, condensate or NGL prices or the prices of other commodities, including
changes in price differentials;
changes in general economic conditions in the:
oil and gas exploration and production industry;
(ii)
 (a)
 (b) the natural gas gathering, compressing, treating, processing and transportation industry generally;
 (c)
 (d)
 (e)the natural gas marketing and trading industry generally (including in each case changes in the laws affecting such industries);
the NGL fractionating and transportation industry generally;
the crude oil and condensate logistics and marketing industry generally; and
(iii)
the outbreak or escalation of hostilities involving the United States, the declaration by the United States of a national emergency or war
or the occurrence of any other calamity or crisis, including acts of terrorism;
(iv)
any hurricane, tornado, flood, earthquake or other natural disaster;
with respect to LRE only, the identity of, or actions or omissions of Vanguard, or its affiliates, or any action taken pursuant to or in
(v)accordance with this Agreement or at the request of or with the consent of Vanguard;
(vi)the announcement or pendency of the merger agreement (including, for the avoidance of doubt, performance of the merger agreement);
any change in the market price or trading volume of the common units of such person or any securities owned by such person (it being
understood and agreed that the exception in this clause (vii) will not preclude any party from asserting that the facts, circumstances,
changes, events,
(vii)
140
TABLE OF CONTENTS
developments, conditions, occurrences or effects giving rise to such change should be deemed to constitute, or be taken into account in
determining whether there has been a material adverse effect);
(viii)
any failure to meet any internal or published budgets, predictions, financial projections or estimates or forecasts of revenues, earnings
or other financial metrics for any period (it being understood and agreed that the exception in this clause (viii) will not preclude any
party from asserting that the facts, circumstances, changes, events, developments, conditions, occurrences or effects giving rise to
such failure should be deemed to constitute, or be taken into account in determining whether there has been, a material adverse
effect);
(ix)
any changes in GAAP (or authoritative interpretation of GAAP);
(x)
(xi)
changes in any laws or regulations applicable to such party or the industries in which such person operates or applicable accounting
regulations or the interpretations thereof; and
any legal proceedings commenced by or involving any current or former member, partner or equityholder of such party (on their own
behalf or on behalf of such party) arising out of or related to the merger agreement or the transactions contemplated thereby;
provided, however, that any change, event, development, circumstance, condition, occurrence or effect referred to in clauses (i), (ii), (iii) or
(iv) will be taken into account for purposes of determining whether a material adverse effect has occurred if and to the extent that such
change, event, development, circumstance, condition, occurrence or effect disproportionately affects such party, as compared to other
similarly situated companies operating in the industries in which such party operates.
LRE Unitholder Approval
LRE has agreed to hold a special meeting of LRE unitholders within 45 days after the mailing of the proxy statement (if reasonably
practicable) for the purpose of such unitholders voting on the approval of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated
thereby. Unless the merger agreement is terminated, the merger agreement requires LRE to call, give notice of and hold the LRE special
meeting (i) irrespective of the making, commencement, disclosure, announcement or submission of any superior proposal (as defined
below) or alternative proposal (as defined below) and (ii) even if the board of directors of LRE GP no longer recommends approval of the
merger agreement. In addition, unless the merger agreement is validly terminated as described in “— Termination of the Merger
Agreement,” LRE will not submit any superior proposal to a vote of the LRE unitholders or (without Vanguard’s prior written consent)
adjourn, postpone or cancel (or propose, publicly or otherwise, or resolve to, to adjourn, postpone or cancel) the LRE special meeting
except for such postponements or adjournments made (i) in the absence of proxies sufficient to obtain approval of a majority of LRE
unitholders, to solicit additional proxies for the purpose of obtaining approval of a majority of LRE unitholders, (ii) in the absence of a
quorum, or (iii) to allow reasonable additional time for the filing and/or mailing of any supplemental or amended disclosure that LRE has
determined after consultation with outside legal counsel is necessary under applicable law and for such supplemental or amended
disclosure to be disseminated and reviewed by LRE unitholders prior to the LRE special meeting.
For purposes of the merger agreement, the term “alternative proposal” means any proposal or offer from any “person” (as defined in the
merger agreement) or “group” (as defined in Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act), other than Vanguard and its subsidiaries, relating to any
(i) direct or indirect acquisition (whether in a single transaction or a series of related transactions) of assets of LRE equal to 20% or more
of the consolidated assets of LRE or to which 20% or more of LRE’s revenues or earnings are attributable, (ii) direct or indirect acquisition
(whether in a single transaction or a series of related transactions) of beneficial ownership (within the meaning of Section 13(d) of the
Exchange Act) of 20% or more of LRE’s equity securities, (iii) tender offer or exchange offer that if consummated would result in any
person or group beneficially owning 20% or more of LRE’s equity securities, or (iv) merger, consolidation, share exchange, business
combination, recapitalization, liquidation, dissolution or similar transaction involving LRE that is structured to permit such person or group
to acquire beneficial ownership of at least 20% of LRE’s consolidated assets or equity interests; in each case, other than the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement.
141
TABLE OF CONTENTS
For purposes of the merger agreement, the term “superior proposal” means a written offer that was not solicited after the date of the merger
agreement and that was obtained after the date of the merger agreement, (i) to acquire, directly or indirectly, (A) more than 50% of the
outstanding equity securities of LRE or (B) more than 50% of the assets of LRE and its subsidiaries or (ii) related to a merger,
consolidation, share exchange, business combination, recapitalization, liquidation, dissolution or similar transactions involving LRE, in
each case made by a third party, which did not result from a material breach of the “no solicitation” provisions of the merger agreement (as
described below in “— No Solicitation by LRE of Alternative Proposals”) and is on terms and conditions that the board of directors of LRE
GP determines in good faith, after consultation with its financial advisors and outside legal counsel, to be more favorable to LRE
unitholders than the merger, taking into account at the time of determination relevant financial considerations, the identity of the person
making such offer, the anticipated timing, conditions and prospects for completion of the transactions contemplated by such offer, the other
terms and conditions of such offer and the implications thereof on LRE, including relevant legal, regulatory and other aspects of such offer
and any changes to the terms of the merger agreement that as of that time had been committed to by Vanguard in writing.
No Solicitation by LRE of Alternative Proposals
The merger agreement contains detailed provisions prohibiting LRE from seeking an alternative proposal to the merger. Under these “no
solicitation” provisions, LRE has agreed that it will not, and will cause its subsidiaries and its and their respective directors, officers and
employees not to, and will use its reasonable best efforts to cause their respective other representatives not to, directly or indirectly:
•
•
initiate, solicit, knowingly encourage or knowingly facilitate any inquiry, proposal or offer that would reasonably be expected to lead to the
submission of any alternative proposal; or
enter into or participate in any discussions or negotiations regarding, or furnish to any person any non-public information with respect to,
or that would reasonably be expected to lead to, any alternative proposal.
In addition, the merger agreement requires LRE to, and to cause its subsidiaries and its and their respective directors, officers and
employees to, and to use its reasonable best efforts to cause their respective other representatives to, immediately cease and cause to be
terminated any discussions or negotiations with any persons conducted prior to the execution of the merger agreement regarding an
alternative proposal.
Notwithstanding these restrictions, the merger agreement provides that, under specified circumstances at any time prior to a majority of
LRE unitholders voting in favor of approving the merger agreement, LRE may furnish information, including non-public information, with
respect to it and its subsidiaries to, and participate in discussions or negotiations with, any third party that makes a written alternative
proposal that was not solicited after the execution of the merger agreement and that did not result from a material breach of the no
solicitation restrictions described above and that the board of directors of LRE GP believes is bona fide, and (after consultation with its
financial advisors and outside legal counsel) that the board of directors of LRE GP determines in good faith constitutes or would
reasonably be likely to lead to or result in a superior proposal, provided that:
•
•
•
substantially concurrently with furnishing any such non-public information to, or entering into discussions or negotiations with, such
person, LRE gives Vanguard written notice of the identity of such person and LRE’s intention to furnish non-public information to, or enter
into discussions or negotiations with, such person;
LRE receives from such person an executed confidentiality agreement between LRE and such person with confidentiality provisions that
are not less restrictive to such person than the provisions of the confidentiality agreement in effect between LRE and Vanguard; and
LRE provides Vanguard with any non-public information about LRE and its subsidiaries that was not previously provided or made
available to Vanguard prior to or substantially concurrently with providing or making available such non-public information to such other
person.
142
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE has also agreed in the merger agreement that it will promptly (and in no event later than 24 hours after receipt), (i) advise Vanguard
in writing of any alternative proposal (and any changes thereto) and the material terms and conditions of any such alternative proposal,
including the identity of such person making such alternative proposal and (ii) provide Vanguard with copies of all written proposals or
draft agreements received by LRE or its representatives setting forth the terms and conditions of, or otherwise relating to, such alternative
proposal. In addition, LRE will keep Vanguard reasonably informed of material developments with respect to any such alternative
proposals, offers, inquiries or requests (and promptly (and in no event later than 24 hours after receipt) provide Vanguard with copies of
any additional written proposals received by it or that LRE has delivered to any third party making an alternative proposal that relate to
such alternative proposal) and of the status of any such discussions or negotiations.
LRE, LRE GP and the LRE GP sellers have also agreed in the merger agreement that none of LRE, LRE GP, any LRE GP seller or any
subsidiary of LRE will enter into any agreement with any person subsequent to the date of the merger agreement that prohibits LRE from
providing any information to Vanguard in accordance with the “no solicitation” provisions (including those described above).
Change in LRE GP Board Recommendation
The merger agreement provides that the board of directors of LRE GP will not (i) withdraw, modify or qualify, in a manner adverse to
Vanguard, the recommendation of the board of directors of LRE GP that LRE’s unitholders approve the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated thereby, including the merger, (ii) fail to include such recommendation in this proxy statement/prospectus or (iii)
publicly approve or recommend, or publicly propose to approve or recommend, any alternative proposal. LRE taking or failing to take, as
applicable, any of the actions described above is referred to as a “partnership change in recommendation.” The merger agreement also
provides that the board of directors of LRE GP will not: (i) approve, adopt or recommend, or publicly propose to approve, adopt or
recommend, or allow LRE or any of its subsidiaries to execute or enter into, any letter of intent, memorandum of understanding, agreement
in principle, merger agreement, acquisition agreement, option agreement, joint venture agreement, partnership agreement or other similar
contract or any tender or exchange offer providing for, with respect to, or in connection with any alternative proposal; (ii) fail to announce
publicly within ten business days after a tender offer or exchange offer relating to the LRE common units has been commenced that the
board of directors of LRE GP recommends rejection of such tender offer or exchange offer and reaffirming the recommendation of the
board of directors of LRE GP that LRE’s unitholders approve the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, including
the merger; or (iii) resolve, agree or publicly propose to, or permit LRE or any of its representatives to agree or publicly propose to, take
any of the actions referred to in this paragraph.
Notwithstanding the terms described above, if (i) LRE receives a written alternative proposal (and such proposal is not withdrawn) that the
board of directors of LRE GP believes is bona fide, (ii) such alternative proposal did not result from a breach of the no solicitation
provisions described above and (iii) the board of directors of LRE GP determines, after consultation with its financial advisors and outside
legal counsel, that such alternative proposal constitutes a superior proposal, then the board of directors of LRE GP may at any time prior
to a majority of LRE unitholders voting in favor of approving the merger agreement, terminate the merger agreement and pay Vanguard
the termination fee (described below in “— Termination Fee”) or effect a partnership change in recommendation; provided, however, that
the board of directors of LRE GP may not take such action pursuant to the foregoing unless:
LRE has provided prior written notice to Vanguard, generally at least two business days in advance, specifying in reasonable detail the
reasons for such action (including a description of the material terms of such superior proposal and delivering Vanguard a copy of any
current draft proposed definitive agreement providing for the alternative proposal for such superior proposal in the form to be entered into
and any other relevant proposed transaction agreements); and
during the two-business day period, LRE has negotiated with Vanguard in good faith (to the extent Vanguard desires to negotiate)
regarding any revisions to or adjustments in the terms and conditions of the merger agreement proposed by Vanguard.
•
•
143
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Other than in connection with an alternative proposal, the merger agreement also permits the board of directors of LRE GP to make a
partnership change in recommendation in response to an “intervening event” (as described below) at any time prior to obtaining the
approval of the LRE unitholders of the merger agreement, but only if:
prior to making such partnership change in recommendation, the board of directors of LRE GP determines in good faith, after consultation
with and considering the advice of LRE’s outside legal counsel, that failure to take such action would be inconsistent with its duties under
applicable Delaware law, LRE’s partnership agreement or LRE GP’s limited liability company agreement;
LRE has given at least three business days’ advance written notice to Vanguard that the board of directors of LRE GP intends to take
such action (which notice shall specify in reasonable detail the reasons for such action); and
during the aforementioned period, LRE has negotiated with Vanguard in good faith (to the extent Vanguard desires to negotiate)
regarding any revisions to or adjustments in the terms and conditions of the merger agreement proposed by Vanguard.
•
•
•
After compliance with the foregoing procedures, if the board of directors of LRE GP still determines in good faith, after consultation with its
financial advisors and outside legal counsel, that the failure to make a partnership change in recommendation would be inconsistent with
its duties under applicable Delaware law, LRE’s partnership agreement or LRE GP’s limited liability company agreement, then the board
of directors of LRE GP may, at any time prior to a majority of LRE unitholders voting in favor of approving the merger agreement, effect a
partnership change in recommendation.
As used in the merger agreement, subject to certain exceptions set forth therein, an “intervening event” means a material event,
circumstance, state of facts, occurrence, development or change that did not exist or was not known to the board of directors of LRE GP on
the date of the merger agreement (or if known, the consequences of which were not known or reasonably foreseeable by the board of
directors of LRE GP as of such date) that becomes known to the board of directors of LRE GP prior to a majority of LRE unitholders voting
in favor of approving the merger agreement (subject to certain customary exceptions as further set forth in the merger agreement, including
the receipt, existence, potential for or terms of an alternative proposal or any matter relating thereto or consequence thereof).
Notwithstanding the restrictions discussed above, LRE and the board of directors of LRE GP may disclose information to LRE’s
unitholders as contemplated by Rule 14d-9 and Rule 14e-2(a) promulgated under the Exchange Act or as otherwise required by law. Any
“stop-look-and-listen” communication by LRE of the board of directors of LRE GP to LRE’s unitholders pursuant to Rule 14d-9(f) will not
be considered a failure to make, or a withdrawal, modification or change in any manner adverse to Vanguard of, the recommendation of
the board of directors of LRE GP that LRE’s unitholders approve the merger agreement.
Regulatory Matters
See “Proposal 1: The Merger — Regulatory Approvals and Clearances Required for the Merger” for a description of the material
regulatory requirements for the completion of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
Vanguard and LRE have determined that they are not required to file notifications with the Federal Trade Commission and the Antitrust
Division of the Department of Justice or observe a mandatory pre-merger waiting period before completing the merger under the HSR Act.
Vanguard and LRE have agreed to (including to cause their respective subsidiaries to) cooperate with each other and use their
reasonable best effort to: (i) take all actions necessary to cause the closing conditions of the merger agreement to be satisfied as promptly
as practicable and to consummate the merger (including preparing all necessary documentation to effect all necessary filings, reports, and
other documentation), (ii) obtain promptly (and in any event no later than December 31, 2015) all approvals, consents, clearances,
expirations or terminations of waiting periods, registrations, permits (including environmental permits), authorizations and other
confirmations from any governmental authority or third party necessary, proper or advisable to consummate the transactions contemplated
by the merger agreement; (iii) defend any lawsuits or
144
TABLE OF CONTENTS
other legal proceedings challenging the merger agreement or the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement; (iv) to cooperate with each other to determine if the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement require a filing and
observation of the waiting period under the HSR Act and, if required, make an appropriate filing of a Notification and Report Form
pursuant to the HSR Act with respect to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement as promptly as practicable and in any
event within 15 business days after the date of the merger agreement and to supply as promptly as practicable any additional information
and documentary material that may be requested by any governmental authority pursuant to the HSR Act or any other antitrust law; (v) use
reasonable best efforts to cooperate with any filing or submission with a governmental authority in connection with the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement and in connection with any investigation or other inquiries by or before a governmental authority
relating to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement; (vi) promptly inform the other party (and supply the other party with)
any communication received by such party from, or given by such party to, the Federal Trade Commission, the Antitrust Division of the
Department of Justice, or any other governmental authority and any material communication received or given in connection with any
proceeding by a private person, in each case regarding the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement; (vii) permit the other
party to review in advance and incorporate their reasonable comments in any communication to be given by it to any governmental
authority with respect to obtaining any clearances required under any antitrust law in connection with the transactions contemplated in the
merger agreement; and (viii) consult with the other party in advance of any meeting or teleconference with any governmental authority or,
in connection with any proceeding by a private person, with any other person, and, to the extent not prohibited by the governmental
authority or other person, give the other party the opportunity to attend and participate in such meetings and teleconferences.
In addition, Vanguard agreed to take, or cause to be taken, any and all steps and to make, or cause to be made, any and all undertakings
necessary to resolve any objections that a governmental authority or any other person may assert under any antitrust law with respect to
the transactions contemplated hereby, and to avoid or eliminate each and every impediment under any antitrust law that may be asserted
by any governmental authority with respect to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, in each case, so as to enable the
closing to occur as promptly as practicable and in any event no later than December 31, 2015; provided that nothing in the merger
agreement requires, or will be construed to require, any party to sell or otherwise dispose of, hold separate (through the establishment of a
trust or otherwise), divest itself of or limit the ownership or operations of all or any portion of their respective businesses, assets or
operations.
In furtherance of the above, Vanguard and LRE agreed to use reasonable best efforts to contest and resist any administrative or judicial
actions or proceedings challenging the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
Termination of the Merger Agreement
Vanguard and LRE may terminate the merger agreement at any time prior to the closing by mutual written consent.
In addition, either Vanguard or LRE may terminate the merger agreement at any time prior to the effective time of the merger by written
notice to the other party:
if the closing of the merger has not occurred on or before December 31, 2015 (unless such failure of the closing to occur is due to the
failure of the terminating party to perform and comply in all material respects with the covenants and agreements to be performed or
complied with by such party prior to the closing);
if there is in effect a final and nonappealable order of a governmental authority restraining, enjoining or otherwise prohibiting the
consummation of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement (unless such right to terminate is primarily due to the failure of
the terminating party to perform any of its obligations under the merger agreement); or
if after the final adjournment of the LRE special meeting at which a vote of the LRE unitholders has been taken in accordance with the
merger agreement, the approval of a majority of LRE unitholders has not been obtained.
•
•
•
145
TABLE OF CONTENTS
In addition, Vanguard may terminate the merger agreement:
•if, prior to final adjournment of the LRE special meeting, a partnership change in recommendation has occurred; or
if LRE, LRE GP or any LRE GP seller has breached or failed to perform any of its representations, warranties, covenants or agreements
set forth in the merger agreement, or any representation or warranty of LRE, LRE GP or any LRE GP seller becomes untrue, which
breach, failure to perform or untruth if it was continuing as of the closing date of the transactions would result in the failure of the
Additional Vanguard Conditions to be satisfied, and such breach, failure to perform or untruth is incapable of being cured (or becoming
true) or, if capable of being cured (or becoming true), is not cured (or does not become true) by the earlier of (i) December 31, 2015 or (ii)
within 30 days following receipt by LRE of notice of such breach, failure or untruth from Vanguard.
•
In addition, LRE may terminate the merger agreement:
if Vanguard has breached or failed to perform any of its representations, warranties, covenants or agreements set forth in the merger
agreement, or any representation or warranty of Vanguard becomes untrue, which breach, failure to perform or untruth if it was continuing
as of the closing date of the transactions would result in the failure of the Additional LRE Conditions to be satisfied, and such breach,
failure to perform or untruth is incapable of being cured (or becoming true) or, if capable of being cured (or becoming true), is not cured (or
does not become true) by the earlier of (i) December 31, 2015 or (ii) within 30 days following receipt by Vanguard of notice of such
breach, failure or untruth from LRE (such a breach, whether committed by LRE (providing Vanguard a right of termination as described in
the above discussion of Vanguard’s termination rights under the merger agreement) or Vanguard (providing LRE a right of termination as
described in this paragraph) being referred to herein as a “terminable breach”); or
in order to enter into a definitive agreement relating to a superior proposal, provided that LRE must concurrently with such termination
pay to Vanguard the termination fee (as described below).
•
•
In some cases, termination of the merger agreement will require (i) LRE or Vanguard, as the case may be, to reimburse up to $1,215,000
of the other party’s expenses as described below under “— Expenses” and (ii) LRE to pay a termination fee of $7,288,000 to Vanguard, as
described below under “— Termination Fee.”
Termination Fee
The merger agreement provides that LRE is required to pay a termination fee of $7,288,000, which is referred to as the “termination fee,”
reduced by the expenses previously paid or reimbursed by LRE (as described below under “— Expenses”), to Vanguard if:
•
prior to the adjournment of the LRE special meeting Vanguard terminates the merger agreement due to a partnership change in
recommendation having occurred;
•LRE terminates the merger agreement in order to enter into a definitive agreement relating to a superior proposal; or
•
each of the following occurs:
•
an alternative proposal is publicly submitted, publicly proposed or publicly disclosed prior to, and not withdrawn at the time of, the date of
the LRE special meeting (or, if such special meeting has not occurred, prior to the termination of the merger agreement as a result of the
failure to consummate the merger prior to December 31, 2015);
the merger agreement is terminated:
•
•by either LRE or Vanguard as a result of the failure to consummate the merger prior to December 31, 2015;
•by either LRE or Vanguard because the merger agreement was not approved at the LRE special meeting; or
146
TABLE OF CONTENTS
• by Vanguard because LRE has committed a terminable breach (as described above); and
LRE enters into a definitive agreement with respect to, or consummates, an alternative proposal within 12 months after the date the
merger agreement is terminated (provided that for purposes of the payment of the termination fee described above, the term “alternative
proposal” has the meaning provided under “— LRE Unitholder Approval,” except that the references to “20% or more” will be deemed to
be references to “50% or more”).
•
In no event will LRE be obligated to make more than one payment of the termination fee and, if LRE has previously paid any of
Vanguard’s expenses in accordance with the merger agreement (as described below under “— Expenses”), the termination fee will be
reduced by the amount of such expenses paid.
Expenses
Generally, all fees and expenses incurred in connection with the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement will be the
obligation of the respective party incurring such fees and expenses, except that Vanguard and LRE will each pay one-half of the
expenses incurred in connection with any HSR Act filing and the filing, printing and mailing of this proxy statement/prospectus.
In addition, in the event that the merger agreement is terminated by either party because the other party has committed a terminable
breach (as described above), then the non-terminating party will pay the terminating party, within two business days, the reasonable and
documented out-of-pocket expenses of the terminating party incurred in connection with the negotiation, execution and delivery of the
merger agreement and the performance of the transactions contemplated thereby up to an aggregate amount equal to $1,215,000.
Conduct of Business Pending the Consummation of the Transactions Contemplated
by the Merger Agreement
Under the merger agreement, LRE has agreed that, until the earlier of the effective time and the termination of the merger agreement, and
except (i) as expressly contemplated or permitted by the merger agreement, (ii) as may be required by applicable law or the terms of any
LRE employee benefit plan, (iii) as set forth in the disclosure letter delivered by LRE to Vanguard or (iv) with the prior written consent of
Vanguard (which consent cannot be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed), neither LRE nor LRE GP will (and no LRE GP seller
nor LRE GP will take any such action on its own behalf or on behalf of LRE or LRE GP), and will cause each of LRE’s subsidiaries not to:
•
•
•
•
conduct its business and the business of its subsidiaries in all material respects other than in the ordinary course, fail to use commercially
reasonable efforts to preserve intact its business organizations, goodwill and assets and maintain its rights, franchises and existing
relations with customers, suppliers, employees and business associates, or take any action that adversely affects the ability of any party
to obtain any approvals required under the HSR Act for the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
issue, sell or otherwise permit to become outstanding, or authorize the creation of, any additional equity or any additional equity-related
rights or enter into any agreement with respect to the foregoing;
split, combine or reclassify any of its equity interests or issue or authorize or propose the issuance of any other securities in respect of, in
lieu of or in substitution for its equity interests, or repurchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, or permit any of its subsidiaries to purchase,
redeem or otherwise acquire any membership, partnership or other equity interests or rights, subject to certain exceptions;
(i) sell, lease, transfer, farmout, exchange, dispose of, license, convey or discontinue all or any portion of its assets, business or
properties, other than (A) in the ordinary course of business, (B) any individual sales, leases, dispositions or discontinuances for
consideration not in excess of $5,000,000, or (C) any distributions otherwise permitted under the merger agreement, (ii) acquire, by
merger or otherwise, or lease any assets or all or any portion of the business or property of any
147
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
•
•
•
•
other entity other than in the ordinary course of business, (iii) merge, consolidate or enter into any other business combination transaction
with any person or (iv) convert from a limited partnership, limited liability company or corporation, as the case may be, to any other
business entity;
make or declare dividends or distributions (i) to the holders of LRE common units that are special or extraordinary distributions or that are
in a cash amount in excess of $0.1875 per LRE common unit per quarter, or (ii) to the holders of any other units or interests in LRE, other
than distributions required under the LRE partnership agreement by reason of regular quarterly cash distributions to the holders of LRE
common units;
amend LRE’s certificate of limited partnership or its partnership agreement, the certificate of formation of LRE GP, the LRE GP limited
liability company agreement, or the organizational documents of any subsidiary of LRE;
• enter into any material contract, agreement or arrangement;
modify, amend, terminate or assign, or waive or assign any rights under any material agreement, in a manner that is materially adverse to
LRE GP, LRE and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, or that would reasonably be expected to prevent or materially delay the
consummation of the merger or the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
waive, release, assign, settle or compromise any material claim, action or proceeding, including any state or federal regulatory
proceeding seeking damages or injunction or other equitable relief;
•implement or adopt any change in its GAAP accounting principles, practices or methods, other than as may be required by GAAP;
fail to use commercially reasonable efforts to maintain, with financially responsible insurance companies, insurance in such amounts and
against such risks and losses as is maintained by it at present;
change in any material respect any of its express or deemed elections relating to taxes, including elections for any and all joint ventures,
partnerships, limited liability companies or other investments where it has the capacity to make such binding election, settle or
compromise any material claim, action, suit, litigation, proceeding, arbitration, investigation, audit or controversy relating to taxes, amend
in any material respect any tax return, or change in any material respect any of its methods of reporting income or deductions for federal
income tax purposes from those employed in the preparation of its federal income tax return for the most recent taxable year for which a
return has been filed, except as may be required by applicable law;
except with respect to certain employee benefit plans maintained by a third party, increase in any respect the compensation of its officers
or employees whose annual base compensation exceeds $200,000 (provided that LRE will provide prompt written notice to Vanguard of
any increase in compensation to any officers or employees), take any action to increase, or accelerate the payment or vesting of the
amounts, benefits or rights payable or accrued or to become payable or accrued under, any employee benefit plan, grant any severance
or termination pay to any officer or director of LRE GP or any employee, or establish, adopt, enter into or materially amend any plan,
policy, program or arrangement for the benefit of any current or former directors or officers of LRE or any of its subsidiaries or any of their
beneficiaries;
(i) incur, assume, guarantee or otherwise become liable for any indebtedness, other than (A) borrowings under LRE’s existing revolving
credit facility or any one or more refinancings of all or any portion of the indebtedness thereunder entered into on commercially
reasonable and customary terms; provided that the aggregate amount of indebtedness described in clause (A) shall not exceed $300.0
million and provided that LRE and LRE GP shall consult with Vanguard prior to paying or agreeing to pay any fees with respect to the
indebtedness described in this clause (A), and in no event shall such fees exceed $1,000,000, or (B) trade credit in the ordinary course of
business, (ii) redeem, repurchase, cancel or otherwise acquire any indebtedness, (iii) enter into any material lease, (iv) create any lien on
its property or the property of its subsidiaries in connection with any
•
•
148
TABLE OF CONTENTS
pre-existing indebtedness, new indebtedness or lease (except with respect to refinancings described in clause (i)), or (v) make or commit
to make any capital expenditures other than as contemplated in LRE’s 2015 capital budget or to satisfy LRE’s plugging and abandonment
obligations;
•authorize, recommend, propose or announce an intention to adopt a plan of complete or partial dissolution or liquidation;
take any action or fail to take any action that would reasonably be expected to cause it or any of its subsidiaries that is not a corporation
to be treated, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, as a corporation;
•enter into any partnership related party transaction (as such term is defined in the merger agreement); and
• agree or commit to do anything prohibited in the list above.
•
Under the merger agreement, the foregoing does not limit or restrict the ability of LRE or its subsidiaries to take otherwise prohibited
actions in response to emergency situations to the extent required in order to ensure the protection of individuals or assets or compliance
with environmental laws, including the release or threatened release of hazardous materials, provided that prompt notice is given to
Vanguard.
Under the merger agreement, Vanguard has agreed that, until the earlier of the effective time and the termination of the merger agreement,
and except (i) as expressly contemplated or permitted by the merger agreement, (ii) as may be required by applicable law, (iii) as set forth
in the disclosure letter delivered by Vanguard to LRE and the LRE GP sellers or (iv) with the prior written consent of LRE (which consent
cannot be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed), Vanguard will not, and will cause each of its subsidiaries not to:
conduct its business and the business of its subsidiaries in all material respects other than in the ordinary course, fail to use commercially
reasonable efforts to preserve intact its business organizations, goodwill and assets and maintain its rights, franchises and existing
relations with customers, suppliers, employees and business associates, or take any action that adversely affects the ability of any party
to obtain any approvals required under the HSR Act for the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
issue, sell or otherwise permit to become outstanding, or authorize the creation of, any additional equity or any additional rights or enter
into any agreement with respect to the foregoing; provided that Vanguard may issue and sell units in the ordinary course of business
pursuant to its existing equity distribution agreement;
split, combine or reclassify any of its equity interests or issue or authorize or propose the issuance of any other securities in respect of, in
lieu of or in substitution for its equity interests, or repurchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, or permit any of its subsidiaries to purchase,
redeem or otherwise acquire any membership, partnership or other equity interests or rights, subject to certain exceptions;
(i) sell, lease, transfer, farmout, exchange, dispose of, license, convey or discontinue all or any portion of its assets, business or
properties other than (A) in the ordinary course of business, (B) any individual sales, leases, dispositions or discontinuances for
consideration not in excess of $20,000,000, (C) any distributions expressly permitted under the merger agreement, (ii) merge, consolidate
or enter into any other business combination transaction with any person or (iii) convert from a limited partnership or limited liability
company, as the case may be, to any other business entity;
make or declare dividends or distributions to the holders of Vanguard common units or other Vanguard securities, other than distributions
under the Vanguard limited liability company agreement by reason of regular monthly or quarterly cash distributions to Vanguard
unitholders;
amend the Vanguard certificate of formation, the Vanguard limited liability company agreement or any organizational document of
Vanguard’s subsidiaries;
•
•
•
•
•
•
149
TABLE OF CONTENTS
•
•
modify, amend, terminate or assign, or waive or assign any rights under any material agreement, in a manner that is materially adverse to
Vanguard and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, or that would reasonably be expected to prevent or materially delay the consummation
of the merger or the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
implement or adopt any material change in its GAAP accounting principles, practices or methods, other than as may be required by
GAAP;
change in any material respect any of its express or deemed elections relating to taxes, including elections for any and all joint ventures,
partnerships, limited liability companies or other investments where it has the capacity to make such binding election, settle or
compromise any material claim, action, suit, litigation, proceeding, arbitration, investigation, audit or controversy relating to taxes, amend
in any material respect any tax return, or change in any material respect any of its methods of reporting income or deductions for federal
income tax purposes from those employed in the preparation of its federal income tax return for the most recent taxable year for which a
return has been filed, except as may be required by applicable law;
•authorize, recommend, propose or announce an intention to adopt a plan of complete or partial dissolution or liquidation;
take any action or fail to take any action that would reasonably be expected to cause Vanguard or any of its subsidiaries that is not a
corporation to be treated, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, as a corporation; and
• agree or commit to do anything prohibited in the list above.
•
•
Under the merger agreement, the foregoing does not limit or restrict the ability of Vanguard or its subsidiaries to take otherwise prohibited
actions (x) to the extent that any such action is implemented to rationalize the corporate structure of Vanguard and its subsidiaries and
does not result in the relevant assets being ultimately controlled, directly or indirectly, by a person other than Vanguard or (y) in response
to emergency situations to the extent required in order to ensure the protection of individuals or assets or compliance with environmental
laws, including the release or threatened release of hazardous materials, provided that prompt notice is given to LRE.
On May 21, 2015, Vanguard executed and delivered a consent letter in respect of the merger agreement, which was acknowledged and
agreed by the board of directors of LRE GP and LRE. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the consent letter, the board of directors of
LRE GP and LRE consented to the entry by Vanguard into the Eagle Rock merger agreement.
Indemnification; Directors’ and Officers’ Insurance
The merger agreement provides that, from and after the effective time of the merger, to the fullest extent permitted by law, Vanguard and
the surviving entity in the merger will indemnify and hold harmless each person who is now, or has been or becomes at any time prior to
the effective time, an officer, director or employee of LRE GP, LRE or any of its subsidiaries and also with respect to any such person, in
such person’s capacity as a director, officer, employee, member, trustee or fiduciary of another corporation, foundation, partnership, joint
venture, trust, pension or other employee benefit plan or enterprise (regardless of whether affiliated with LRE) serving at the request of or
on behalf of LRE GP, LRE or any of its subsidiaries and together with such person’s heirs, executors or administrators against any losses,
claims, damages, liabilities, costs, indemnification expenses, judgments, fines, penalties and amounts paid in settlement resulting
therefrom. Additionally, Vanguard will advance to any indemnified party any indemnification expenses incurred in defending, serving as a
witness with respect to or otherwise participating with respect to any claim or action in advance of the final disposition of such claim or
action without the requirement of any bond or other security.
The indemnification and advancement obligations of Vanguard and the surviving entity in the merger pursuant to the merger agreement
extend to acts or omissions occurring at or before the effective time and any claim or action relating thereto (including with respect to any
acts or omissions occurring in connection with the approval of the merger agreement and the consummation of the merger and the
transactions contemplated
150
TABLE OF CONTENTS
by the merger agreement, including the consideration and approval thereof and the process undertaken in connection therewith and any
claim or action relating thereto), and all rights to indemnification and advancement conferred hereunder continue as to each indemnified
party who has ceased to be a director or officer of LRE or any of its subsidiaries after the date of the merger agreement and inure to the
benefit of such person’s heirs, executors and personal and legal representatives.
For a period of six years from the effective time, as required by the merger agreement, Vanguard will maintain in effect the current
directors’ and officers’ liability and fiduciary liability insurance policies covering the indemnified parties (but may substitute therefor other
policies of at least the same coverage and amounts containing terms and conditions that are no less advantageous to the indemnified
parties so long as that substitution does not result in gaps or lapses in coverage or are alleged to have occurred) with respect to matters
occurring on or before the effective time, but Vanguard is not required to pay annual premiums in excess of 300% of the last annual
premiums paid therefor prior to the date of the merger agreement and will purchase the maximum amount of coverage that can be
obtained for that amount if the coverage would cost in excess of that amount. Vanguard may, in its sole discretion, on or prior to the
effective time, purchase a “tail policy” with respect to acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have occurred prior to the effective time that
were committed or alleged to have been committed by such indemnified parties in their capacity as such; provided that in no event shall
the cost of such policy, if purchased by Vanguard, exceed six times an amount equal to 300% of the last annual premiums paid thereof
prior to the date of the merger agreement by LRE for directors’ and officers’ liability insurance policies and, if such a “tail policy” is
purchased, neither Vanguard nor the surviving entity in the merger shall have any further obligations with respect to maintaining directors’
and officers’ liability insurance.
Financing Matters
Pursuant to the merger agreement, prior to the effective time of the merger, LRE and LRE GP have agreed, at Vanguard’s sole cost and
expense, to cooperate, and to cause their respective subsidiaries and representatives to cooperate, as is reasonably necessary with
Vanguard in connection with any financing by Vanguard or Vanguard’s subsidiaries in connection with the transactions contemplated by
the merger agreement as may be reasonably requested by Vanguard or its representatives.
Amendment of Merger Agreement
At any time prior to the effective time, whether before or after approval of the merger agreement by LRE unitholders, the parties may, by
written agreement, amend the merger agreement; provided, however, that following approval of the merger and the other transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement by LRE unitholders, no amendment or change to the provisions of the merger agreement will be
made which by law would require further approval by LRE unitholders without such approval. The merger agreement also provides that, in
addition to any approvals required by LRE’s partnership documents or LRE GP’s limited liability company documents or pursuant to the
merger agreement, any waivers by LRE or LRE GP of, or any amendment or modification of any provisions in the merger agreement other
than relating to the conduct of business covenants (except relating to equity issuances) must be approved by the LRE GP conflicts
committee.
Remedies; Specific Performance
Under the merger agreement, each of the parties agrees that irreparable damage would occur and that the parties would not have any
adequate remedy at law in the event that any of the provisions of the merger agreement were not performed in accordance with their
specific terms, and each agrees that it will not oppose the granting of an injunction, specific performance and other equitable relief as
provided in the merger agreement on the basis that (x) each party has an adequate remedy at law or (y) an award of specific performance
is not an appropriate remedy for any reason at law or equity.
151
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Representations and Warranties
The merger agreement contains representations and warranties made by Vanguard, on the one hand, and LRE, LRE GP and the LRE GP
sellers, on the other hand. These representations and warranties have been made solely for the benefit of the other parties to the merger
agreement and:
•
•
may be intended not as statements of fact or of the condition of the parties to the merger agreement or their respective subsidiaries, but
rather as a way of allocating the risk to one of the parties if those statements prove to be inaccurate;
have been qualified by disclosures that were made to the other party in connection with the negotiation of the merger agreement, which
disclosures may not be reflected in the merger agreement;
•may apply standards of materiality in a way that is different from what may be viewed as material to you or other investors; and
were made only as of the date of the merger agreement or such other date or dates as may be specified in the merger agreement and are
subject to more recent developments.
•
The representations and warranties made by both Vanguard and LRE relate to:
• organization, general authority, standing and similar matters;
•
•
equity interests in other entities;
capitalization;
•
•
litigation;
internal controls and procedures;
approval and authorization of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement and any conflicts
created by such transactions;
•no violations or defaults resulting from the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
•required consents and approvals of governmental authorities in connection with the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
• documents filed with the SEC and financial statements included in those documents;
•
• absence of undisclosed liabilities since December 31, 2014;
absence of certain changes or events from December 31, 2014 through the date of the merger agreement and from the date of the merger
agreement through the closing date;
• compliance with applicable laws and permits;
•
•
•
•
•
• information supplied in connection with this proxy statement/prospectus;
•
• employee benefits and employment matters;
•
•
intellectual property;
related party transactions;
material contracts;
environmental matters;
reserve reports;
title to properties;
tax matters;
152
•
•
•
insurance;
regulatory matters;
derivatives;
TABLE OF CONTENTS
financial advisors; and
•
• absence of additional representations and warranties.
Additional representations and warranties made only by Vanguard relate to the operations of Merger Sub and the financing of the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
Additional representations and warranties made only by LRE, LRE GP and the LRE GP sellers relate to state takeover statutes and
unitholder approval of the merger.
Additional Agreements
The merger agreement also contains covenants relating to cooperation in the preparation of this proxy statement/prospectus and
additional agreements relating to, among other things, access to information, notice of specified matters and public announcements. The
merger agreement also obligates Vanguard to have Vanguard common units to be issued in connection with the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement approved for listing on the NASDAQ, subject to official notice of issuance, prior to the date of the
consummation of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
153
TABLE OF CONTENTS
VANGUARD NATURAL RESOURCES, LLC
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA COMBINED FINANCIAL
INFORMATION
Vanguard as adjusted for the Merger and as further adjusted for the Eagle Rock Merger
Subject to the terms and conditions of the merger agreement and in accordance with Delaware law, the merger agreement provides for
the merger of Merger Sub with and into LRE, with LRE continuing as the surviving entity, and, at the same time, the purchase by
Vanguard of all of the outstanding limited liability company interests in LRE GP, resulting in both LRE and LRE GP becoming wholly
owned subsidiaries of Vanguard. Further, subject to the terms and conditions of the Eagle Rock merger agreement and in accordance
with Delaware law, the Eagle Rock merger agreement provides for the merger of Talon Merger Sub with and into Eagle Rock, with Eagle
Rock continuing as the surviving entity and a wholly owned subsidiary Vanguard.
The pro forma financial statements presented in this subsection have been prepared using the acquisition method of accounting for
business combinations under U.S. GAAP. Under the acquisition method of accounting, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed from
LRE and Eagle Rock will be recorded as of the acquisition date at their respective fair values.
The historical financial information included in the columns entitled “Vanguard” presented in this subsection was derived from the
unaudited financial statements included in Vanguard’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 and its Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 which are incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus.
The historical financial information included in the columns entitled “LRE” was derived from LRE’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the
quarter ended June 30, 2015 and its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 which are incorporated by
reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. The historical financial information included in the columns entitled “Eagle Rock” was
derived from Eagle Rock’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 and its Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the year ended December 31, 2014 which are incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus.
On January 31, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Encore Energy Partners Operating, LLC, completed the acquisition of
certain natural gas and oil assets in the Pinedale and Jonah fields located in Southwestern Wyoming for approximately $555.6 million in
cash (the “Pinedale Acquisition”).
On September 30, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Vanguard Operating, LLC, completed the acquisition of natural gas,
oil and NGL assets in the Piceance Basin located in Colorado for approximately $496.4 million (the “Piceance Acquisition”).
The unaudited pro forma combined balance sheet at June 30, 2015 presented in this subsection has been presented to show the effect as
if the merger, the Eagle Rock merger and the pro forma adjustments had occurred on June 30, 2015. The Pinedale Acquisition and the
Piceance Acquisition were included in Vanguard’s historical balance sheet at June 30, 2015, and, as such, there are no pro forma
adjustments related to the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition.
The unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the year ended December
31, 2014 presented in this subsection have been presented based on Vanguard’s individual statements of operations, and reflect the pro
forma operating results attributable to the merger, the Eagle Rock merger, the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition as if the
merger, the Eagle Rock merger and acquisitions and the related transactions had occurred on January 1, 2014. Vanguard’s historical
statements of operations include operating results from the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition for the six months ended
June 30, 2015 and, as such, there are no pro forma adjustments related to the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition for this
period.
Pro forma data is based on currently available information and certain estimates and assumptions as explained in the notes to the
unaudited pro forma combined financial statements presented in this subsection. Pro forma data is not necessarily indicative of the
financial results that would have been attained had the merger, the Eagle Rock merger and the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance
Acquisition occurred on January 1, 2014. As actual adjustments may differ from the pro forma adjustments, the pro forma amounts
presented should not be viewed as indicative of operations in future periods.
154
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in this subsection is based on assumptions that Vanguard believes
are reasonable under the circumstances and are intended for informational purposes only. Actual results may differ from the estimates and
assumptions used. The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in this subsection is not necessarily indicative of
the financial results that would have occurred if these transactions had taken place on the dates indicated, nor is it indicative of future
consolidated results.
The completion of the Eagle Rock merger is not a condition to the completion of the merger and there can be no assurance that the
transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement will be completed.
155
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Balance Sheet
As of June 30, 2015
Historical
(in thousands)
Vanguard
LRE
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 2)
Vanguard/
LRE Pro
 
Forma
Combined
$7,681
$(3,782
)(e)  $8,031
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 2)
Historical
Eagle
 
Rock
$20
$—
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock Pro
Forma
Combined
$8,051
121,500
$4,132
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash
equivalents
Trade accounts
receivable, net
Derivative assets
Due from affiliates
Prepaid expenses
Other currents assets    6,146
Total current assets
Oil and natural gas
properties, at cost
  
Accumulated
depletion,
amortization and
impairment
Oil and natural gas
properties evaluated,
net – full cost method
Other assets
Goodwill
Derivative assets
85,754
8,659
—
94,413
27,087      —
114,415
   —
   —
32,087      —
     —
     1,456
     1,240
     (142
     —
     —
     51,123      (3,924
210,447
 
   4,194,888      972,120      (559,640)(a)    4,404,315      891,788      (458,534)(g)    4,860,374
36,169      —
     —
     —
     —
     —
     11,594      —
     74,870      —
146,502
 
 
   1,456
)(a)    1,098
   6,146
 
) 
   257,646
182,671
   1,456
   1,098
   17,740
   332,516
22,805 (g)
(203,053)(a)
(2,154,462)    (559,640)    559,640 (a)     (2,154,462)    (458,534)    458,534 (g)     (2,154,462)
2,040,426      412,480      (203,053)
2,249,853      433,254      22,805
2,705,912
420,955
   68,942
—
     37,159      —
213,648
634,603
   106,101
—
     38,469      —
31,552
666,155
   144,570
Deferred financing
costs, net of
accumulated
amortization and other
assets
Other assets
Total assets
156
—
1,646
(1,646
)(a)    —
—
—
—
27,272
 $2,768,042    $502,863    $5,015
455
(10
)(a)    27,717
15,585      (4,788
$3,275,920    $562,178    $49,569
)(g)    38,514
$3,887,667
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Balance Sheet – (continued)
As of June 30, 2015
Historical
(in thousands)
Vanguard  LRE
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 2)
Vanguard/
LRE Pro
 
Forma
Combined
Historical
Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 2)
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock Pro
Forma
Combined
$12,165
   1,266
     
   19,012
   17,580
   11,653
$4,400
  $9,442
    —
    —
      
      
    3,096
    —
    16,540     —
    92
    —
41,659
2,857
—
4,314
—
—
29,579
10,389     —
(k)   $26,007
   1,266
 
 
     
   22,108
 
   34,120
 
 
   11,745
44,516
4,314
39,968
—
    7,889
11,226
(a)     26,544
(f)
174,998     50,305     18,400
—
—
—
   11,226
    14,000 (l)     48,433
243,703  
   —
—
—
750
262
3,564
29,579
41,397
$—
     —
       
     —
     —
     —
$—
    —
      
    2,578
    7,642
    151
Liabilities and
members’ equity
     
Current liabilities
     
Accounts payable:
 $12,165
Trade
   1,266
Affiliates
     
Accrued liabilities:
Lease operating
   16,434
Developmental capital   9,938
Interest
   11,502
Production and other
taxes
Derivative liabilities
Oil and natural gas
revenue payable
     —
Distributions payable    11,226
     1,380
   14,892
Other
  
     1,200
     
Total current liabilities    149,149     23,269      2,580
Term loan
Revolving credit
facility
Long-term debt
  
  
Derivative liabilities
Asset retirement
obligations
Deferred tax liabilities    —
Other long-term
liabilities
1,890,731    —
     
      
      
     
   66
    1,054
—
    9,072
148,997     40,558      (6,769
1,460
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Total liabilities
Members’ equity
Cumulative Preferred
units
Common units
50,000      (50,000 )(b)    —
    235,000     (235,000)(b)    —
—
—
—
1,120
285,000 (b)     2,175,731    144,781    (94,000 )(h)    2,320,803 
 
       
 
 
 
       
 
 
     —
)(a)    182,786     48,335     11,758 (g)     242,879
94,000 (h)       
(g)       
    291
    —
—
28,589     —
28,589
1,120
—
—
2,190,403    349,881     (4,189
335,444     —
—
)
1,460
4,960
—
6,420
2,536,095    276,970    30,449
2,843,514
335,444     —
—
335,444
234,580     —
165,968 (c)     396,766     285,208    (285,208)(j)     701,094  
 
       
     (3,782
(4,400
)(k)
)(e)
—
7,615
   —
—
    (9,139 )    9,139
Class B units
General Partner
Public common
unitholders
Total members’ equity    577,639     152,982     9,204
Total liabilities and
members’ equity
(d)     —
    162,121     (162,121)(d)    —
$2,768,042  $502,863   $5,015
—
7,615
—
    —
—
308,728 (i)       
    —
    —
7,615
   —
—
—
739,825     285,208    19,120
1,044,153
$3,275,920  $562,178  $49,569
$3,887,667
See the accompanying notes to the unaudited pro forma combined financial statements.
157
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of Operations
For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2015
Historical
Vanguard
LRE
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 3)
Vanguard/
LRE Pro
 
Forma
Combined
Historical
Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 3)
(in thousands,
except per unit
data)
$26,291    $ —  
(a) 
     7,986      55
       
 
  
     2,832      —
$—
   —
—
—
—
9,755      —
—
$106,092    $—
   103,692      —
       
     
   22,115
     —
$36,186 (j) 
     16,510 (j) 
     (2
     10,029 (j)
$—
   —
)(k)       
   —
—
62,725      (62,725 )(j)
—
47,988
11,065      —
—
)    2
   —
   279,887      73,788      —
(2
(k)
—
   —
—
38,233
19,283
Revenues:
   79,801
Oil sales
Natural gas sales    95,651
  
NGLs sales
Natural gas,
natural gas
condensate and
sulfur
Net gains on
commodity
derivative
contracts
Other income
Total revenues
Costs and
expenses:
Production:
Lease operating
expenses
Production and
other taxes
Depreciation,
depletion,
amortization and
accretion
  
  
Impairment of oil
and natural gas
properties
Accretion
expense
67,078
22,180
—
—
   232,968      46,919      —
55
(55
)(a)
—
   —
12,780      —
(179
)(c)    79,679
22,836      —
2,748      —
—
24,928
2,726
—
130,015      17,574      —
(17,574)(d)    139,099      31,035      —
8,294 (d)       
(e)       
   790
865,975      35,962      —
—
901,937      68,344      —
1,029      —
(1,029 )(e)    —
—
—
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock Pro
Forma
Combined
     
 $142,278
   120,200
     
   32,144
—
59,053
—
   353,675
102,515
27,654
—
—
(28,446)(m)    160,054
18,692 (m)       
)(n)       
   (326
—
—
970,281
—
—
(323
)(o)     56,691
(10,403)
1,317,195
10,403
(963,520 )
1,869 (p)     (48,153
   (1,913 )(p)
)
)
)
)
(5,259
(2,575
69
)
(55,918
(3,157
)    (2,102 )    —
—
(5,754 )    3,179
(l)
—
3,203
(3,179
)(l)
—
(44
(42,002 )    (7,562 )    —
2,782
(46,782 )    (9,092 )    —
(912,475 )    (47,268)    18
12,568
(947,157 )    (82,640 )    —
—
18
(18
)(b)
—
—
1,521
—
(912,475 )    (47,250)    —
12,568
(947,157 )    (81,119 )    —
(13,380 )    —
—
—
(13,380 )    —
—
$(925,855 )  $(47,250)  $ —
$12,568
$(960,537 )  $(81,119 )  $—
10,359
(1,019,438)
—
1,521
10,359
(1,017,917)
—
(13,380
)
$10,359
$(1,031,297)
—
68
18,193
—
16,464
(18
1,103,441     86,625
Loss on
settlement of
asset retirement
obligations
Selling, general
and administrative
expenses
Total costs and
expenses 
Income (loss) from
operations
Other income
(expense):
Interest expense    (40,563 )    (5,889 )    —  
  
 
Net losses on
interest rate
derivative
contracts
(870,473 )    (39,706)    18
)    (1,673 )    —
(1,484
(18
)
)(b)
—
45
—
—
—
—
(68
)(f)     —
—
—
(20
)(g)    34,619
22,395      —
(9,786 )
1,180,262     147,336     —
9,786
(900,375 )    (73,548 )    —
5,889 (h)     (43,670 )    (4,439 )    —
   (3,107 )(h)
—
—
—
—
45
Net income (loss)
from short term
investments
Other
Total other
expense
Income (loss)
before taxes
Income tax benefit
(expense)
Loss from
continuing
operations
Less: Distributions
to Preferred
unitholders
Loss from
continuing
operations
attributable to
Common and
Class B
unitholders
158
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of
Operations – (continued)
For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2015
Historical
Vanguard LRE
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
Adjustments
 
(Note 3)
Vanguard/
LRE Pro
 
Forma
Combined
Historical
Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
Adjustments
 
(Note 3)
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
Rock Pro
 
Forma
Combined
(in thousands,
except per unit
data)
Loss from
continuing
operations per
Common and Class
B unit:
Basic & Diluted
Weighted average
units outstanding:
Common
units – basic &
diluted
Class B
units – basic &
diluted
$(10.86 )
84,816
420
$(9.47
)
15,453 (i)     100,269
420
$(7.92
)
28,746 (q)     129,015
420
See the accompanying notes to the unaudited pro forma combined financial statements.
159
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of Operations
For the Year Ended December 31, 2014
Vanguard
As
 
Adjusted
(Note 4)
LRE
 
Historical
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 3)
Vanguard/
LRE Pro
 
Forma
Combined
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 3)
(in thousands,
except per unit
data)
Revenues:
Oil sales
Natural gas sales
  
NGLs sales
Natural gas, natural
gas liquids, oil,
condensate and
sulfur
Net gains on
commodity
derivative contracts
Other income
Total revenues
Costs and
expenses:
Production:
Lease operating
expenses
Production and
other taxes
Depreciation,
depletion,
amortization and
accretion
  
  
Impairment of oil
and natural gas
properties
$—
   —
     
   —
—
—
—
   —
(322
$285,918   $76,662    $ —
   351,404     28,521      121
     
  
   101,309     11,362      —
—
—
—
163,452     71,235      —
—
   902,083     187,905     (4
125
(125
149,765     25,821      —
68,749      8,738
—
267,091     36,729      —
194,280     37,758      —
(a)
)(a) 
)
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock
Pro forma
Adjustments
     
 
 $475,943  
   431,279  
     
 
   151,848
—
329,118
—
 
   1,388,188
218,934
90,412
$362,580    $—
   380,046      —
     
       
   112,671      —
$113,363 (j) 
 $—
(j) 
     51,252
   —
)(k)       
     (19
(j) 
     39,177
   —
—
203,792      (203,792 )(j)     —
234,687      94,431      —
—
—
)    19
   1,089,984     298,204      —
(19
)(c)    175,264      43,670      —
—
77,487
12,925      —
(36,729)(d)    291,715      85,579      —
23,070 (d)       
   1,554 (e)
—
232,038      395,892      —
(k)     —
 
   —
—
—
(80,810)(m)    339,702
43,847 (n)       
)(n)       
   (629
—
627,930
(2,071 )(e)    —
(151
)(f)     —
—
—
—
—
(b)
(31
)(g)    42,441
47,193      —
(14,680)
818,945      585,259      —
14,680
271,039      (287,055)    —
10,472 (h)     (85,207 )    (15,247 )    —
   (6,213 )(h)
—
30,839      11,447      186
710,724     122,715     186
191,359     65,190      (190
151
—
2,071
—
(1,933 )    (1,790 )    —
(78,994 )    (10,472 )    —
Accretion expense    —
Loss on settlement
of asset retirement
obligations
Selling, general
and administrative
expenses
Total costs and
expenses
Income from
operations
Other income
(expense):
Interest expense
  
Net losses on
interest rate
derivative contracts
Gain on acquisition
of oil and natural
gas properties
Net income (loss)
from short term
investment
Other
     4
Total other expense   (78,037 )    (12,262 )    4
Income (loss)
before taxes
Income tax benefit
(expense)
Income (loss) from
continuing
operations
Less: Distributions
to Preferred
unitholders
113,322     52,742      —
(18,197 )    —
2,836
—
—
—
54
—
—
—
—
113,322     52,928      (186
—
(186
)    186
)
(a)
)
(b)
—
—
—
—
(584
)(o)     89,050
(38,176)
1,366,028
38,176
22,160
13,857 (p)     (96,137 ) 
   (9,540 )(p)
(5,457
)
2,836
(53,987 )
)(1)     —
4,317
311
 
   (152,434 )
42,493
(130,274 )
—
5,403
42,493
(124,871 )
—
(18,197 )
—
—
—
—
 
   4,259
(3,723
)    (1,734
)    —
2,836
—
—
—
—
—
(62,028 )    8,041
(1)     —
58
   (86,036 )    (70,715 )    —
8,294
(8,041
18,939
185,003      (357,770)    —
—
—
5,403
—
18,939
185,003      (352,367)    —
—
(18,197 )    —
—
See the accompanying notes to the unaudited pro forma combined financial statements.
160
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of
Operations – (continued)
For the Year Ended December 31, 2014
Vanguard
As
 
Adjusted
(Note 4)
LRE
 
Historical
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 3)
Vanguard/
LRE Pro
 
Forma
Combined
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 3)
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock
Pro forma
Adjustments
(in thousands,
except per unit
data)
Income (loss) from
continuing
operations
attributable to
$95,125   $52,742   $ —
$18,939
$166,806   $(352,367)  $ —
$42,493
$(143,068 )
$1.16
 $1.14
81,611
82,039
420
$(1.13
 $(1.13
) 
)
28,746 (q)     125,810
28,318 (q)     125,810
420
$1.71
 $1.69
15,453 (i)     97,064
15,453 (i)     97,492
420
See the accompanying notes to the unaudited pro forma combined financial statements.
Common and Class
B
unitholders
Income (loss) from
continuing
operations per
Common and Class
B unit:
Basic
Diluted
Weighted average
units outstanding:
Common
units – basic
Common units – 
diluted
Class B
units – basic &
diluted
161
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Statements
Note 1 Basis of Presentation
On January 31, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Encore Energy Partners Operating, LLC, completed the Pinedale
Acquisition, whereby Vanguard acquired certain natural gas and oil assets in the Pinedale and Jonah fields located in Southwestern
Wyoming for approximately $555.6 million in cash.
On September 30, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Vanguard Operating, LLC, completed the Piceance Acquisition,
whereby Vanguard acquired natural gas, oil and NGL assets in the Piceance Basin located in Colorado for approximately $496.4 million.
On April 20, 2015, Vanguard and LRE entered into a definitive merger agreement, pursuant to which a subsidiary of Vanguard will merge
with and into LRE, with LRE continuing as the surviving entity (the “merger”), and, at the same time, Vanguard will purchase all of the
limited liability company interests in LRE GP, LLC, the general partner of LRE (“LRE GP”), resulting in both LRE and LRE GP becoming
wholly owned subsidiaries of Vanguard. Under the terms of the merger agreement, holders of LRE common units will receive 0.550
common units of Vanguard for each LRE common unit held. In addition, Vanguard will issue and deliver to the members of LRE GP
12,320 common units of Vanguard in exchange for all limited liability company interests in LRE GP. The transaction would result in
approximately 15.45 million additional common units being issued by Vanguard, which consists of 15.44 million common units issued to
the former LRE unitholders and 12,320 common units issued to the former members of LRE GP. The completion of the merger is subject
to the approval of the holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units, voting
together as a single class, and other customary closing conditions.
On May 21, 2015, Vanguard entered into a merger agreement (the “Eagle Rock merger agreement”) with Eagle Rock Energy Partners,
L.P. (“Eagle Rock”) and Eagle Rock Energy GP, L.P., the general partner of Eagle Rock (“Eagle Rock GP”), pursuant to which and subject
to the terms and conditions thereof an indirect subsidiary of Vanguard will merge with and into Eagle Rock, with Eagle Rock continuing as
the surviving entity and a wholly owned subsidiary of Vanguard (the “Eagle Rock merger”). Under the terms of the merger agreement,
each outstanding common unit representing a limited partner interest in Eagle Rock will be converted into the right to receive 0.185 newly
issued Vanguard common units or, in the case of fractional Vanguard common units, cash. Further, in connection with the Eagle Rock
merger agreement, Vanguard will adopt Eagle Rock’s long-term incentive plan and each outstanding award of Eagle Rock common units
issued under such plan will be converted into new awards of Vanguard restricted units. The completion of the Eagle Rock merger is
subject to (i) the approval of the merger agreement by the affirmative vote or consent of the holders of at least a majority of the outstanding
Eagle Rock common units, voting as a class, (ii) the approval of the issuance of the new Vanguard common units in connection with the
merger by the majority of the votes cast affirmatively or negatively by holders of the outstanding Vanguard common units and Vanguard
class B units present in person or by proxy at a duly called unitholder meeting and (iii) other customary closing conditions.
The proposed merger and the Eagle Rock merger will be accounted for in accordance with Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting
Standards Codification Topic 805 — Business Combinations, which is referred to as FASB ASC 805.
Vanguard’s unaudited pro forma combined balance sheet at June 30, 2015 has been presented in this subsection to show the effect as if
the merger, the Eagle Rock merger and the pro forma adjustments had occurred on June 30, 2015. The Pinedale Acquisition and the
Piceance Acquisition were included in Vanguard’s historical balance sheet at June 30, 2015, and, as such, there are no pro forma
adjustments related to the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition.
Vanguard’s unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the year ended
December 31, 2014 have been presented in this subsection based on Vanguard’s individual statements of operations, and reflect the pro
forma operating results attributable to the merger, the Eagle Rock merger, the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition as if the
merger, the Eagle Rock merger and acquisitions and the related transactions had occurred on January 1, 2014. Vanguard’s historical
statements of operations include operating results from the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition
162
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Statements
Note 1 Basis of Presentation  – (continued)
for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and, as such, there are no pro forma adjustments related to the Pinedale Acquisition and the
Piceance Acquisition for this period.
The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in this subsection includes adjustments to conform LRE’s and Eagle
Rock’s accounting for oil and natural gas properties to the full cost method. Vanguard follows the full cost method of accounting for oil and
natural gas properties while LRE and Eagle Rock follow the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and natural gas properties.
Certain costs that are capitalized under the full cost method are expensed under the successful efforts method. These costs consist
primarily of unsuccessful exploration drilling costs, geological and geophysical costs, delay rental on leases, abandonment costs and
general and administrative expenses directly related to exploration and development activities. Under the successful efforts method of
accounting, proved property acquisition costs are amortized on a unit-of-production basis over total proved reserves and costs of wells,
related equipment and facilities are depreciated over the life of the proved developed reserves that will utilize those capitalized assets on
a field-by-field basis. Under the full cost method of accounting, property acquisition costs, costs of wells, related equipment and facilities
and future development costs are included in a single full cost pool, which is amortized on a unit-of-production basis over total proved
reserves.
Pro forma data is based on currently available information and certain estimates and assumptions as explained in the notes to the
unaudited pro forma combined financial statements presented in this subsection. Pro forma data is not necessarily indicative of the
financial results that would have been attained had the merger, the Eagle Rock merger, the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance
Acquisition occurred on January 1, 2014. As actual adjustments may differ from the pro forma adjustments, the pro forma amounts
presented should not be viewed as indicative of operations in future periods.
The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in this subsection is based on assumptions that Vanguard believes
are reasonable under the circumstances and are intended for informational purposes only. Actual results may differ from the estimates and
assumptions used. The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in this subsection is not necessarily indicative of
the financial results that would have occurred if these transactions had taken place on the dates indicated, nor is it indicative of future
consolidated results.
Note 2 Unaudited Pro forma Combined Balance Sheet
LRE Merger
The consideration to be transferred, fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and resulting goodwill in connection with the
merger were calculated as follows (in thousands):
Pro forma consideration
Market value of Vanguard’s common units to be issued to LRE
unitholders(c)
Long-term debt assumed
  
Add: fair value of liabilities assumed
$165,968
285,000 
   450,968
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Current derivative liabilities
Other current liabilities
Asset retirement obligations
Long-term derivative liabilities
Amount attributable to liabilities assumed
10,633  
   3,564
 
   11,652  
   33,789  
   1,054
 
 $60,692
163
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 2 Unaudited Pro forma Combined Balance Sheet  – (continued)
Less: fair value of assets acquired
Cash
Trade accounts receivable
Current derivative assets
Due from affiliates
Other current assets
Oil and natural gas properties
Long-term derivative assets
Other assets
Amount attributable assets acquired
Goodwill
7,681
   8,659
 
   32,087  
   1,456
 
 
   1,098
209,427 
   37,159  
   445
 
 $298,012 
 $213,648
The total consideration for the proposed merger comprising the fair value of Vanguard’s common units to be issued to LRE unitholders
and fair value of long-term debt assumed was assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on a preliminary assessment
of the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at June 30, 2015 using currently available information. Vanguard
expects to close the proposed merger as soon as practicable. However, the proposed merger is subject to approvals by LRE unitholders
and regulatory agencies. As such, the timing of closing this proposed merger is uncertain.
The consideration to be transferred, fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and resulting goodwill in connection with the
Eagle Rock merger were calculated as follows (in thousands):
Eagle Rock Merger
Pro forma consideration
Market value of Vanguard’s common units to be issued to Eagle
Rock unitholders(i)
Long-term debt assumed
  
Add: fair value of liabilities assumed
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Other current liabilities
Asset retirement obligations
Deferred tax liabilitiy
Other Long-term liabilities
Amount attributable to liabilities assumed
Less: fair value of assets acquired
Cash
Trade accounts receivable
Current derivative assets
Other current assets
Oil and natural gas properties
Long-term derivative assets
Other assets
Amount attributable assets acquired
Goodwill
$308,728
145,072 
   453,800 
     
 
   42,416  
   21,889  
   60,093  
   28,589  
   4,960
 
 $157,947 
 
     
   20
 
   27,087  
   36,169  
   11,594  
   456,059 
   38,469  
   10,797  
 $580,195 
 $31,552
The total consideration for the proposed Eagle Rock merger comprising the fair value of Vanguard’s common units to be issued to Eagle
Rock unitholders and fair value of long-term debt assumed was assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on a
preliminary assessment of the estimated fair value of
164
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 2 Unaudited Pro forma Combined Balance Sheet  – (continued)
the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at June 30, 2015 using currently available information. Vanguard expects to close the
proposed Eagle Rock merger as soon as practicable. However, the proposed Eagle Rock merger is subject to approvals by Eagle Rock
unitholders and Vanguard unitholders. As such, the timing of closing this proposed Eagle Rock merger is uncertain.
Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the total consideration over the estimated fair value of net assets acquired. The total consideration
for the proposed merger was based on the market capitalization of LRE or Eagle Rock, as applicable, with an added control premium
which resulted in a higher value compared to the fair value of the net assets acquired. The resulting goodwill is attributable to Vanguard’s
qualitative assumptions of long-term factors that the acquisition creates for its unitholders. These assumptions include:
•
•
the acquisition of long-life, low-decline, mature oil and natural gas exploration and production assets that are well-suited for Vanguard’s
upstream MLP model and its stated corporate strategy to grow via accretive acquisitions;
• additional scale and efficiencies in Vanguard’s current operating basins;
increased scale of operations which will permit Vanguard to compete more effectively and facilitate future development projects and
acquisitions through increased cash flow and lower cost of capital investment in the current reduced commodity price environment.
Vanguard also expects the combined business to realize substantial operating and administrative synergies;
the addition of a balanced production and reserves product mix that Vanguard believes provides an advantage in light of the better
expected profit margins for oil and NGLs production than natural gas production as reflected in the short-term and long-term market prices
for oil versus natural gas; and
improvement in a number of Vanguard’s financial ratios commonly used to assess its credit rating. The predominantly unit-for-unit nature
of the transaction is expected to allow Vanguard to reduce leverage and strengthen its balance sheet. In addition, because size is a key
contributor to credit ratings for oil and natural gas exploration and production companies, increased scale could result in improved credit
ratings for the combined entity, in particular if both the merger and the Eagle Rock merger are consummated.
•
•
165
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 2 Unaudited Pro forma Combined Balance Sheet  – (continued)
Vanguard believes the estimates used in the fair market valuation and purchase price allocation are reasonable and that the significant
effects of the proposed merger and Eagle Rock merger are properly reflected.
The final purchase price allocation and the resulting effect on results of operations and financial position may significantly differ from the
pro forma amounts included herein.
The purchase price allocation is preliminary and subject to change due to several factors, including:
•
•
•
changes in the estimated fair values of LRE’s assets and liabilities as of the closing date of the proposed merger, which could result from
changes in expected future commodity prices, changes in reserve estimates as well as other changes;
changes in the estimated fair values of Eagle Rock’s assets and liabilities as of the closing date of the proposed Eagle Rock merger,
which could result from changes in expected future commodity prices, changes in reserve estimates as well as other changes; and
changes in the estimated fair value of the Vanguard common unit consideration transferred depending on its estimated fair value at the
date of closing of each merger.
Pro Forma Adjustment to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Balance Sheet
LRE Merger
Represents pro forma adjustments to:
(a)
• adjust the assets acquired and liabilities assumed to their estimated fair values as of the closing date;
• eliminate LRE’s historical accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization balances;
• adjust asset retirement obligations using Vanguard’s estimates; and
• eliminate deferred financing costs on LRE’s term loan and credit facility.
(b)
(c)
Represents the termination of LRE’s credit agreement and term loan agreement and the extinguishment of the related debt outstanding
using Vanguard’s borrowings under its reserve-based credit facility.
Represents the increase in Vanguard’s common units resulting from the issuance of Vanguard’s common units to LRE to effect the
proposed merger as follows (in thousands, except merger exchange ratio and closing share price):
Estimated LRE common units owned by public unitholders
Estimated LRE common units owned by affiliated unitholders
Estimated LRE common units owned by the owners of LRE GP
Total estimated LRE common units to be acquired by Vanguard
Proposed merger exchange ratio of Vanguard common units for
each LRE common unit
Vanguard common units to be issued
Closing price of Vanguard common unit on July 31, 2015
Vanguard common unit consideration
19,505  
   8,570
 
   22
 
   28,097
0.55
15,453  
 $10.74
 
 $165,968
The proposed transaction has a preliminary value of approximately $451.0 million, including the assumption of LRE’s debt of
approximately $285.0 million at June 30, 2015. The final value of the Vanguard common unit consideration will be determined based on
the actual number of Vanguard common units issued and the market price of Vanguard’s common unit as of the date of acquisition. A ten
percent increase or decrease in the closing price of Vanguard’s common units would increase or decrease the value of Vanguard
common unit consideration and goodwill by approximately $16.6 million.
(d) Represents the elimination of LRE’s historical equity in connection with the acquisition method of accounting.
166
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 2 Unaudited Pro forma Combined Balance Sheet  – (continued)
(e)
Represents the estimated $3.8 million of legal and advisory fees to be incurred by Vanguard not reflected in the June 30, 2015 balance
sheet, that are not capitalizable as part of the transaction. These costs are reflected in the unaudited pro forma combined balance sheet
as a reduction of equity as the costs will be expensed by Vanguard as incurred.
(f)Represents cash severance payment to an executive officer of LRE GP to be paid immediately prior to the closing of the merger.
Eagle Rock Merger
Represents pro forma adjustments to:
(g)
• adjust the assets acquired and liabilities assumed to their estimated fair values as of the closing date;
• eliminate Eagle Rock’s historical accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization balances;
• adjust asset retirement obligations using Vanguard’s estimates; and
• eliminate deferred financing costs on Eagle Rock’s credit facility and senior notes.
(h)
(i)
Represents the termination of Eagle Rock’s revolving credit agreement and the extinguishment of the related debt outstanding using
Vanguard’s borrowings under its reserve-based credit facility.
Represents the increase in Vanguard’s common units resulting from the issuance of Vanguard’s common units to Eagle Rock to effect
the proposed merger as follows (in thousands, except merger exchange ratio and closing share price):
Estimated Eagle Rock common units owned by public unitholders    152,987 
Estimated Eagle Rock unvested performance units that will vest
upon closing
Total estimated Eagle Rock common units to be acquired by
2,395
Vanguard
Proposed merger exchange ratio of Vanguard common units for
each Eagle Rock common unit
Vanguard common units to be issued
Closing price of Vanguard common unit on July 31, 2015
Vanguard common unit consideration
155,382
0.185
28,746  
 $10.74
 
 $308,728
The proposed transaction has a preliminary value of approximately $453.8 million, including the assumption of Eagle Rock’s debt of
approximately $145.1 million at June 30, 2015. The final value of the Vanguard common unit consideration will be determined based on
the actual number of Vanguard common units issued and the market price of Vanguard’s common unit as of the date of acquisition. A ten
percent increase or decrease in the closing price of Vanguard’s common units would increase or decrease the value of Vanguard
common unit consideration and goodwill by approximately $30.9 million.
(j)Represents the elimination of Eagle Rock’s historical equity in connection with the acquisition method of accounting.
Represents the estimated $4.4 million of legal and advisory fees to be incurred by Vanguard not reflected in the June 30, 2015 balance
sheet, that are not capitalizable as part of the transaction. These costs are reflected in the unaudited pro forma combined balance sheet
as a reduction of equity as the costs will be expensed by Vanguard as incurred.
Represents cash severance payment to certain employees, executive officers and directors of Eagle Rock GP to be paid immediately
prior to the closing of the Eagle Rock merger.
(k)
(l)
Reclassifications were made to the historical LRE and Eagle Rock assets and liabilities to conform to Vanguard’s presentation. Those
reclassifications did not impact the total historical LRE and Eagle Rock assets or liabilities.
167
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 3 Pro Forma Adjustments to the Unaudited Combined Statements of
Operations
LRE Merger
Adjustments (a) – (b) to the unaudited pro forma combined statement of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the
year ended December 31, 2014 presented in this subsection include reclassifications required to conform LRE’s revenue and expense
items to Vanguard’s presentation as follows:
(a)Represents the reclassification of LRE’s other income sales to conform to Vanguard’s natural gas product sales presentation.
(b) Represents the reclassification of LRE’s income tax expense to conform to Vanguard’s presentation.
Adjustments (c) – (i) to the unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the
year ended December 31, 2014 are to reflect the merger with LRE and the conversion of LRE’s method of accounting for oil and natural
gas properties from the successful efforts method of accounting to the full cost method of accounting.
(c)
(d)
Represents the capitalization of unsuccessful exploration costs, geological and geophysical costs and delay rentals attributable to the
development of oil and natural gas properties in accordance with the full cost method of accounting for oil and natural gas properties.
Represents the change in depreciation, depletion and amortization primarily resulting from the pro forma calculation of the combined
entity’s depletion expense under the full cost method of accounting for oil and natural gas properties.
(e) Represents the change in accretion expense using Vanguard’s asset retirement obligations estimates.
(f)
(g)
(h)
Represents the adjustment to eliminate the loss on settlement of asset retirement obligations to conform to Vanguard’s full cost method
of accounting for oil and natural gas properties.
Represents the elimination of certain general and administrative expenses resulting from LRE not being a separate public company
after the completion of the Merger, including NYSE listing fees and SEC filing fees.
Represents the adjustment to interest expense arising from borrowings under Vanguard’s reserve-based credit facility used to
terminate LRE’s credit agreement and term loan agreement and the extinguishment of the related debt outstanding. We eliminated the
interest expense recorded by LRE and calculated pro forma interest expense based on the long-term debt assumed of $285.0 million
and Vanguard’s variable interest rate as of June 30, 2015 of 2.18%. The effect on net income of a 1/8 percent variance in interest rates
would be $0.4 million and $0.8 million for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the year ended December 31, 2014,
respectively.
Represents the adjustment for the weighted average number of units from the issuance of approximately 15.45 million Vanguard
common units under the terms of the Merger, which consists of 15.44 million common units issued to the former LRE unitholders and
12,320 common units issued to the former members of LRE GP, whereby LRE’s public unitholders will receive 0.550 Vanguard
(i)
common units for each LRE common unit held at closing.
Eagle Rock Merger
Adjustments (j) – (l) to the unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the
year ended December 31, 2014 include reclassifications required to conform Eagle Rock’s revenue and expense items to Vanguard’s
presentation as follows:
(j)
Represents the reclassification of Eagle Rock’s natural gas, natural gas liquids, oil, condensate and sulfur revenues to conform to
Vanguard’s oil sales, natural gas sales and NGLs sales presentation.
(k)Represents the reclassification of Eagle Rock’s other income sales to conform to Vanguard’s natural gas product sales presentation.
168
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 3 Pro Forma Adjustments to the Unaudited Combined Statements of
Operations  – (continued)
(l)Represents the reclassification of Eagle Rock’s income on short term investments to conform to Vanguard’s presentation.
Adjustments (m) – (q) to the unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the
year ended December 31, 2014 are to reflect the merger with Eagle Rock.
(m)
Represents the change in depreciation, depletion and amortization primarily resulting from the pro forma calculation of the combined
entity’s depletion expense under the full cost method of accounting for oil and natural gas properties.
(n) Represents the change in accretion expense using Vanguard’s asset retirement obligations estimates.
(o)
(p)
Represents the elimination of certain general and administrative expenses resulting from Eagle Rock not being a separate public
company after the completion of the Merger, including NASDAQ listing fees and SEC filing fees.
Represents the adjustment to interest expense arising from borrowings under Vanguard’s reserve-based credit facility used to
terminate Eagle Rock’s credit agreement and term loan agreement and the extinguishment of the related debt outstanding. Interest
expense recorded by Eagle Rock included interest for its senior notes and revolving credit facility. We eliminated the interest expense
recorded by Eagle Rock related to the revolving credit facility only and calculated pro forma interest expense. Since Eagle Rock had a
more significant debt balance in 2014, we applied Vanguard’s monthly variable interest rate, which ranged from 1.9% to 2.17% in 2014,
and 2.18% to 2.44% in 2015, to Eagle Rock’s monthly outstanding balance to calculate the pro forma interest expense adjustment. The
effect on net income of a 1/8 percent variance in interest rates would be $0.2 million and $1.2 million for the six months ended June 30,
2015 and for the year ended December 31, 2014, respectively.
Represents the adjustment for the weighted average number of units from the issuance of approximately 28.75 million Vanguard
common units under the terms of the Eagle Rock merger, whereby Eagle Rock’s public unitholders will receive 0.185 Vanguard
common units for each Eagle Rock common unit held at closing. Since the combined results of operations after giving effect to the
merger and the Eagle Rock merger results in a net loss, 0.43 million Vanguard phantom units were excluded from the calculation of pro
forma diluted earnings per unit due to their anti-dilutive effect.
(q)
169
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 4 Adjustments for Pinedale and Piceance Acquisitions
On January 31, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Encore Energy Partners Operating, LLC, completed the acquisition of
certain natural gas and oil assets in the Pinedale and Jonah fields located in Southwestern Wyoming for approximately $555.6 million in
cash (the “Pinedale Acquisition”), and, on September 30, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Vanguard Operating, LLC,
completed the acquisition of natural gas, oil and NGL assets in the Piceance Basin located in Colorado for approximately $496.4 million
(the “Piceance Acquisition”).
The Vanguard As Adjusted column in the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of Operations Data for Year Ended December 31,
2014 presented above in this subsection, incorporates the following financial information related to the Pinedale Acquisition and the
Piceance Acquisition:
(in thousands, except per unit data)
Vanguard
Historical
$268,685   $2,145
   285,439     8,533
   70,489      3,581
163,452     —
Revenues:
Oil sales
Natural gas sales
NGLs sales
Net gains on commodity derivative
contracts
Total revenues
Costs and expenses:
Production:
Lease operating expenses
Production and other taxes
Depreciation, depletion, amortization
and accretion
Impairment of oil and natural gas
properties
Selling, general and administrative
expenses
Total costs and expenses
Income from operations
Other income (expense):
Interest expense
Net losses on interest rate derivative
contracts
Gain on acquisition of oil and natural
gas properties
Other
Total other expense
Net income (loss)
Less: Distributions to Preferred
unitholders
Net income (loss) attributable to
Common and Class B unitholders
Net income per Common and Class B
unit:
Basic
Diluted
Weighted average units outstanding:
Common units  – basic
Common units  – diluted
Class B units – basic & diluted
Vanguard
 
As
Adjusted
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
 
(a)   $15,088
(a)     57,432
(a)     27,239
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
 
 
     
(f)   $285,918 
(f)     351,404 
(f)     101,309 
   163,452
—
99,759
788,065     14,259  
 
     
 
     
(b)     13,072
   132,515     4,178
(b)     5,268
   61,874      1,607
(c)     34,250
226,937     5,904
902,083 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
(g)    149,765 
(g)    68,749  
(h)    267,091
234,434     (5,904)(c)
(34,250)(h)
194,280
30,839      —
—
30,839
686,599     5,785
   101,466     8,474
     
   (69,765 )    (988
(1,933 )    —
18,340
   81,419
)(d)    (8,241
—
710,724 
 
   191,359 
 
     
 
 
)(i)    (78,994 ) 
   (1,933 )
34,523      (32,114 )(e)    427
   —
   54
 
   (7,814
   (37,121 )    (33,102 ) 
   64,345      (24,628 ) 
   73,605
—
(18,197 )    —
—
$46,148    $(24,628 )
$73,605
$0.56
 $0.55
     
   81,611     
   82,039     
   420
(j)     2,836
 
)
54
 
   (78,037 ) 
   113,322
(18,197 )
$95,125
$1.16
 
 $1.14
 
     
   81,611  
   82,039  
   420
170
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 4 Adjustments for Pinedale and Piceance Acquisitions  – (continued)
The measurement of the fair value at acquisition date of the assets acquired in the Pinedale Acquisition as compared to the fair value of
consideration transferred, adjusted for purchase price adjustments, resulted in a gain of $32.1 million, as reflected in the table below,
primarily due to the increase in natural gas prices between the date the purchase and sale agreement was entered into and the closing
date.
Fair value of assets and liabilities acquired:
Oil and natural gas properties
Inventory
Asset retirement obligations
Imbalance liabilities
Other
Total fair value of assets and liabilities acquired
Fair value of consideration transferred
Gain on acquisition
(in
 
thousands)
 $600,123  
   244
 
   (12,404 ) 
   (171
) 
   (125
) 
   587,667  
   555,553  
 $32,114
The measurement of the fair value at acquisition date of the assets acquired in the Piceance Acquisition as compared to the fair value of
consideration transferred, adjusted for purchase price adjustments, resulted in goodwill of $0.4 million, calculated in the following table,
which was immediately impaired and recorded as a loss in current period earnings. The loss resulted primarily from the changes in oil and
natural gas prices between the date the purchase and sale agreement was entered into and the closing date, which were used to value
the reserves acquired.
Fair value of assets and liabilities acquired:
Oil and natural gas properties
Asset retirement obligations
Production and ad valorem taxes payable
Suspense liabilities
Other
Total fair value of assets and liabilities acquired
Fair value of consideration transferred
Loss on acquisition
(in
 
thousands)
 $523,537  
   (19,452 ) 
) 
   (7,552
   (445
) 
   (124
) 
   495,964  
   496,391  
 $(427
)
The unaudited pro forma combined statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2014 presented in this subsection includes
adjustments to reflect the following:
(c)
(a) Represents the increase in oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids sales resulting from the Pinedale Acquisition.
(b)Represents the increase in lease operating expenses and production and other taxes resulting from the Pinedale Acquisition.
Represents the increase in depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion resulting from the Pinedale Acquisition and the
corresponding reduction in the impairment recognized in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Represents the pro forma interest expense related to borrowings under the reserve-based credit facility to fund the Pinedale
Acquisition.
Represents the elimination of the nonrecurring gain from the acquisition of oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids properties in the
Pinedale Acquisition.
(d)
(e)
(f)Represents the increase in oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids sales resulting from the Piceance Acquisition.
(g)Represents the increase in lease operating expenses and production and other taxes resulting from the Piceance Acquisition.
171
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 4 Adjustments for Pinedale and Piceance Acquisitions  – (continued)
(h)
(i)
(j)
Represents the increase in depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion resulting from the Piceance Acquisition and the
corresponding reduction in the impairment recognized in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Represents the pro forma interest expense related to borrowings under the reserve-based credit facility to fund the Piceance
Acquisition.
Represents the elimination of the nonrecurring loss from the impairment of the goodwill recognized in the acquisition of oil, natural gas
and natural gas liquids properties in the Piceance Acquisition.
172
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 5 Supplemental Oil and Gas Information (Unaudited)
The following tables set forth summary pro forma information with respect to Vanguard’s pro forma combined estimated net proved and
proved developed natural gas, oil and natural gas liquids reserves for the year ended December 31, 2014. The pro forma information for
the year ended December 31, 2014 presented in this subsection gives effect to the Pinedale Acquisition, the Piceance Acquisition, the
merger, and the Eagle Rock merger as if they occurred on January 1, 2014. Future exploration, exploitation and development
expenditures, as well as future commodity prices and service costs, will affect the reserve volumes attributable to the acquired properties
and the standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows.
The completion of the Eagle Rock merger is not a condition to the completion of the merger and there can be no assurance that the
transactions contemplated by the Eagle Rock merger agreement will be completed.
Estimated changes in the quantities of natural gas, oil and natural gas liquids reserves for the year ended
December 31, 2014 are as follows:
Natural Gas (in MMcf)
Net proved reserves
January 1, 2014
Revisions of previous
estimates
Extensions,
discoveries and other
Purchases of reserves
in place
Production
December 31, 2014
Vanguard
 
Historical
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments(a)
Vanguard
As
Adjusted
LRE
 
Historical
Vanguard/LRE
 
Pro Forma
Combined
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Combined
586,489     573,755     294,000     —
1,454,244    92,622     1,546,866
177,226    1,724,092
(66,797 )   52,272
(12,679
)    —
(27,204 )   7,484     (19,720
)    (19,897 )   (39,617 )
2,927
—
1,036,285    —
—
—
—
2,927
1,138     4,065
22,990     27,055
(889,961
)    146,324     1,948     148,272
769
149,041
(83,037 )   (29,478
  1,475,867    596,549     261,522     (858,071
)    (19,799
)    31,890
(100,424 )   (6,467 )   (106,891
)    1,475,867    96,725     1,572,592
)    (11,995 )   (118,886 ) 
    169,093    1,741,685
Oil (in MBbls)
Vanguard
 
Historical
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments(a)
45,316     4,852
(2,910 )   585
465
—
12,873     —
(2,394 )   —
2,477
(83
—
)     —
—
—
—
Net proved reserves
January 1, 2014
Revisions of previous
estimates
Extensions,
discoveries and other
Purchases of reserves
in place
Sales of reserves in
place
Production
December 31, 2014
173
(3,301 )   (270
  50,049     5,167
)    (216
 
  2,178
)     295
(7,345
(3,492 )   (904
)   (4,396 )   (1,313 )   (5,709 ) 
)    50,049     13,106     63,155     11,017     74,172
LRE
 
Historical
Vanguard
As
Adjusted
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Combined
    
 
  52,645     10,698     63,343     13,542     76,885
Vanguard/
LRE
 
Pro
Forma
Combined
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
(2,408 )   434
(1,974 )   (2,618 )   (4,592 )
—
465
573
1,038
1,080     2,118
(7,640
)    5,233     2,305     7,538
326
7,864
—
(2,394 )   —
(2,394 )   —
(2,394 )
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 5 Supplemental Oil and Gas Information (Unaudited)  – (continued)
Natural Gas Liquids (in MBbls)
Vanguard
 
Historical
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Pro Forma
Adjustments(a)
29,195     20,044
(10,769 )   (5,752
12,340
)    (828
Net proved reserves     
January 1, 2014
Revisions of previous
estimates
Extensions,
discoveries and other   22
—
)    —
—
LRE
 
Historical
Vanguard
As
Adjusted
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Combined
    
 
  61,579     3,969     65,548     14,637     80,185
Vanguard/
LRE
 
Pro
Forma
Combined
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
(17,349 )   635
(16,714 )   (2,039 )   (18,753 )
—
—
22
182
204
2,224     2,428
Purchases of
reserves in place
Production
  (2,759 )   (1,243
December 31, 2014   42,529     13,049
26,840     —
—
(24,740
)    2,100     198
2,298
170
2,468
)    (1,186
    10,326
)    1,365
    (23,375
(3,823 )   (366
) 
)    42,529     4,618     47,147     13,834     60,981
)    (4,189 )   (1,158 )   (5,347
(a)
To adjust the amount of purchases of reserves representing the Pinedale Acquisition and Piceance Acquisition during 2014 included in
Vanguard’s historical information. The pro forma effect of each acquisition is presented separately in the table above.
Estimated quantities of natural gas, oil and natural gas liquids reserves as of December 31, 2014 are as
follows:
LRE
Historical
Vanguard
 
Historical(a)
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
Rock
 
Pro Forma
Combined(c)
 
     
  1,475,867    96,725    1,572,592    169,093   1,741,685  
  50,049
Vanguard/
Eagle
LRE
 
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Historical
Combined(b)
13,106    63,155
11,017    74,172
42,529
4,618
47,147
13,834    60,981
2,031,335    203,069   2,234,404    318,199   2,552,603
970,714    88,265    1,058,979    126,783   1,185,762  
  39,143
10,962    50,105
59,700
9,595
28,678
3,956
32,634
10,895    43,529
1,377,640    177,773   1,555,413    249,723   1,805,136
Estimated proved reserves:     
Natural Gas (MMcf)
Oil (MBbls)
Natural Gas Liquids
(MBbls)
MMcfe
Estimated proved
developed reserves:
Natural Gas (MMcf)
Oil (MBbls)
Natural Gas Liquids
(MBbls)
MMcfe
(a)
(b)
(c)
The historical standardized measure includes Vanguard, the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition as of December 31,
2014.
Includes Vanguard’s, the Pinedale Acquisition’s, the Piceance Acquisition’s and LRE’s estimated net proved and proved developed
oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids reserves as of December 31, 2014.
Includes Vanguard’s, the Pinedale Acquisition’s, the Piceance Acquisition’s, LRE’s and Eagle Rock’s estimated net proved and proved
developed oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids reserves as of December 31, 2014.
174
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 5 Supplemental Oil and Gas Information (Unaudited)  – (continued)
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to the combined proved oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids
reserves at December 31, 2014 is as follows (in thousands):
Vanguard
 
Historical(a)
LRE
Vanguard/
LRE
 
Pro Forma
Combined
Eagle Rock
 
Historical
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
 
Rock
Combined
$11,225,973   $1,749,346   $12,975,319   $2,187,346   $15,162,665 
   (3,999,460 )    (688,333 )    (4,687,793 )    (760,799 )    (5,448,592 ) 
   (845,872 )    (117,473 )    (963,345 )    (240,886 )    (1,204,231 ) 
   6,380,641      943,540      7,324,181      1,185,661     8,509,842
(3,404,914 )    (501,869 )    (3,906,783 )    (591,421 )    (4,498,204 )
$2,975,727    $441,671    $3,417,398    $594,240    $4,011,638
Future cash inflows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for
estimated timing of cash
flows
Standardized measure of
discounted future net cash
flows
(a) The historical standardized measure includes Vanguard, the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition.
For the December 31, 2014 calculations in the preceding table, estimated future cash inflows from estimated future production of proved
reserves were computed using the average oil and natural gas price based upon the 12-month average price of $94.87 and $94.99 per
barrel of crude oil and $4.36 and $4.35 per MMBtu for natural gas for Vanguard Historical and LRE, respectively, adjusted for quality,
transportation fees and a regional price differential, and the volume-weighted average price of $35.35 and $33.11 per barrel of natural gas
liquids for Vanguard Historical and LRE, respectively. The natural gas liquids prices were calculated using the differentials for each
property to West Texas Intermediate reference price of $94.87 and $94.99 for Vanguard Historical and LRE, respectively. Vanguard may
receive amounts different than the standardize measure of discounted cash flow for a number of reasons, including price changes and the
effects of Vanguard’s hedging activities.
175
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 5 Supplemental Oil and Gas Information (Unaudited)  – (continued)
The following are the principal sources of change in the combined standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows on a pro
forma basis for the year ended December 31, 2014 (in thousands):
Vanguard
 
Historical
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
Vanguard
 
As Adjusted
LRE
 
Historical
Vanguard/
Eagle
LRE
 
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Historical
Combined(a)
Vanguard/
LRE/Eagle
Rock
 
Pro Forma
Combined(b)
Sales and transfers,
net of production
$(430,224 )  $(116,408 )  $(96,653 )  $123,169
$(520,116 )  $(81,986 )  $(602,102 )  $(152,097)  $(754,199 )
costs
Net changes in
prices and
production costs
Extensions
discoveries and
improved recovery,
less related costs
Changes in
estimated future
development costs
Previously
estimated
development costs
incurred during the
period
Revision of
previous quantity
estimates
Accretion of
discount
Purchases of
reserves in place
Sales of reserves
Change in
production rates,
timing and other
Net change in
standardized
measure
Standardized
measure, January
1, 2014
Standardized
measure,
December 31, 2014
11,138
311,334      (132,576 )    —
189,896      584
190,480      (63,142 )    127,338
24,841
—
—
—
24,841
17,979      42,820
74,684      117,504
36,564
(115,401 )    (13,728 )    —
(92,565 )    (11,897 )    (104,462 )    71,800      (32,662 )
68,817
74,685
352
—
143,854      27,073      170,927      49,409      220,336
(292,454 )    26,854
(20,726 )    —
(286,326 )    30,256      (256,070 )    (149,993)    (406,063 )
183,397      46,010
53,471
—
282,878      39,313      322,191      59,818      382,009
1,621,571     —
(48,163 )    —
—
—
(1,257,662)    363,909      45,665      409,574      11,904      421,478
—
(48,163 )    —
(48,163 )    —
(48,163 )
(33,731 )    57,008
65,465
—
88,742
(17,873 )    70,869
41,351      112,220
1,141,756     284,082      (144,395 )    (1,134,493)    146,950      49,114      196,064      (56,266 )    139,798
1,833,971     460,099      534,707      —
2,828,777     392,557     3,221,334     650,506      3,871,840
$2,975,727   $744,181    $390,312    $(1,134,493)  $2,975,727   $441,671   $3,417,398   $594,240    $4,011,638
(a)The pro forma standardized measure includes Vanguard, the Pinedale Acquisition, the Piceance Acquisition and the merger with LRE.
The pro forma standardized measure includes Vanguard, the Pinedale Acquisition, the Piceance Acquisition, the merger and the Eagle
Rock merger.
(b)
176
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard as adjusted for the Eagle Rock merger without giving effect to the merger
Subject to the terms and conditions of the merger agreement and in accordance with Delaware law, the Eagle Rock merger agreement
provides for the merger of Talon Merger Sub with and into Eagle Rock, with Eagle Rock continuing as the surviving entity and as a wholly
owned indirect subsidiary of Vanguard.
The pro forma financial statements presented in this subsection have been prepared using the acquisition method of accounting for
business combinations under U.S. GAAP. Under the acquisition method of accounting, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed from
Eagle Rock will be recorded as of the acquisition date at their respective fair values.
The historical financial information included in the columns entitled “Vanguard” presented in this subsection was derived from the
unaudited financial statements included in Vanguard’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 and its Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 which are incorporated by reference into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus. The historical financial information included in the columns entitled “Eagle Rock” in this subsection was derived
from Eagle Rock’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015, and Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2014, which are incorporated by reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus.
On January 31, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Encore Energy Partners Operating, LLC, completed the acquisition of
certain natural gas and oil assets in the Pinedale and Jonah fields located in Southwestern Wyoming for approximately $555.6 million in
cash (the “Pinedale Acquisition”).
On September 30, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Vanguard Operating, LLC, completed the acquisition of natural gas,
oil and NGL assets in the Piceance Basin located in Colorado for approximately $496.41 million (the “Piceance Acquisition”).
The unaudited pro forma combined balance sheet at June 30, 2015 presented in this subsection has been presented to show the effect as
if the Eagle Rock merger and the pro forma adjustments had occurred on June 30, 2015. The Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance
Acquisition were included in Vanguard’s historical balance sheet at June 30, 2015, and, as such, there are no pro forma adjustments
related to the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition.
The unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the year ended December
31, 2014 presented in this subsection have been presented based on Vanguard’s individual statements of operations, and reflect the pro
forma operating results attributable to the Eagle Rock merger, the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition as if the Eagle Rock
merger and acquisitions and the related transactions had occurred on January 1, 2014. Vanguard’s historical statements of operations
include operating results from the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and, as
such, there are no pro forma adjustments related to the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition for this period.
Pro forma data is based on currently available information and certain estimates and assumptions as explained in the notes to the
unaudited pro forma combined financial statements presented in this subsection. Pro forma data is not necessarily indicative of the
financial results that would have been attained had the Eagle Rock merger and the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition
occurred on January 1, 2014. As actual adjustments may differ from the pro forma adjustments, the pro forma amounts presented in this
subsection should not be viewed as indicative of operations in future periods.
The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in this subsection is based on assumptions that Vanguard believes
are reasonable under the circumstances and are intended for informational purposes only. Actual results may differ from the estimates and
assumptions used. The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in this subsection is not necessarily indicative of
the financial results that would have occurred if these transactions had taken place on the dates indicated, nor is it indicative of future
consolidated results.
177
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Balance Sheet
As of June 30, 2015
(in thousands)
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade accounts receivable, net
Derivative assets
Due from affiliates
Prepaid expenses
Other currents assets
Total current assets
Oil and natural gas properties, at cost
  
Accumulated depletion, amortization
and impairment
Oil and natural gas properties
evaluated, net – full cost method
Other assets
Goodwill
Derivative assets
Deferred financing costs, net of
accumulated amortization and other
assets
Other assets
Total assets
Historical
Vanguard
Eagle
 
Rock
Adjustments
 
(Note 2)
Vanguard/
Eagle Rock
 
Pro Forma
Combined
$20
   $—
     27,087      —
     36,169      —
     —
     —
     —
     —
     11,594      —
     74,870      —
$4,132
 
   85,754
 
   114,415
 
   —
 
   —
 
   6,146
   210,447
 
   4,194,888      891,788      (458,534)(a)    4,650,947
$4,152
   112,841
   150,584
   —
   —
   17,740
   285,317
22,805 (a)
(2,154,462)    (458,354)    458,534 (a)     (2,154,462)
2,040,426      433,254      22,805
2,496,485
420,955
   68,942
—
     38,469      —
31,552 (a)     452,507
   107,411
—
—
—
—
27,272
 $2,768,042    $562,178    $49,569
15,585      (4,788
)(a)    38,069
$3,379,789
178
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Balance Sheet – (continued)
As of June 30, 2015
(in thousands)
Liabilities and members’ equity
Current liabilities
Accounts payable:
Trade
Affiliates
Accrued liabilities:
Lease operating
Developmental capital
Interest
Production and other taxes
Derivative liabilities
Oil and natural gas revenue payable
Distributions payable
Other
Total current liabilities
Term loan
Revolving credit facility
Long-term debt
  
  
Derivative liabilities
Asset retirement obligations
Deferred tax liabilities
Other long-term liabilities
Total liabilities
Members’ equity
Cumulative Preferred units
Common units
  
  
Class B units
General Partner
Public common unitholders
Total members’ equity
Total liabilities and members’ equity
Historical
Vanguard
Eagle
Rock
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 2)
Vanguard/
Eagle Rock
 
Pro Forma
Combined
—
    —
—
$12,165
   1,266
(e)   $26,007
 
   1,266
$9,442
    —
$4,400
    —
19,530
    3,096
    —
   26,478
    16,540     —
   11,594
    —
    92
   44,254
    —
    2,857
   750
    —
    —
   39,968
    10,389     —
    —
    —
   11,226
    14,000 (f)     36,781
    7,889
16,434
 
   9,938
 
   11,502
 
   41,397
 
   750
 
   29,579
 
   11,226
 
   14,892
   217,854  
   149,149     50,305     18,400  
   —
 
   —
 
   —
 
   —
 
   1,890,731    144,781    (94,000 )(b)    2,035,803 
 
     
     
 
   66
 
   148,997     48,335     11,758 (a)     209,090  
 
 
   —
   28,589
   6,420
   1,460
 
 
   2,190,403    276,970    30,449  
   2,497,822 
 
   335,444     —
   335,444  
   234,580     285,208    (285,208)(d)    538,908  
     
 
 
     
   7,615
 
   7,615
 
   —
 
   —
 
   —
   —
 
 
   881,967  
   577,639     285,208    19,120  
 $2,768,042  $562,178  $49,569  
 $3,379,789
94,000 (b)       
(a)       
    291
   66
 
    —
)(e)
(4,400
    308,278 (c)       
    —
    —
    —
28,589     —
    4,960
    —
—
    —
—
—
    —
    —
See the accompanying notes to the unaudited pro forma combined financial statements.
179
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of Operations
For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2015
(in thousands, except per
unit data)
Historical
Vanguard
Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 3)
$—
     —
       
     —
$36,186 (a) 
     16,510 (a) 
     (2
     10,029 (a)
$—
   —
)(b)       
   —
62,725      (62,725 )(a)     —
11,065      —
—
)    2
   232,968      73,788      —
(2
(b)
—
—
   —
—
38,233
$79,801
   95,651
     
   19,283
Revenues:
Oil sales
Natural gas sales
  
NGLs sales
Natural gas, natural gas
liquids, oil, condensate and
sulfur
Net gains on commodity
derivative contracts
Other income
Total revenues
Costs and expenses:
Production:
Lease operating expenses    67,078
Production and other taxes    22,180
Depreciation, depletion,
amortization and accretion
  
  
Impairment of oil and
natural gas properties
Accretion expense
Loss on settlement of asset
retirement obligations
Selling, general and
administrative expenses
Total costs and expenses
Income (loss) from
operations
Other income (expense):
Interest expense
18,193
—
—
—
—
—
—
22,395      —
1,103,441     147,336     —
(870,473 )    (73,548 )    —
(40,563 )    (4,439 )    —
22,836      —
     2,726
     —
   130,015      31,035      —
—
   —
 
   (28,446)(d)    150,970
89,914
   24,906
865,975      68,344      —
934,319
Vanguard/
Eagle Rock
 
Pro Forma
Combined
$115,987  
   112,159  
 
     
   29,312
—
49,298
—
 
   306,756
18,692 (d)       
)(e)      
   (326
—
—
—
—
—
(323
)(f)     40,265
(10,403)
1,240,374
10,403
(933,618 )
1,869 (g)     (45,046 ) 
   (1,913 )(g)      
 
   —
(3,586
)
—
(c) 
)(c)     —
 
   (44
 
) 
 $10,359
(2,575
)
69
 
   (51,138 ) 
 $(984,756 )
—
1,521
10,359
(983,235 )
—
(13,380 )
$10,359
$(996,615 )
(5,754 )    3,179
(3,179
—
(1,484
3,203
)    (2,102 )    —
Net losses on interest rate
derivative contracts
Net income (loss) from short
term investments
   45
Other
Total other expense
   (42,002 )    (9,092 )    —
Income (loss) before taxes  $(912,475 )  $(82,640 )  $—
Income tax benefit
(expense)
Loss from continuing
operations
Less: Distributions to
Preferred unitholders
Loss from continuing
operations attributable to
Common and Class B
unitholders
$(925,855 )  $(81,119 )  $—
(912,475 )    (81,119 )    —
(13,380 )    —
1,521
—
—
—
180
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of
Operations – (continued)
For the Six months Ended June 30, 2015
(in thousands, except per
unit data)
Loss from continuing
operations per Common
and Class B unit:
Basic & Diluted
Weighted average units
outstanding:
Common units – basic &
diluted
Class B units – basic &
diluted
Historical
Vanguard
Eagle
Rock
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note 3)
Vanguard/
Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Combined
$(10.86 )
84,816
420
$(8.68
)
28,746 (h)     113,562
420
See the accompanying notes to the unaudited pro forma combined financial statements.
181
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of Operations
For the Year Ended December 31, 2014
(in thousands, except per
unit data)
Revenues:
Vanguard
As
 
Adjusted
(Note 4)
Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note3)
Vanguard/
Eagle Rock
 
Pro Forma
Combined
267,091     85,579      —
(80,810
315,078
$113,363 (a)   $—
(a)     —
     51,252
)(b) 
     (19
(a)     —
     39,177
     203,792      (203,792 )(a)     —
—
$285,918   $—
   351,404     —
     
       
   101,309     —
Oil sales
Natural gas sales
  
NGLs sales
Natural gas, natural gas
liquids, oil, condensate
Net gains on commodity
derivative contracts
Other income
Total revenues
Costs and expenses:
Production:
Lease operating expenses    149,765     43,670      —
Production and other taxes    68,749      12,925      —
Depreciation, depletion,
163,452     94,431      —
—
)    19
   902,083     298,204      —
(19
—
(b)     —
   —
—
   —
$399,281  
   402,637
140,486
—
257,883
—
 
   1,200,287
193,435  
 
   81,674
amortization and accretion
  
  
Impairment of oil and
natural gas properties
Accretion expense
Loss on settlement of asset
retirement obligations
Selling, general and
administrative expenses
Total costs and expenses
Income from operations
Other income (expense):
Interest expense
  
Net losses on interest rate
derivative contracts
Gain on acquisition of oil
and natural gas properties
Net income (loss) from short
term investments
Other
Total other expense
194,280     395,892      —
—
—
—
—
—
—
30,839      47,193      —
710,724     585,259      —
   191,359     (287,055)    —
(78,994 )    (15,247 )    —
(1,933 )    (1,734
)    —
2,836
—
—
—
(62,028 )    8,041
54
   (78,037 )    (70,715 )    —
8,294
(8,041
)(d)
43,847 (d)       
)(e)      
   (629
—
590,172
—
—
—
—
(584
)(f)     77,448
(38,176) 
   38,176
1,257,807 
   (57,520 ) 
 
   13,857 (g)     (89,924 ) 
   (9,540 )(g)      
 
   —
(3,667
)
—
(c)     —
)(c)     —
4,317
2,836
(53,987 )
307
   (144,435 )
182
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Subsidiaries
Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of
Operations – (continued)
For the Year Ended December 31, 2014
Vanguard/
Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
Combined
 $(201,955)
(in thousands, except per
unit data)
Vanguard
As
 
Adjusted
(Note 4)
Eagle
 
Rock
Pro Forma
reclassification
 
adjustments
(Note 3)
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
(Note3)
—
—
—
5,403
(18,197 )    —
$95,125    $(352,367)  $ —
113,322     (352,367)    —
Income (loss) before taxes  $113,322   $(357,770)  $ —
Income tax benefit
(expense)
Income (loss) from
continuing operations
Less: Distributions to
Preferred unitholders
Income (loss) from
continuing operations
attributable to Common and
Class B unitholders
Income (loss) from
continuing operations per
Common and Class B unit:
Basic
Diluted
Weighted average units
outstanding:
Common units – basic
Common units – diluted
Class B units – basic &
diluted
81,611     
   82,039
$1.16
 $1.14
420
$42,493
—
5,403
42,493
(196,552)
—
(18,197 )
42,493
$(214,749)
$(1.94
 $(1.94
) 
)
28,746 (h)     110,357  
   28,318 (h)     110,357
420
See the accompanying notes to the unaudited pro forma combined financial statements.
183
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Statements
Note 1 Basis of Presentation
On January 31, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Encore Energy Partners Operating, LLC, completed the Pinedale
Acquisition, whereby Vanguard acquired certain natural gas and oil assets in the Pinedale and Jonah fields located in Southwestern
Wyoming for approximately $555.6 million in cash.
On September 30, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Vanguard Operating, LLC, completed the Piceance Acquisition,
whereby Vanguard acquired natural gas, oil and NGL assets in the Piceance Basin located in Colorado for approximately $496.4 million.
On May 21, 2015, Vanguard entered into a merger agreement (as such agreement may be amended from time to time, the “Eagle Rock
merger agreement”) with Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P. (“Eagle Rock”) and Eagle Rock Energy GP, L.P., the general partner of Eagle
Rock (“Eagle Rock GP”), pursuant to which and subject to the terms and conditions thereof a wholly owned indirect subsidiary of
Vanguard will merge with and into Eagle Rock, with Eagle Rock continuing as the surviving entity and a wholly owned indirect subsidiary
of Vanguard (the “Eagle Rock merger”). Under the terms of the Eagle Rock merger agreement, each outstanding common unit
representing a limited partner interest in Eagle Rock will be converted into the right to receive 0.185 newly issued Vanguard common
units or, in the case of fractional Vanguard common units, cash. Further, in connection with the Eagle Rock merger agreement, Vanguard
will adopt Eagle Rock’s long-term incentive plan and each outstanding award of Eagle Rock common units issued under such plan will
be converted into new awards of Vanguard restricted units. The completion of the Eagle Rock merger is subject to (i) the approval of the
Eagle Rock merger agreement by the affirmative vote or consent of the holders of at least a majority of the outstanding Eagle Rock
common units, voting as a class, (ii) the approval of the issuance of the new Vanguard common units in connection with the Eagle Rock
merger by the majority of the votes cast affirmatively or negatively by holders of the Vanguard common units and class B units present in
person or by proxy at a duly called unitholder meeting and (iii) other customary closing conditions.
The proposed Eagle Rock merger will be accounted for in accordance with Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards
Codification Topic 805 — Business Combinations, which is referred to as FASB ASC 805.
Vanguard’s unaudited pro forma combined balance sheet at June 30, 2015 has been presented in this subsection to show the effect as if
the Eagle Rock merger and the pro forma adjustments had occurred on June 30, 2015. The Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance
Acquisition were included in Vanguard’s historical balance sheet at June 30, 2015, and, as such, there are no pro forma adjustments
related to the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition.
Vanguard’s unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the year ended
December 31, 2014 have been presented in this subsection based on Vanguard’s individual statements of operations, and reflect the pro
forma operating results attributable to the Eagle Rock merger, the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition as if the Eagle Rock
merger and acquisitions and the related transactions had occurred on January 1, 2014. Vanguard’s historical statements of operations
include operating results from the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and, as
such, there are no pro forma adjustments related to the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition for this period.
The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in this subsection includes adjustments to conform Eagle Rock’s
accounting for oil and natural gas properties to the full cost method. Vanguard follows the full cost method of accounting for oil and natural
gas properties while Eagle Rock follows the successful efforts method of accounting for oil and natural gas properties. Certain costs that
are capitalized under the full cost method are expensed under the successful efforts method. These costs consist primarily of
unsuccessful exploration drilling costs, geological and geophysical costs, delay rental on leases, abandonment costs and general and
administrative expenses directly related to exploration and development activities. Under the successful efforts method of accounting,
proved property acquisition costs are amortized on a unit-of-production basis over total proved reserves and costs of wells, related
equipment and facilities are
184
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 1 Basis of Presentation   – (continued)
depreciated over the life of the proved developed reserves that will utilize those capitalized assets on a field-by-field basis. Under the full
cost method of accounting, property acquisition costs, costs of wells, related equipment and facilities and future development costs are
included in a single full cost pool, which is amortized on a unit-of-production basis over total proved reserves.
Pro forma data is based on currently available information and certain estimates and assumptions as explained in the notes to the
unaudited pro forma combined financial statements presented in this subsection. Pro forma data is not necessarily indicative of the
financial results that would have been attained had the Eagle Rock merger, the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition
occurred on January 1, 2014. As actual adjustments may differ from the pro forma adjustments, the pro forma amounts presented should
not be viewed as indicative of operations in future periods.
The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in this subsection is based on assumptions that Vanguard believes
are reasonable under the circumstances and are intended for informational purposes only. Actual results may differ from the estimates and
assumptions used. The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in this subsection is not necessarily indicative of
the financial results that would have occurred if these transactions had taken place on the dates indicated, nor is it indicative of future
consolidated results.
Note 2 Unaudited Pro forma Combined Balance Sheet
Eagle Rock Merger
The consideration to be transferred, fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and resulting goodwill in connection with the
Eagle Rock merger were calculated as follows (in thousands):
Pro forma consideration
Market value of Vanguard’s common units to be issued to Eagle
Rock unitholders(c)
Long-term debt assumed
  
Add: fair value of liabilities assumed
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Other current liabilities
Asset retirement obligations
Deferred tax liability
Other Long-term liabilities
Amount attributable to liabilities assumed
Less: fair value of assets acquired
Cash
Trade accounts receivable
Current derivative assets
Other current assets
Oil and natural gas properties
Long-term derivative assets
Other assets
Amount attributable assets acquired
Goodwill
$308,728
145,072 
   453,800 
     
 
   42,416  
   21,889  
   60,093  
   28,589  
   4,960
 
 $157,947 
     
 
 $20
 
   27,087  
   36,169  
   11,594  
   456,059 
   38,469  
   10,797  
 $580,195 
 $31,552
185
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 2 Unaudited Pro forma Combined Balance Sheet  – (continued)
The total consideration for the proposed Eagle Rock merger comprising the fair value of Vanguard’s common units to be issued to Eagle
Rock unitholders and fair value of long-term debt assumed was assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on a
preliminary assessment of the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at June 30, 2015 using currently
available information. Vanguard expects to close the proposed Eagle Rock merger as soon as practicable. However, the proposed Eagle
Rock merger is subject to approvals by Eagle Rock unitholders and Vanguard unitholders. As such, the timing of closing this proposed
Eagle Rock merger is uncertain.
Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the total consideration over the estimated fair value of net assets acquired. The total consideration
for the proposed merger was based on the market capitalization of LRE or Eagle Rock, as applicable, with an added control premium
which resulted in a higher value compared to the fair value of the net assets acquired. The resulting goodwill is attributable to Vanguard’s
qualitative assumptions of long-term factors that the acquisition creates for its unitholders. These assumptions include:
•
•
the acquisition of long-life, low-decline, mature oil and natural gas exploration and production assets that are well-suited for Vanguard’s
upstream MLP model and its stated corporate strategy to grow via accretive acquisitions;
• additional scale and efficiencies in Vanguard’s current operating basins;
increased scale of operations which will permit Vanguard to compete more effectively and facilitate future development projects and
acquisitions through increased cash flow and lower cost of capital investment in the current reduced commodity price environment.
Vanguard also expects the combined business to realize substantial operating and administrative synergies;
the addition of a balanced production and reserves product mix that Vanguard believes provides an advantage in light of the better
expected profit margins for oil and NGLs production than natural gas production as reflected in the short-term and long-term market prices
for oil versus natural gas; and
improvement in a number of Vanguard’s financial ratios commonly used to assess its credit rating. The predominantly unit-for-unit nature
of the transaction is expected to allow Vanguard to reduce leverage and strengthen its balance sheet. In addition, because size is a key
contributor to credit ratings for oil and natural gas exploration and production companies, increased scale could result in improved credit
ratings for the combined entity, in particular if both the merger and the Eagle Rock merger are consummated.
•
•
Pro Forma Adjustment to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Balance Sheet
Eagle Rock Merger
Represents pro forma adjustments to:
(a)
• adjust the assets acquired and liabilities assumed to their estimated fair values as of the closing date;
• eliminate Eagle Rock’s historical accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization balances;
• adjust asset retirement obligations using Vanguard’s estimates; and
• eliminate deferred financing costs on Eagle Rock’s credit facility and senior notes.
(b)
Represents the termination of Eagle Rock’s revolving credit agreement and the extinguishment of the related debt outstanding using
Vanguard’s borrowings under its reserve-based credit facility.
186
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 2 Unaudited Pro forma Combined Balance Sheet  – (continued)
(c)
Represents the increase in Vanguard’s common units resulting from the Vanguard common unit issuance to effect the proposed Eagle
Rock merger as follows (in thousands, except merger exchange ratio and closing share price):
Estimated Eagle Rock common units owned by public unitholders    152,987 
Estimated Eagle Rock unvested performance units that will vest
upon closing
Total estimated Eagle Rock common units to be acquired by
Vanguard
Proposed merger exchange ratio of Vanguard common units for
each Eagle Rock common unit
Vanguard common units to be issued
Closing price of Vanguard common unit on July 31, 2015
Vanguard common unit consideration
28,746  
 $10.74
 
 $308,728
155,382
0.185
2,395
The proposed Eagle Rock merger has a preliminary value of approximately $453.8 million, including the assumption of Eagle Rock’s debt
of approximately $145.1 million at June 30, 2015. The final value of the Vanguard common unit consideration will be determined based
on the actual number of Vanguard common units issued and the market price of Vanguard’s common unit as of the date of acquisition. A
ten percent increase or decrease in the closing price of Vanguard’s common units would increase or decrease the value of Vanguard
common unit consideration and goodwill by approximately $30.9 million.
(d)Represents the elimination of Eagle Rock’s historical equity in connection with the acquisition method of accounting.
Represents the estimated $4.4 million of legal and advisory fees to be incurred by Vanguard not reflected in the June 30, 2015 balance
sheet, that are not capitalizable as part of the transaction. These costs are reflected in the unaudited pro forma combined balance sheet
as a reduction of equity as the costs will be expensed by Vanguard as incurred.
Represents cash severance payment to certain employees, executive officers and directors of Eagle Rock G&P to be paid immediately
prior to the closing of the Eagle Rock merger.
(e)
(f)
Reclassifications were made to the historical Eagle Rock assets and liabilities to conform to Vanguard’s presentation. Those
reclassifications did not impact the total historical Eagle Rock assets or liabilities.
Note 3 Pro Forma Adjustments to the Unaudited Combined Statements of
Operations
Eagle Rock Merger
Adjustments (a) – (c) to the unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the
year ended December 31, 2014 presented in this subsection include reclassifications required to conform Eagle Rock’s revenue and
expense items to Vanguard’s presentation as follows:
(a)
Represents the reclassification of Eagle Rock’s natural gas, natural gas liquids, oil, condensate and sulfur revenues to conform to
Vanguard’s oil sales, natural gas sales and NGLs sales presentation.
(b)Represents the reclassification of Eagle Rock’s other income sales to conform to Vanguard’s natural gas product sales presentation.
(c)Represents the reclassification of Eagle Rock’s income on short term investments to conform to Vanguard’s presentation.
Adjustments (d) – (h) to the unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations for the six months ended June 30, 2015 and for the
year ended December 31, 2014 are to reflect the merger with Eagle Rock.
187
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 3 Pro Forma Adjustments to the Unaudited Combined Statements of
Operations  – (continued)
(d)
Represents the change in depreciation, depletion and amortization primarily resulting from the pro forma calculation of the combined
entity’s depletion expense under the full cost method of accounting for oil and natural gas properties.
(e) Represents the change in accretion expense using Vanguard’s asset retirement obligations estimates.
Represents the elimination of certain general and administrative expenses resulting from Eagle Rock not being a separate public
company after the completion of the Eagle Rock merger, including NASDAQ listing fees and SEC filing fees.
Represents the adjustment to interest expense arising from borrowings under Vanguard’s reserve-based credit facility used to
terminate Eagle Rock’s credit agreement and term loan agreement and the extinguishment of the related debt outstanding. Interest
expense recorded by Eagle Rock included interest for its senior notes and revolving credit facility. We eliminated the interest expense
recorded by Eagle Rock related to the revolving credit facility only and calculated pro forma interest expense. Since Eagle Rock had a
more significant debt balance in 2014, we applied Vanguard’s monthly variable interest rate, which ranged from 1.9% to 2.17% in 2014,
and 2.18% to 2.44% in 2015, to Eagle Rock’s monthly outstanding balance to calculate the pro forma interest expense adjustment. The
effect on net income of a 1/8 percent variance in interest rates would be $0.2 million and $1.2 million for the six months ended June 30,
2015 and for the year ended December 31, 2014, respectively.
Represents the adjustment for the weighted average number of units from the issuance of approximately 28.75 million Vanguard
common units under the terms of the Eagle Rock merger, whereby Eagle Rock’s public unitholders will receive 0.185 Vanguard
common units for each Eagle Rock common unit held at closing of the Eagle Rock merger. Since the combined results of operations
after giving effect to the merger and the Eagle Rock merger results in a net loss, 0.43 million Vanguard phantom units were excluded
from the calculation of pro forma diluted earnings per unit due to their anti-dilutive effect.
(f)
(g)
(h)
188
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 4 Adjustments for Pinedale and Piceance Acquisitions
On January 31, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Encore Energy Partners Operating, LLC, completed the acquisition of
certain natural gas and oil assets in the Pinedale and Jonah fields located in Southwestern Wyoming for approximately $555.6 million in
cash (the “Pinedale Acquisition”), and, on September 30, 2014, Vanguard and its wholly owned subsidiary, Vanguard Operating, LLC,
completed the acquisition of natural gas, oil and NGL assets in the Piceance Basin located in Colorado for approximately $496.4 million
(the “Piceance Acquisition”).
The Vanguard As Adjusted column in the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Statement of Operations Data for Year Ended December 31,
2014 presented in this subsection above, incorporates the following financial information related to the Pinedale Acquisition and the
Piceance Acquisition:
(in thousands, except per unit data)
Revenues: 
Oil sales
Natural gas sales
NGLs sales
Net gains on commodity derivative
contracts
Total revenues
Costs and expenses:
Production:
Lease operating expenses
Production and other taxes
Depreciation, depletion, amortization
and accretion
Impairment of oil and natural gas
properties
Selling, general and administrative
expenses
Total costs and expenses
Income from operations
Other income (expense):
Interest expense
Net losses on interest rate derivative
contracts
Gain on acquisition of oil and natural
gas properties
Other
Total other expense
Net income (loss)
Less: Distributions to Preferred
unitholders
Net income (loss) attributable to
Common and Class B unitholders
Net income per Common and Class B
unit:
Basic
Diluted
Weighted average units outstanding:
Common units – basic
Common units – diluted
Class B units – basic & diluted
189
Historical
 
Vanguard
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Vanguard
 
As
Adjusted
$268,685   $2,145 (a)   $15,088 (f)   $285,918 
   285,439     8,533 (a)     57,432 (f)     351,404 
   70,489      3,581 (a)     27,239 (f)     101,309 
   163,452 
   163,452     —
—
99,759
902,083 
   788,065     14,259  
 
     
 
     
     
 
     
 
   132,515     4,178 (b)     13,072 (g)     149,765 
   61,874      1,607 (b)     5,268 (g)     68,749  
   226,937     5,904 (c)     34,250 (h)     267,091
234,434     (5,904 )(c)    (34,250)(h)    194,280
30,839      —
—
30,839
710,724 
   686,599     5,785  
   191,359 
   101,466     8,474  
 
     
     
 
)(d)    (8,241 )(i)     (78,994 ) 
   (69,765 )    (988
   (1,933 )
18,340  
   81,419
(1,933 )    —
—
(j) 
   34,523      (32,114)(e)    427
   —
   54
 
 
   (7,814 ) 
   (37,121 )    (33,102) 
   73,605  
   64,345      (24,628)
—
2,836
54
 
   (78,037 ) 
   113,322
(18,197 )    —
—
(18,197 )
$46,148    $(24,628)
$73,605
$95,125
$0.56
 $0.55
     
   81,611     
   82,039     
    
   420
$1.16
 
 $1.14
     
 
   81,611  
   82,039  
 
   420
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 4 Adjustments for Pinedale and Piceance Acquisitions  – (continued)
The measurement of the fair value at acquisition date of the assets acquired in the Pinedale Acquisition as compared to the fair value of
consideration transferred, adjusted for purchase price adjustments, resulted in a gain of $32.1 million, as reflected in the table below,
primarily due to the increase in natural gas prices between the date the purchase and sale agreement was entered into and the closing
date.
Fair value of assets and liabilities acquired:
Oil and natural gas properties
Inventory
Asset retirement obligations
Imbalance liabilities
Other
Total fair value of assets and liabilities acquired
Fair value of consideration transferred
Gain on acquisition
(in
 
thousands)
 $600,123  
   244
 
   (12,404 ) 
) 
   (171
   (125
) 
   587,667  
   555,553  
 $32,114
The measurement of the fair value at acquisition date of the assets acquired in the Piceance Acquisition as compared to the fair value of
consideration transferred, adjusted for purchase price adjustments, resulted in goodwill of $0.4 million, calculated in the following table,
which was immediately impaired and recorded as a loss in current period earnings. The loss resulted primarily from the changes in oil and
natural gas prices between the date the purchase and sale agreement was entered into and the closing date, which were used to value
the reserves acquired.
Fair value of assets and liabilities acquired:
Oil and natural gas properties
Asset retirement obligations
Production and ad valorem taxes payable
Suspense liabilities
Other
Total fair value of assets and liabilities acquired
Fair value of consideration transferred
Loss on acquisition
(in
 
thousands)
$523,537  
   (19,452 ) 
) 
   (7,552
) 
   (445
   (124
) 
   495,964  
   496,391  
 $(427
)
The unaudited pro forma combined statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2014 presented in this subsection include
adjustments to reflect the following:
(a) Represents the increase in oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids sales resulting from the Pinedale Acquisition.
(b)Represents the increase in lease operating expenses and production and other taxes resulting from the Pinedale Acquisition.
Represents the increase in depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion resulting from the Pinedale Acquisition and the
corresponding reduction in the impairment recognized in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Represents the pro forma interest expense related to borrowings under the reserve-based credit facility to fund the Pinedale
Acquisition.
Represents the elimination of the nonrecurring gain from the acquisition of oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids properties in the
Pinedale Acquisition.
(d)
(c)
(e)
(f)Represents the increase in oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids sales resulting from the Piceance Acquisition.
(g)Represents the increase in lease operating expenses and production and other taxes resulting from the Piceance Acquisition.
190
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 4 Adjustments for Pinedale and Piceance Acquisitions  – (continued)
(h)
(i)
(j)
Represents the increase in depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion resulting from the Piceance Acquisition and the
corresponding reduction in the impairment recognized in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Represents the pro forma interest expense related to borrowings under the reserve-based credit facility to fund the Piceance
Acquisition.
Represents the elimination of the nonrecurring loss from the impairment of the goodwill recognized in the acquisition of oil, natural gas
and natural gas liquids properties in the Piceance Acquisition.
Note 5 Supplemental Oil and Gas Information (Unaudited)
The following tables set forth summary pro forma information with respect to Vanguard’s pro forma combined estimated net proved and
proved developed natural gas, oil and natural gas liquids reserves for the year ended December 31, 2014. The pro forma information for
the year ended December 31, 2014 presented in this subsection gives effect to the Pinedale Acquisition, the Piceance Acquisition and the
Eagle Rock merger as if they occurred on January 1, 2014. Future exploration, exploitation and development expenditures, as well as
future commodity prices and service costs, will affect the reserve volumes attributable to the acquired properties and the standardized
measure of discounted future net cash flows.
Estimated changes in the quantities of natural gas, oil and natural gas liquids reserves for the year ended
December 31, 2014 are as follows:
Vanguard
 
Historical
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments(a)
Vanguard
As
Adjusted
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
Vanguard/
Eagle Rock
 
Pro Forma
Combined
Net proved reserves
January 1, 2014
Revisions of previous
estimates
Extensions, discoveries and
other
Purchases of reserves in
place
Production
December 31, 2014
586,489     573,755     294,000     —
1,454,244    177,226    1,631,470
(66,797 )   52,272
(12,679
)    —
(27,204 )   (19,897 )   (47,101 )
2,927
—
1,036,285    —
—
—
—
2,927
22,990     25,917
(889,961
)    146,324     769
147,093
(83,037 )   (29,478
  1,475,867    596,549     261,522     (858,071
)    (19,799
)    31,890
(100,424 )   (11,995 )   (112,419 ) 
)    1,475,867    169,093    1,644,960
Vanguard
 
Historical
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments(a)
Vanguard/
Eagle
Rock
 
Pro
Forma
Combined
    
 
  52,645     13,542     66,187
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
Vanguard
As
Adjusted
(2,408 )   (2,618 )   (5,026 )
45,316     4,852
(2,910 )   585
465
—
12,873     —
2,477
(83
—
)     —
—
—
—
465
1,080     1,545
(7,640
)    5,233     326
5,559
(2,394 )   —
  (3,301 )   (270
  50,049     5,167
—
)    (216
 
  2,178
—
)     295
(7,345
(2,394 )   —
    (2,394 ) 
 
 
  (3,492 )   (1,313 )   (4,805 ) 
)    50,049     11,017     61,066
Net proved reserves
January 1, 2014
Revisions of previous
estimates
Extensions, discoveries and
other
Purchases of reserves in
place
Sales of reserves in place
Production
December 31, 2014
191
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 5 Supplemental Oil and Gas Information (Unaudited)   – (continued)
Vanguard
 
Historical
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments(a)
29,195     20,044
12,340
(10,769 )   (5,752
)    (828
22
—
26,840     —
—
—
—
)    —
—
Vanguard/
Eagle
Rock
 
Pro
Forma
Combined
    
 
  61,579     14,637     76,216
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
Vanguard
As
Adjusted
(17,349 )   (2,039 )   (19,388 )
22
2,224     2,246
Net proved reserves
January 1, 2014
Revisions of previous
estimates
Extensions, discoveries and
other
Purchases of reserves in
place
Production
December 31, 2014
(24,740
)    2,100     170
2,270
(2,759 )   (1,243
  42,529     13,049
)    (1,186
    10,326
)    1,365
    (23,375
(3,823 )   (1,158 )   (4,981 ) 
)    42,529     13,834     56,363
(a)
To adjust the amount of purchases of reserves representing the Pinedale Acquisition and Piceance Acquisition during 2014 included in
Vanguard’s historical information. The pro forma effect of each acquisition is presented separately in the table above.
Estimated quantities of natural gas, oil and natural gas liquids reserves as of December 31, 2014 are as
follows:
Vanguard
 
Historical(a)
Eagle
Rock
Historical
Vanguard/
Eagle Rock
 
Pro Forma
Combined(b)
    
 
     
  1,475,867    169,093    1,644,960  
 
  50,049
  42,529
 
  2,031,335    318,199    2,349,534  
    
 
  970,714    126,783    1,097,497  
  39,143
 
  28,678
 
  1,377,640    249,723    1,627,363
11,017
   13,834
61,066
   56,363
9,595
   10,895
48,738
   39,573
Estimated proved reserves:
Natural Gas (MMcf)
Oil (MBbls)
Natural Gas Liquids (MBbls)
MMcfe
Estimated proved developed reserves:
Natural Gas (MMcf)
Oil (MBbls)
Natural Gas Liquids (MBbls)
MMcfe
(a)
(b)
The historical standardized measure includes Vanguard, the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition as of December 31,
2014.
Includes Vanguard’s, the Pinedale Acquisition’s, the Piceance Acquisition’s and Eagle Rock’s estimated net proved and proved
developed oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids reserves as of December 31, 2014.
The standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to the combined proved oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids
reserves at December 31, 2014 is as follows (in thousands):
Vanguard
 
Historical(a)
Eagle Rock
 
Historical
Vanguard/
Eagle Rock
 
Pro Forma
Combined
$11,225,973   $2,187,346   $13,413,319 
   (3,999,460 )    (760,799 )    (4,760,259 ) 
   (845,872 )    (240,886 )    (1,086,758 ) 
   6,380,641      1,185,661     7,566,302
Future cash inflows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated timing
of cash flows
Standardized measure of discounted
future net cash flows
(3,404,914 )    (591,421 )    (3,996,335 )
$2,975,727    $594,240    $3,569,967
192
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Notes to the Unaudited Pro Forma Combined Financial
Statements
Note 5 Supplemental Oil and Gas Information (Unaudited)   – (continued)
(a) The historical standardized measure includes Vanguard, the Pinedale Acquisition and the Piceance Acquisition.
For the December 31, 2014 calculations in the preceding table, estimated future cash inflows from estimated future production of proved
reserves were computed using the average oil and natural gas price based upon the 12-month average price of $94.87 and $94.99 per
barrel of crude oil and $4.36 and $4.35 per MMBtu for natural gas for (i) Vanguard Historical and (ii) Eagle Rock, respectively, adjusted for
quality, transportation fees and a regional price differential. The natural gas liquids prices were calculated using the differentials for each
property to West Texas Intermediate reference price of $94.87 and $94.99 for (i) Vanguard Historical and (ii) Eagle Rock, respectively.
Vanguard may receive amounts different than the standardize measure of discounted cash flow for a number of reasons, including price
changes and the effects of Vanguard’s hedging activities.
The following are the principal sources of change in the combined standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows on a pro
forma basis for the year ended December 31, 2014 (in thousands):
Vanguard
 
Historical
Pinedale
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Piceance
 
Acquisition
Adjustments
Pro Forma
 
Adjustments
Vanguard
 
As Adjusted
$(430,224 )  $(116,408 )  $(96,653 )  $123,169
Vanguard/
Eagle Rock
 
Pro Forma
Combined(a)
   $(520,116 )  $(152,097)  $(672,213 )
Eagle
 
Rock
Historical
Sales and transfers, net of
production costs
Net changes in prices and
production costs
Extensions discoveries and
improved recovery, less
related costs
Changes in estimated future
development costs
Previously estimated
development costs incurred
during the period
Revision of previous quantity
estimates
Accretion of discount
Purchases of reserves in
place
Sales of reserves
Change in production rates,
timing and other
Net change in standardized
measure
Standardized measure,
January 1,
2014
Standardized measure,
December 31, 2014
11,138
311,334      (132,576 )    —
189,896      (63,142 )    126,754
24,841
—
—
—
24,841
74,684      99,525
36,564
(115,401 )    (13,728 )    —
(92,565 )    71,800      (20,765 )
68,817
74,685
352
—
143,854      49,409      193,263
(292,454 )    26,854
(20,726 )    —
(286,326 )    (149,993)    (436,319 )
183,397      46,010
53,471
—
282,878      59,818      342,696
1,621,571     —
(48,163 )    —
—
—
(1,257,662)    363,909      11,904      375,813
—
(48,163 )    —
(48,163 )
(33,731 )    57,008
65,465
—
88,742
41,351      130,093
1,141,756     284,082      (144,395 )    (1,134,493)    146,950      (56,266 )    90,684
1,833,971     460,099      534,707      —
2,828,777     650,506      3,479,283
$2,975,727   $744,181    $390,312    $(1,134,493)  $2,975,727   $594,240    $3,569,967
The pro forma standardized measure includes Vanguard, the Pinedale Acquisition, the Piceance Acquisition and the Eagle Rock
(a)merger.
193
TABLE OF CONTENTS
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES OF
THE MERGER
The following is a discussion of the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger that may be relevant to LRE common
unitholders and Vanguard common unitholders. Unless otherwise noted, the legal conclusions set forth in the discussion relating to the
consequences of the merger to LRE and its common unitholders are the opinion of Andrews Kurth LLP, counsel to LRE (“Andrews
Kurth”), as to the material U.S. federal income tax consequences relating to those matters. Unless otherwise noted, the legal conclusions
set forth in the discussion relating to the consequences of the merger to Vanguard and its common unitholders are the opinion of Paul
Hastings LLP, counsel to Vanguard (“Paul Hastings”), as to the material U.S. federal income tax consequences relating to those matters.
This discussion is based upon current provisions of the Code, existing and proposed Treasury regulations promulgated under the Code
(the “Treasury Regulations”) and current administrative rulings and court decisions, all of which are subject to change, possibly with
retroactive effect. Changes in these authorities may cause the tax consequences to vary substantially from the consequences described
below.
This discussion does not purport to be a complete discussion of all U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger. Moreover, the
discussion focuses on LRE common unitholders and Vanguard common unitholders who are individual citizens or residents of the United
States (for U.S. federal income tax purposes) and has only limited application to corporations, estates, trusts, nonresident aliens or other
unitholders subject to specialized tax treatment, such as tax-exempt institutions, employee benefit plans, foreign persons, financial
institutions, insurance companies, real estate investment trusts (REITs), individual retirement accounts (IRAs), mutual funds, traders in
securities that elect mark-to-market, persons who hold LRE common units or Vanguard common units as part of a hedge, straddle or
conversion transaction, persons who acquired LRE common units or Vanguard common units by gift, or directors and employees of LRE
that received (or are deemed to receive) LRE common units as compensation or through the exercise (or deemed exercise) of options,
unit appreciation rights, phantom units or restricted units granted under an LRE equity incentive plan. Also, the discussion assumes that
the LRE common units and Vanguard common units are held as capital assets at the time of the merger (generally, property held for
investment).
Neither LRE nor Vanguard has sought a ruling from the IRS with respect to any of the tax consequences discussed below, and the IRS
would not be precluded from taking positions contrary to those described herein. As a result, no assurance can be given that the IRS will
agree with all of the tax characterizations and the tax consequences described below. Some tax aspects of the merger are not certain, and
no assurance can be given that the below-described opinions and/or the statements contained herein with respect to tax matters would be
sustained by a court if contested by the IRS. Furthermore, the tax treatment of the merger may be significantly modified by future
legislative or administrative changes or court decisions. Any modifications may or may not be retroactively applied.
Accordingly, LRE and Vanguard strongly urge each LRE common unitholder and Vanguard common unitholder to consult with,
and depend upon, such unitholder’s own tax advisor in analyzing the U.S. federal, state, local and foreign tax consequences of
the merger particular to the unitholder.
Tax Opinions Required as a Condition to Closing
No ruling has been or will be requested from the IRS with respect to the tax consequences of the merger. Instead, LRE and Vanguard will
rely on the opinions of their respective counsel regarding the tax consequences of the merger.
It is a condition of Vanguard’s obligation to complete the merger that Vanguard receive an opinion of its counsel, Paul Hastings, to the
effect that for U.S. federal income tax purposes:
•
•
Vanguard will not recognize any income or gain as a result of the merger other than any gain resulting from any decrease in partnership
liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code;
no gain or loss will be recognized by a holder of Vanguard common units as a result of the merger other than any gain resulting from any
decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code; and
194
at least 90% of the combined gross income of Vanguard and LRE for the most recent four complete calendar quarters ending before the
Closing Date for which the necessary financial information is available is from sources treated as “qualifying income” within the meaning
•
TABLE OF CONTENTS
of Section 7704(d) of the Code.
Paul Hastings has informed Vanguard that it knows of no reason that it would not be able to deliver the opinion described above if the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement were consummated on the date of this proxy statement/prospectus. For a description
of the legal conclusions of Paul Hastings with respect to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, please read “— U.S.
Federal Income Tax Treatment of the Merger” and “— Tax Consequences of the Merger to Vanguard and its Unitholders.” For a
description of the legal conclusions of Paul Hastings with respect to the U.S. federal income tax consequences of Vanguard common unit
ownership, please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of Vanguard Common Unit Ownership.”
It is a condition of LRE’s obligation to complete the merger that LRE receive an opinion of its counsel, Andrews Kurth, to the effect that for
U.S. federal income tax purposes:
except to the extent any cash received in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units causes the transaction to be treated as a disguised
sale under Section 707 of the Code or is otherwise taxable, LRE will not recognize any income or gain as a result of the merger other
than any gain resulting from any actual or constructive distribution of cash, including as a result of any decrease in partnership liabilities
pursuant to Section 752 of the Code;
except to the extent any cash received in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units causes the transaction to be treated as a disguised
sale under Section 707 of the Code or is otherwise taxable, holders of LRE common units will not recognize any income or gain as a
result of the merger other than any gain resulting from any actual or constructive distribution of cash, including as a result of any decrease
in partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code; and
at least 90% of the gross income of LRE for the most recent four complete calendar quarters ending before the Closing Date for which the
necessary financial information is available is from sources treated as “qualifying income” within the meaning of Section 7704(d) of the
Code.
•
•
•
The opinion of Andrews Kurth will not extend to any LRE common unitholder who acquired common units from LRE in exchange for
property other than cash.
Andrews Kurth has informed LRE that it knows of no reason that it would not be able to deliver the opinion described above if the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement were consummated on the date of this proxy statement/prospectus. For a description
of the legal conclusions of Andrews Kurth with respect to the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, please read “— U.S.
Federal Income Tax Treatment of the Merger,” “— Tax Consequences of the Merger to LRE,” “— Tax Consequences of the Merger to LRE
Common Unitholders,” “— Tax Basis and Holding Period of the Vanguard Common Units Received” and “— Effect of Termination of
LRE’s Tax Year at Closing of Merger.”
The opinions of counsel will assume that the merger will be consummated in the manner contemplated by, and in accordance with, the
terms set forth in the merger agreement and described in this proxy statement/prospectus. In addition, the tax opinions delivered to
Vanguard and LRE at closing will be based upon certain factual assumptions, representations and covenants made by the officers of
Vanguard, LRE and LRE GP and any of their respective affiliates. If there are material changes to the tax consequences of the merger and
either Vanguard or LRE waives the receipt of the requisite tax opinion as a condition to closing, then this proxy statement/prospectus will
be amended and recirculated and unitholder approval will be resolicited. Unlike a ruling, an opinion of counsel represents only that
counsel’s best legal judgment and does not bind the IRS or the courts. Accordingly, no assurance can be given that the above-described
opinions will be sustained by a court if contested by the IRS.
Assumptions Related to the U.S. Federal Income Tax Treatment of the Merger
The discussion below assumes that Vanguard will be classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes at the time of the
merger. Please read the discussion of the opinion of Paul Hastings that
195
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard is classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes under “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of
Vanguard Common Unit Ownership — Partnership Status” below. The discussion below also assumes that LRE will be classified as a
partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes at the time of the merger. Please read the discussion of the opinion of Andrews Kurth that
LRE is classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes under “— U.S. Federal Income Tax Treatment of the Merger.”
Following the merger, a holder of LRE common units who receives Vanguard common units will be treated as a partner in Vanguard
regardless of the U.S. federal income tax classification of LRE.
Additionally, the discussion below assumes that all of the liabilities of LRE that are deemed assumed by Vanguard in the merger qualify
for an exception to the “disguised sale” rules. Vanguard and LRE believe that such liabilities qualify for one or more of the exceptions to
the “disguised sale” rules and intend to take the position that neither Vanguard nor LRE will recognize any income or gain as a result of
the “disguised sale” rules with respect to such liabilities.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Treatment of the Merger
Upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the merger agreement, (1) a subsidiary of Vanguard will merge with and into LRE
and all LRE common units will be converted into the right to receive Vanguard common units and (2) Vanguard will acquire all of the
limited liability company interests of LRE GP in exchange for Vanguard common units. For U.S. federal income tax purposes, the merger
will be a “merger” of Vanguard and LRE within the meaning of Treasury Regulations promulgated under Section 708 of the Code, with
Vanguard being treated as the continuing partnership and LRE being treated as the terminated partnership.
As a result, the following is deemed to occur for U.S. federal income tax purposes: (1) LRE will be deemed to contribute its assets (subject
to its liabilities) to Vanguard in exchange for (i) the issuance to LRE of Vanguard common units (ii) the assumption of LRE’s liabilities and
(iii) any cash received in lieu of fractional Vanguard units, and (2) LRE will be deemed to liquidate, distributing Vanguard common units
and cash to the holders of LRE common units in exchange for such LRE common units (the “Assets-Over Form”). LRE will take the
position that the cash received in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units will be treated as received by LRE in connection with the
merger. If the treatment of the cash in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units were challenged, an LRE common unitholder may be
treated as having made a taxable sale of a portion of its LRE common units to Vanguard in exchange for the fractional cash and would
recognize gain or loss equal to the difference between the cash received and such unitholder’s tax basis in its LRE common units
deemed sold to Vanguard.
The remainder of this discussion, except as otherwise noted, assumes that the merger and the transactions contemplated thereby will be
treated for U.S. federal income tax purposes in the manner described above. For the purposes of this discussion under “U.S. Federal
Income Tax Treatment of the Merger” with respect to LRE and its unitholders and based upon the factual representations made by LRE
and LRE GP, Andrews Kurth is of the opinion that LRE will be treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes immediately
preceding the merger. The representations made by LRE and LRE GP upon which Andrews Kurth has relied in rendering its opinion
include, without limitation: (a) neither LRE nor any of its operating subsidiaries (other than LRE Finance Corporation) has elected to be
treated, or will be treated, as a corporation for federal income tax purposes; (b) for each taxable year, more than 90% of LRE’s gross
income has been and will be income of a character that Andrews Kurth has opined is “qualifying income” within the meaning of Section
7704(d) of the Code; and (c) each hedging transaction that LRE treats as resulting in qualifying income has been and will be appropriately
identified as a hedging transaction pursuant to applicable Treasury Regulations, and has been and will be associated with oil, natural
gas, or products thereof that are held or to be held by LRE in activities that Andrews Kurth has opined result in qualifying income.
Tax Consequences of the Merger to LRE
Under the Assets-Over Form, LRE will be deemed to contribute all of its assets to Vanguard in exchange for Vanguard common units, the
assumption of LRE’s liabilities, and cash in lieu of fractional Vanguard common units. In general, the deemed contribution of assets from
LRE to Vanguard in exchange for Vanguard common units will not result in the recognition of gain or loss by LRE. The actual and
deemed receipt of cash by LRE, however, could give rise to the recognition of taxable gain by LRE, and any such taxable gain
196
TABLE OF CONTENTS
would be allocated to the LRE common unitholders pursuant to the LRE partnership agreement. The deemed receipt of cash by LRE
could give rise to a partially taxable “disguised sale” of assets from LRE to Vanguard under section 707(a)(2)(B) of the Code. Under
Section 707 of the Code and the Treasury Regulations thereunder, a transfer of property by a partner to a partnership, coupled with a
related transfer of money or other consideration (other than a partnership interest) by the partnership to such partner (including the
partnership’s assumption of, or taking of property subject to, certain liabilities), may be characterized, in part, as a “disguised sale” of
property, rather than as a non-taxable contribution of the property to the partnership. The deemed receipt of cash from Vanguard is
expected to qualify for one or more exceptions to “disguised sale” treatment and therefore might not be treated as part of a disguised sale
of property by LRE to Vanguard.
Tax Consequences of the Merger to LRE Common Unitholders
Under the Assets-Over Form, holders of LRE common units will be deemed to receive distributions in liquidation of LRE consisting of
Vanguard common units and any cash in lieu of fractional Vanguard units. In general, the receipt of Vanguard common units will not result
in the recognition of taxable gain or loss to such unitholders. The receipt of cash by a holder of LRE common units (including, as
discussed below, a deemed distribution of cash resulting from a net reduction in the amount of nonrecourse liabilities allocated to such
unitholder) will result in the recognition of taxable gain if such receipt exceeds the adjusted tax basis in the LRE common units
surrendered in the merger. The receipt of Vanguard common units and cash may trigger taxable gain under the disguised sale rules of
section 707(a)(2)(B) of the Code for a holder of LRE common units that contributed property in exchange for LRE common units.
As a partner in LRE, a holder of LRE common units is entitled to include the nonrecourse liabilities of LRE attributable to its LRE common
units in the tax basis of its LRE common units. As a partner in Vanguard after the merger, a holder of LRE common units will be entitled to
include the nonrecourse liabilities of Vanguard attributable to the Vanguard common units received in the merger in the tax basis of such
units received. The nonrecourse liabilities of Vanguard will include the nonrecourse liabilities of LRE after the merger. The amount of
nonrecourse liabilities attributable to an LRE common unit or a Vanguard common unit is determined under complex regulations under
Section 752 of the Code.
If the nonrecourse liabilities attributable to the Vanguard common units received by a holder of LRE common units in the merger exceed
the nonrecourse liabilities attributable to the LRE common units surrendered by such LRE common unitholder in the merger, such LRE
common unitholder’s tax basis in the Vanguard common units received will be correspondingly higher than such unitholder’s tax basis in
the LRE common units surrendered. If the nonrecourse liabilities attributable to the Vanguard common units received by a holder of LRE
common units in the merger are less than the nonrecourse liabilities attributable to the LRE common units surrendered by such LRE
common unitholder in the merger, such LRE common unitholder’s tax basis in the Vanguard common units received will be
correspondingly lower than the unitholder’s tax basis in the LRE common units surrendered. Please read “— Tax Basis and Holding
Period of the Vanguard Common Units Received” below.
Any reduction in liabilities described in the preceding paragraph will be treated as a deemed cash distribution to a holder of LRE common
units. Additionally, a holder of LRE common units will be treated as receiving a cash distribution as a result of the receipt of cash in lieu of
fractional units in the merger. If the amount of any such actual or deemed distributions of cash to a holder of LRE common units exceeds
such LRE common unitholder’s tax basis in the LRE common units surrendered, such LRE common unitholder will recognize taxable
gain in an amount equal to such excess. While there can be no assurance, Vanguard and LRE expect that most holders of LRE common
units will not recognize gain in this manner. However, the application of the rules governing the allocation of nonrecourse liabilities in the
context of the merger is complex and subject to uncertainty. There can be no assurance that a holder of LRE common units will not
recognize gain as a result of the distributions deemed received by such LRE common unitholder as a result of a net decrease in the
amount of nonrecourse liabilities allocable to such LRE common unitholder as a result of the merger and the amount of cash for fractional
Vanguard common units actually received by such LRE common unitholder in the merger. The amount and effect of any gain that may be
recognized by an affected LRE common unitholder will depend on the affected LRE common unitholder’s particular situation, including
the ability of the affected LRE common unitholder to utilize any suspended passive losses. Depending on these factors, any particular
affected LRE common unitholder may, or may not, be able to offset all or a
197
TABLE OF CONTENTS
portion of any gain recognized. Each holder of LRE common units should consult such unitholder’s own tax advisor in analyzing whether
the merger causes such unitholder to recognize actual and/or deemed distributions in excess of the tax basis of his LRE common units
surrendered in the merger.
Tax Basis and Holding Period of the Vanguard Common Units Received
A holder of LRE common units has an initial tax basis in its LRE common units, which consists of the amount such LRE common
unitholder paid for such LRE common units plus such LRE common unitholder’s share of LRE’s nonrecourse liabilities. That basis has
been and will be increased by such LRE common unitholder’s share of income and by any increases in such LRE common unitholder’s
share of nonrecourse liabilities. That basis has been and will be decreased, but not below zero, by distributions, by such LRE common
unitholder’s share of losses, by any decreases in such LRE common unitholder’s share of nonrecourse liabilities and by such LRE
common unitholder’s share of expenditures that are not deductible in computing taxable income and are not required to be capitalized.
A holder of LRE common units will have an initial aggregate tax basis in the Vanguard common units such LRE common unitholder will
receive in the merger that will be equal to such LRE common unitholder’s adjusted tax basis in the LRE common units exchanged
therefor, decreased by (i) any basis attributable to such LRE common unitholder’s share of LRE’s nonrecourse liabilities and (ii) any cash
received in the merger, and increased by such LRE common unitholder’s share of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities immediately after
the merger. In addition, the tax basis in the Vanguard common units received in the merger by a holder of LRE common units will be
increased by the amount of any income or gain recognized by such LRE common unitholder pursuant to the transactions contemplated by
the merger.
As a result of the Assets-Over Form, a holder of LRE common units will have a holding period in the Vanguard common units received in
the merger that will not be determined by reference to its holding period in the LRE common units exchanged therefor. Instead, such LRE
common unitholder’s holding period in the Vanguard common units received in the merger that are attributable to LRE’s capital assets or
assets used in its business as defined in Section 1231 of the Code will include LRE’s holding period in those assets. The holding period
for Vanguard common units received by a holder of LRE common units attributable to other assets of LRE, such as inventory and
receivables, will begin on the day following the merger.
Effect of Termination of LRE’s Tax Year at Closing of Merger
LRE uses the year ending December 31 as its taxable year and the accrual method of accounting for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
As a result of the merger, LRE’s taxable year will end as of the effective date of the merger, and LRE will be required to file a final U.S.
federal income tax return for the taxable year ending upon the effective date of the merger. Each LRE common unitholder will receive a
Schedule K-1 from LRE for the taxable year ending upon the effective date of the merger and will be required to include in income its
share of income, gain, loss and deduction for this period. In addition, an LRE common unitholder who has a taxable year ending on a date
other than December 31 and after the date the merger is effected must include its share of income, gain, loss and deduction in income for
its taxable year, with the result that the LRE common unitholder will be required to include in income for its taxable year its share of more
than one year of income, gain, loss and deduction from LRE.
Tax Consequences of the Merger to Vanguard and Its Unitholders
Neither Vanguard nor its unitholders will recognize any income or gain, or loss, for federal income tax purposes as a result of the merger
other than any gain recognized as a result of decreases in partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code. Each Vanguard
unitholder’s share of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities will be recalculated following the merger. Any resulting increase or decrease in a
Vanguard unitholder’s nonrecourse liabilities will result in a corresponding increase or decrease in such unitholder’s adjusted tax basis in
its Vanguard common units. A reduction in a unitholder’s share of nonrecourse liabilities would, if such reduction exceeds the unitholder’s
tax basis in his or her Vanguard common units, under certain circumstances, result in the recognition of taxable gain by a Vanguard
unitholder. While there can be no assurance, Vanguard and LRE do not expect any Vanguard common unitholders to recognize gain in
this manner.
198
TABLE OF CONTENTS
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES OF
VANGUARD COMMON UNIT OWNERSHIP
This section is a summary of the material federal income tax consequences that may be relevant to individual citizens or residents of the
United States owning Vanguard common units received in the merger. This section is based upon current provisions of the Code, existing
and proposed Treasury regulations promulgated under the Code (the “Treasury Regulations”) and current administrative rulings and court
decisions, all of which are subject to change. Later changes in these authorities may cause the tax consequences to vary substantially
from the consequences described below. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this section to Vanguard include its
operating subsidiaries.
The following discussion does not comment on all federal income tax matters affecting Vanguard or its common unitholders and does not
describe the application of the alternative minimum tax that may be applicable to certain unitholders. Moreover, the discussion focuses on
unitholders who are individual citizens or residents of the United States and has only limited application to corporations, estates, entities
treated as partnerships for U.S. federal income tax purposes, trusts, nonresident aliens, U.S. expatriates and former citizens or long-term
residents of the United States or other unitholders subject to specialized tax treatment, such as banks, insurance companies and other
financial institutions, tax-exempt institutions, foreign persons (including, without limitation, controlled foreign corporations, passive foreign
investment companies and non-U.S. persons eligible for the benefits of an applicable income tax treaty with the United States), individual
retirement accounts (“IRAs”), real estate investment trusts (“REITs”) or mutual funds, dealers in securities or currencies, traders in
securities, U.S. persons whose “functional currency” is not the U.S. dollar, persons holding their units as part of a “straddle,” “hedge,”
“conversion transaction” or other risk reduction transaction, and persons deemed to sell their units under the constructive sale provisions
of the Code. In addition, the discussion only comments, to a limited extent, on state, local, and foreign tax consequences. Accordingly,
Vanguard encourages each prospective unitholder to consult his own tax advisor in analyzing the state, local and foreign tax
consequences particular to him of the ownership or disposition of common units and potential changes in applicable laws.
No ruling has been or will be requested from the IRS regarding any matter affecting Vanguard following the merger or the consequences
of owning Vanguard common units received in the merger. Instead, Vanguard will rely on opinions of Paul Hastings. Unlike a ruling, an
opinion of counsel represents only that counsel’s best legal judgment and does not bind the IRS or the courts. Accordingly, the opinions
and statements made herein may not be sustained by a court if contested by the IRS. Any contest of this sort with the IRS may materially
and adversely impact the market for the common units and the prices at which common units trade. In addition, the costs of any contest
with the IRS, principally legal, accounting and related fees, will result in a reduction in cash available for distribution to Vanguard’s
unitholders and thus will be borne indirectly by Vanguard’s unitholders. Furthermore, the tax treatment of Vanguard, or of an investment in
Vanguard, may be significantly modified by future legislative or administrative changes or court decisions. Any modifications may or may
not be retroactively applied.
All statements as to matters of federal income tax law and legal conclusions with respect thereto, but not as to factual matters, contained in
this section, unless otherwise noted, are the opinion of Paul Hastings and are based on the accuracy of the representations made by
Vanguard and LRE.
For the reasons described below, Paul Hastings has not rendered an opinion with respect to the following specific federal income tax
issues: (i) the treatment of a unitholder whose common units are loaned to a short seller to cover a short sale of common units (please
read “— Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership —  Treatment of Short Sales”); (ii) whether Vanguard’s monthly convention for allocating
taxable income and losses is permitted by existing Treasury Regulations (please read “— Disposition of Common Units —  Allocations
Between Transferors and Transferees”); (iii) whether percentage depletion will be available to a unitholder or the extent of the percentage
depletion deduction available to any unitholder (please read “— Tax Treatment of Operations — Oil and Natural Gas
Taxation — Depletion Deductions”); (iv) whether the deduction related to U.S. production activities will be available to a unitholder or the
extent of any such deduction to any unitholder (please read “— Tax Treatment of Operations — Oil and Natural Gas
Taxation — Deduction for U.S. Production Activities”); (v) whether Vanguard’s method for taking into account Section 743 adjustments is
sustainable in certain cases (please read “— Tax Consequences of Unit
199
Ownership — Section 754 Election” and “— Uniformity of Units”); and (vi) whether an LRE common unitholder will be able to utilize
suspended passive losses related to its LRE common units to offset income from Vanguard (please read “— Tax Consequences of Unit
Ownership — Limitations on Deductibility of Losses” and “— Uniformity of Units”).
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Partnership Status
A partnership is not a taxable entity and incurs no federal income tax liability. Instead, each partner of a partnership is required to take into
account his share of items of income, gain, loss and deduction of the partnership in computing his federal income tax liability, regardless
of whether cash distributions are made to him by the partnership. Distributions by a partnership to a partner are generally not taxable to
the partnership or the partner unless the amount of cash distributed to him is in excess of the partner’s adjusted basis in his partnership
interest. Section 7704 of the Code provides that publicly traded partnerships will, as a general rule, be taxed as corporations. However, an
exception, referred to as the “Qualifying Income Exception,” exists with respect to publicly traded partnerships of which 90% or more of the
gross income for every taxable year consists of “qualifying income.” Qualifying income includes income and gains derived from the
exploration, development, mining or production, processing, transportation, and marketing of natural resources, including oil, gas, and
products thereof. Other types of qualifying income include interest (other than from a financial business), dividends, gains from the sale of
real property and gains from the sale or other disposition of capital assets held for the production of income that otherwise constitutes
qualifying income. Vanguard estimates that less than 2% of its current gross income is not qualifying income; however, this estimate could
change from time to time. Based upon and subject to this estimate, the factual representations made by Vanguard, LRE and LRE GP and
a review of the applicable legal authorities, Paul Hastings is of the opinion that at least 90% of Vanguard’s current gross income
constitutes qualifying income. The portion of Vanguard’s income that is qualifying income may change from time to time.
The IRS has made no determination as to Vanguard’s status or the status of its operating subsidiaries for federal income tax purposes.
Instead, Vanguard will rely on the opinion of Paul Hastings on such matters. It is the opinion of Paul Hastings that, based upon the Code,
its regulations, published revenue rulings and court decisions and the representations described below that:
• Vanguard will be classified as a partnership for federal income tax purposes; and
Except for VNR Finance Corp. and VNR Holdings, LLC, each of Vanguard’s operating subsidiaries will be treated as a partnership or will
be disregarded as an entity separate from it for federal income tax purposes.
•
In rendering its opinion, Paul Hastings has relied on factual representations made by Vanguard, LRE and LRE GP. The representations
made by Vanguard, LRE and LRE GP upon which Paul Hastings has relied include:
•
•
•
Except for VNR Finance Corp. and VNR Holdings, LLC, neither Vanguard nor any of its operating subsidiaries has elected or will elect to
be treated, or is otherwise treated, as a corporation for federal income tax purposes; and
For each taxable year, more than 90% of Vanguard’s gross income has been and will be income of the type that Paul Hastings has
opined or will opine is “qualifying income” within the meaning of Section 7704(d) of the Code; and
Each hedging transaction that Vanguard treats as resulting in qualifying income has been and will be appropriately identified as a
hedging transaction pursuant to applicable Treasury Regulations and has been and will be associated with oil, gas, or products thereof
that are held or to be held by Vanguard in activities that Paul Hastings has opined or will opine result in qualifying income.
Vanguard and LRE believe that these representations have been true in the past and expect that these representations will continue to be
true in the future.
If Vanguard fails to meet the Qualifying Income Exception, other than a failure that is determined by the IRS to be inadvertent and that is
cured within a reasonable time after discovery (in which case the IRS may also require Vanguard to make adjustments with respect to its
unitholders or pay other amounts), Vanguard
200
TABLE OF CONTENTS
will be treated as if it had transferred all of its assets, subject to liabilities, to a newly formed corporation, on the first day of the year in
which Vanguard fails to meet the Qualifying Income Exception, in return for stock in that corporation, and then distributed that stock to the
unitholders in liquidation of their interests in Vanguard. This deemed contribution and liquidation should be tax-free to unitholders and
Vanguard so long as Vanguard, at that time, does not have liabilities in excess of the tax basis of its assets. Thereafter, Vanguard would
be treated as a corporation for federal income tax purposes.
If Vanguard were treated as an association taxable as a corporation in any taxable year, either as a result of a failure to meet the
Qualifying Income Exception or otherwise, its items of income, gain, loss and deduction would be reflected only on its tax return rather
than being passed through to its unitholders, and Vanguard’s net income would be taxed to Vanguard at corporate rates. Any distribution
made to a unitholder at a time Vanguard is treated as a corporation would be (i) a taxable dividend to the extent of Vanguard’s current and
accumulated earnings and profits, then (ii) a nontaxable return of capital to the extent of the unitholder’s tax basis in his common units,
and thereafter (iii) taxable capital gain. Accordingly, taxation as a corporation would result in a material reduction in a unitholder’s cash
flow and after-tax return and thus would likely result in a substantial reduction of the value of the common units.
The discussion below is based on Paul Hastings’ opinion that Vanguard will be classified as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes.
Limited Partner Status
Unitholders of Vanguard will be treated as partners of Vanguard for federal income tax purposes. Also, unitholders whose common units
are held in street name or by a nominee and who have the right to direct the nominee in the exercise of all substantive rights attendant to
the ownership of their common units will be treated as partners of Vanguard for federal income tax purposes.
A beneficial owner of common units whose units have been transferred to a short seller to complete a short sale would appear to lose his
status as a partner with respect to those units for federal income tax purposes. Please read “— Tax Consequences of Unit
Ownership — Treatment of Short Sales.”
Income, gains, losses or deductions would not appear to be reportable by a unitholder who is not a partner for federal income tax
purposes, and any cash distributions received by a unitholder who is not a partner for federal income tax purposes would therefore appear
to be fully taxable as ordinary income. These holders are urged to consult their tax advisors with respect to the tax consequences to them
of holding common units in Vanguard. The references to “unitholders” in the discussion that follows are to persons who are treated as
partners in Vanguard for federal income tax purposes.
Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership
Flow-Through of Taxable Income
Subject to the discussion below under “— Entity-Level Collections,” Vanguard will not pay any federal income tax. Instead, each
unitholder will be required to report on his income tax return his share of Vanguard’s income, gains, losses and deductions without regard
to whether Vanguard makes cash distributions to him. Consequently, Vanguard may allocate income to a unitholder even if he has not
received a cash distribution. Each unitholder will be required to include in income his allocable share of Vanguard’s income, gains, losses
and deductions for its taxable year ending with or within his taxable year. Vanguard’s taxable year ends on December 31.
Treatment of Distributions
Distributions by Vanguard to a unitholder generally will not be taxable to the unitholder for federal income tax purposes, except to the
extent the amount of any such cash distribution exceeds his tax basis in his common units immediately before the distribution. Vanguard’s
cash distributions in excess of a unitholder’s tax basis generally will be considered to be gain from the sale or exchange of the common
units, taxable in accordance with the rules described under “— Disposition of Common Units.” Any reduction in a unitholder’s share of
Vanguard’s liabilities for which no partner bears the economic risk of loss, known as “nonrecourse liabilities,” will be treated as a
distribution by Vanguard of cash to that unitholder. To the extent
201
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard’s distributions cause a unitholder’s “at-risk” amount to be less than zero at the end of any taxable year, he must recapture any
losses deducted in previous years. Please read “— Limitations on Deductibility of Losses.”
A decrease in a unitholder’s percentage interest in Vanguard because of its issuance of additional common units will decrease his share
of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities, and thus will result in a corresponding deemed distribution of cash. This deemed distribution may
constitute a non-pro rata distribution. A non-pro rata distribution of money or property may result in ordinary income to a unitholder,
regardless of his tax basis in his common units, if the distribution reduces the unitholder’s share of Vanguard’s “unrealized receivables,”
including depreciation, recapture and/or substantially appreciated “inventory items,” each as defined in the Code, and collectively,
“Section 751 Assets.” To that extent, the unitholder will be treated as having been distributed his proportionate share of the Section 751
Assets and then having exchanged those assets with Vanguard in return for the non-pro rata portion of the actual distribution made to him.
This latter deemed exchange will generally result in the unitholder’s realization of ordinary income, which will equal the excess of (i) the
non-pro rata portion of that distribution over (ii) the unitholder’s tax basis (often zero) for the share of Section 751 Assets deemed
relinquished in the exchange.
Basis of Common Units
Please read “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Merger — Tax Basis and Holding Period of Vanguard Common
Units Received” for a discussion of how to determine the initial tax basis of Vanguard common units received in the merger. A unitholder’s
initial tax basis will be increased by his share of Vanguard’s income and by any increases in his share of Vanguard’s nonrecourse
liabilities. That basis will be decreased, but not below zero, by distributions from Vanguard, by the unitholder’s share of Vanguard’s
losses, by any decreases in his share of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities and by his share of Vanguard’s expenditures that are not
deductible in computing taxable income and are not required to be capitalized. A unitholder will have a share, generally based on his
share of profits, of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities. Please read “— Disposition of Common Units — Recognition of Gain or Loss.”
Limitations on Deductibility of Losses
The deduction by a unitholder of his share of Vanguard’s losses will be limited to the tax basis in his units and, in the case of an individual
unitholder, estate, trust, or corporate unitholder (if more than 50% of the value of the corporate unitholder’s stock is owned directly or
indirectly by or for five or fewer individuals or some tax-exempt organizations), to the amount for which the unitholder is considered to be
“at risk” with respect to Vanguard’s activities, if that is less than his tax basis. A common unitholder subject to these limitations must
recapture losses deducted in previous years to the extent that distributions cause his at-risk amount to be less than zero at the end of any
taxable year. Losses disallowed to a unitholder or recaptured as a result of these limitations will carry forward and will be allowable as a
deduction to the extent that his at-risk amount is subsequently increased, provided such losses do not exceed such common unitholder’s
tax basis in his common units. Upon the taxable disposition of a unit, any gain recognized by a unitholder can be offset by losses that
were previously suspended by the at-risk limitation but may not be offset by losses suspended by the basis limitation. Any loss previously
suspended by the at-risk limitation in excess of that gain would no longer be utilizable.
In general, a unitholder will be at risk to the extent of the tax basis of his units, excluding any portion of that basis attributable to his share
of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities, reduced by (i) any portion of that basis representing amounts otherwise protected against loss
because of a guarantee, stop loss agreement or other similar arrangement and (ii) any amount of money he borrows to acquire or hold his
units, if the lender of those borrowed funds owns an interest in Vanguard, is related to the unitholder or can look only to the units for
repayment. A unitholder’s at-risk amount will increase or decrease as the tax basis of the unitholder’s units increases or decreases, other
than tax basis increases or decreases attributable to increases or decreases in his share of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities.
In addition to the basis and at-risk limitations on the deductibility of losses, the passive loss limitations generally provide that individuals,
estates, trusts and some closely-held corporations and personal service corporations can deduct losses from passive activities, which are
generally trade or business activities in which the taxpayer does not materially participate, only to the extent of the taxpayer’s income from
those
202
TABLE OF CONTENTS
passive activities. The passive loss limitations are applied separately with respect to each publicly traded partnership. Consequently, any
passive losses Vanguard generates will only be available to offset its passive income generated in the future and will not be available to
offset income from other passive activities or investments, including Vanguard’s investments or a unitholder’s investments in other
publicly traded partnerships, or the unitholder’s salary, active business or other income. Passive losses that are not deductible because
they exceed a unitholder’s share of income Vanguard generates may be deducted in full when he disposes of his entire investment in
Vanguard in a fully taxable transaction with an unrelated party. The passive loss limitations are applied after other applicable limitations
on deductions, including the at-risk rules and the basis limitation.
A unitholder’s share of Vanguard’s net income may be offset by any of its suspended passive losses, but it may not be offset by any other
current or carryover losses from other passive activities, including those attributable to other publicly traded partnerships.
There is no guidance as to whether suspended passive activity losses of LRE common units will be available to offset passive activity
income that is allocated from Vanguard after the merger to a former LRE common unitholder. The IRS may contend that since Vanguard is
not the same partnership as LRE, the passive loss limitation rules would not allow a former LRE common unitholder to utilize such losses
until such time as all of the former LRE common unitholder’s Vanguard common units are sold. A Vanguard unitholder may take the
position, however, that Vanguard should be deemed a continuation of LRE for this purpose such that any suspended LRE losses would
be available to offset Vanguard taxable income allocated to such unitholder. Because of the lack of guidance with respect to this issue,
Paul Hastings is unable to opine as to whether suspended passive activity losses arising from LRE activities will be available to offset
Vanguard taxable income allocated to a former LRE common unitholder following the merger. If a unitholder has losses with respect to
LRE common units, he is urged to consult his own tax advisor.
Limitations on Interest Deductions
The deductibility of a non-corporate taxpayer’s “investment interest expense” is generally limited to the amount of that taxpayer’s “net
investment income.” Investment interest expense includes:
• interest on indebtedness properly allocable to property held for investment;
• Vanguard’s interest expense attributed to portfolio income; and
•the portion of interest expense incurred to purchase or carry an interest in a passive activity to the extent attributable to portfolio income.
The computation of a unitholder’s investment interest expense will take into account interest on any margin account borrowing or other
loan incurred to purchase or carry a unit. Net investment income includes gross income from property held for investment and amounts
treated as portfolio income under the passive loss rules, less deductible expenses, other than interest, directly connected with the
production of investment income, but generally does not include gains attributable to the disposition of property held for investment or (if
applicable) qualified dividend income. The IRS has indicated that the net passive income earned by a publicly traded partnership will be
treated as investment income to its unitholders. In addition, the unitholder’s share of Vanguard’s portfolio income will be treated as
investment income.
Entity-Level Collections
If Vanguard is required or elects under applicable law to pay any federal, state, local or foreign income tax on behalf of any unitholder or
any former unitholder, Vanguard is authorized to pay those taxes from its funds. That payment, if made, will be treated as a distribution of
cash to the unitholder on whose behalf the payment was made. If the payment is made on behalf of a person whose identity cannot be
determined, Vanguard is authorized to treat the payment as a distribution to all current unitholders. Vanguard is authorized to amend its
limited liability company agreement in the manner necessary to maintain uniformity of intrinsic tax characteristics of units and to adjust
later distributions, so that after giving effect to these distributions, the priority and characterization of distributions otherwise applicable
under its limited liability company agreement is maintained as nearly as is practicable. Payments by Vanguard as described above could
give rise
203
to an overpayment of tax on behalf of an individual unitholder in which event the unitholder would be required to file a claim in order to
TABLE OF CONTENTS
obtain a credit or refund.
Allocation of Income, Gain, Loss and Deduction
If Vanguard has a net profit, its items of income, gain, loss and deduction will be allocated among its holders of units other than Series A
preferred units, Series B preferred units and Series C preferred units in accordance with their percentage interests in Vanguard. If
Vanguard has a net loss, its items of income, gain, loss and deduction will be allocated among all of its unitholders in accordance with
their percentage interests in Vanguard to the extent of their positive capital accounts. Holders of Vanguard’s Series A preferred units,
Series B preferred units and Series C preferred units will be allocated net loss only in the event that the capital accounts of the common
unitholders have been reduced to zero.
Specified items of Vanguard’s income, gain, loss and deduction will be allocated to account for any difference between the tax basis and
fair market value of any property contributed to Vanguard that exists at the time of such contribution, referred to in this discussion as the
“Contributed Property.” The effect of these allocations, referred to as Section 704(c) Allocations, to a unitholder purchasing common units
from Vanguard in an offering will be essentially the same as if the tax bases of its assets were equal to their fair market values at the time
of the offering. Former LRE common unitholders that receive Vanguard units in the merger will receive the Section 704(c) Allocations that
otherwise would have been allocated to LRE pursuant to Section 704(c) of the Code had LRE simply contributed its assets to Vanguard in
exchange for units. Under these rules for example, following the merger in the event that Vanguard divests itself of certain assets formerly
owned by LRE (including through a distribution of such assets), all or a portion of any gain recognized as a result of a divestiture of such
assets may be required to be allocated to the former LRE common unitholders. In addition, a former LRE common unitholder may also be
required to recognize its share of LRE’s remaining “built-in gain” upon certain distributions by Vanguard to that unitholder of other
Vanguard property (other than money) within seven years following the merger. No special distributions will be made to the former LRE
common unitholders with respect to any tax liability from such transactions.
In the event Vanguard issues additional common units or engages in certain other transactions in the future, “reverse Section 704(c)
Allocations,” similar to the Section 704(c) Allocations described above, will be made to all of Vanguard’s unitholders immediately prior to
such issuance or other transactions to account for the difference between the “book” basis for purposes of maintaining capital accounts
and the fair market value of all property held by Vanguard at the time of such issuance or future transaction. In addition, items of recapture
income will be allocated to the extent possible to the unitholder who was allocated the deduction giving rise to the treatment of that gain
as recapture income in order to minimize the recognition of ordinary income by some unitholders. Finally, although Vanguard does not
expect that its operations will result in the creation of negative capital accounts, if negative capital accounts nevertheless result, items of
its income and gain will be allocated in an amount and manner sufficient to eliminate the negative balance as quickly as possible.
An allocation of Vanguard’s items of income, gain, loss or deduction, other than an allocation required by the Code to eliminate the
difference between a partner’s “book” capital account, credited with the fair market value of Contributed Property, and “tax” capital
account, credited with the tax basis of Contributed Property, referred to in this discussion as the “Book-Tax Disparity,” will generally be
given effect for federal income tax purposes in determining a partner’s share of an item of income, gain, loss or deduction only if the
allocation has “substantial economic effect.” In any other case, a partner’s share of an item will be determined on the basis of his interest
in Vanguard, which will be determined by taking into account all the facts and circumstances, including:
• his relative contributions to Vanguard;
• the interests of all the partners in profits and losses;
•
• the rights of all the partners to distributions of capital upon liquidation.
the interest of all the partners in cash flow; and
204
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Paul Hastings is of the opinion that, with the exception of the issues described in “— Section 754 Election” and “— Disposition of
Common Units — Allocations Between Transferors and Transferees,” allocations under Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement
will be given effect for federal income tax purposes in determining a partner’s share of an item of income, gain, loss or deduction.
Treatment of Short Sales
A unitholder whose units are loaned to a “short seller” to cover a short sale of units may be considered as having disposed of those units.
If so, he would no longer be treated for tax purposes as a partner with respect to those units during the period of the loan and may
recognize gain or loss from the disposition. As a result, during this period:
•any of Vanguard’s income, gain, loss or deduction with respect to those units would not be reportable by the unitholder;
• any cash distributions received by the unitholder as to those units would be fully taxable; and
• while not entirely free from doubt, all of these distributions would appear to be ordinary income.
Because there is no direct or indirect controlling authority on the issue relating to partnership interests, Paul Hastings has not rendered an
opinion regarding the tax treatment of a unitholder whose common units are loaned to a short seller to cover a short sale of common units;
therefore, unitholders desiring to assure their status as partners and avoid the risk of gain recognition from a loan to a short seller are
urged to consult a tax advisor to discuss whether it is advisable to modify any applicable brokerage account agreements to prohibit their
brokers from borrowing and loaning their units. The IRS has previously announced that it is studying issues relating to the tax treatment of
short sales of partnership interests. Please also read “— Disposition of Common Units — Recognition of Gain or Loss.”
Tax Rates
Currently, the highest marginal U.S. federal income tax rate applicable to ordinary income of individuals is 39.6% and the highest
marginal U.S. federal income tax rate applicable to long-term capital gains (generally, capital gains on certain assets held for more than
twelve months) of individuals is 20%. Such rates are subject to change by new legislation at any time.
In addition, a 3.8% Medicare tax (NIIT) on certain net investment income earned by individuals, estates and trusts currently applies. For
these purposes, net investment income generally includes a unitholder’s allocable share of Vanguard’s income and gain realized by a
unitholder from a sale of Vanguard common units. In the case of an individual, the tax will be imposed on the lesser of (i) the unitholder’s
net investment income or (ii) the amount by which the unitholder’s modified adjusted gross income exceeds $250,000 (if the unitholder is
married and filing jointly or a surviving spouse), $125,000 (if the unitholder is married and filing separately) or $200,000 (in any other
case). In the case of an estate or trust, the tax will be imposed on the lesser of (i) undistributed net investment income, or (ii) the excess
adjusted gross income over the dollar amount at which the highest income tax bracket applicable to an estate or trust begins for such
taxable year. The Department of the Treasury and the IRS have issued guidance in the form of proposed and final Treasury Regulations
regarding the NIIT. Prospective unitholders are urged to consult with their tax advisors as to the impact of the NIIT on an investment in
Vanguard’s units.
Section 754 Election
Vanguard has made the election permitted by Section 754 of the Code. That election is irrevocable without the consent of the IRS unless
there is a constructive termination of the partnership. Please read “— Disposition of Common Units — Constructive Termination.” The
election will generally permit Vanguard to adjust a common unit purchaser’s tax basis in its assets (“inside basis”) under Section 743(b) of
the Code to reflect his purchase price. This election does not apply with respect to a person who purchases common units directly from
Vanguard. The Section 743(b) adjustment belongs to the purchaser and not to other unitholders. For purposes of this discussion, the
inside basis in Vanguard’s assets with respect to a unitholder will be considered to have two components: (i) his share of Vanguard’s tax
basis in its assets (“common basis”) and (ii) his Section 743(b) adjustment to that basis.
205
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Under Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement, the board of directors of Vanguard is authorized to take a position to preserve the
uniformity of units even if that position is not consistent with applicable Treasury Regulations. Vanguard has adopted the remedial
allocation method as to all of its properties. Where the remedial allocation method is adopted, a literal application of Treasury Regulations
governing a 743(b) adjustment attributable to properties depreciable under Section 167 of the Internal Revenue Code may give rise to
differences in the taxation of unitholders purchasing units from Vanguard and unitholders purchasing from other unitholders. If Vanguard
has any such properties, it intends to adopt methods employed by other publicly traded partnerships to preserve the uniformity of units,
even if inconsistent with existing Treasury Regulations, and Paul Hastings has not opined on the validity of this approach. Please read
“— Uniformity of Units.”
The IRS may challenge Vanguard’s position with respect to depreciating or amortizing the Section 743(b) adjustment it takes to preserve
the uniformity of the units due to lack of controlling authority. Because a unitholder’s tax basis for its units is reduced by its share of
Vanguard’s items of deduction or loss, any position Vanguard takes that understates deductions will overstate a unitholder’s basis in its
units, and may cause the unitholder to understate gain or overstate loss on any sale of such units. Please read “— Disposition of
Units — Recognition of Gain or Loss.” If such a challenge were sustained, the gain from the sale of units might be increased without the
benefit of additional deductions.
A Section 754 election is advantageous if the transferee’s tax basis in his units is higher than the units’ share of the aggregate tax basis of
Vanguard’s assets immediately prior to the transfer. Conversely, a Section 754 election is disadvantageous if the transferee’s tax basis in
his units is lower than those units’ share of the aggregate tax basis of Vanguard’s assets immediately prior to the transfer. Thus, the fair
market value of the units may be affected either favorably or unfavorably by the election. A basis adjustment is required regardless of
whether a Section 754 election is made in the case of a transfer of an interest in Vanguard if it has a substantial built-in loss immediately
after the transfer, or if it distributes property and has a substantial basis reduction. Generally, a built-in loss or a basis reduction is
substantial if it exceeds $250,000.
The calculations involved in the Section 754 election are complex and will be made on the basis of assumptions as to the value of
Vanguard’s assets and other matters. For example, the allocation of the Section 743(b) adjustment among Vanguard’s assets must be
made in accordance with the Code. The IRS could seek to reallocate some or all of any Section 743(b) adjustment allocated by Vanguard
to its tangible assets to goodwill instead. Goodwill, as an intangible asset, is generally nonamortizable or may be amortizable over a
longer period of time or under a less accelerated method than Vanguard’s tangible assets. Vanguard cannot assure you that the
determinations it makes will not be successfully challenged by the IRS and that the deductions resulting from them will not be reduced or
disallowed altogether. Should the IRS require a different basis adjustment to be made, and should, in Vanguard’s opinion, the expense of
compliance exceed the benefit of the election, Vanguard may seek permission from the IRS to revoke its Section 754 election. If
permission is granted, a subsequent purchaser of units may be allocated more income than he would have been allocated had the
election not been revoked.
Tax Treatment of Operations
Accounting Method and Taxable Year
Vanguard uses the year ending December 31 as its taxable year and the accrual method of accounting for federal income tax purposes.
Each unitholder will be required to include in income his share of Vanguard’s income, gain, loss and deduction for its taxable year ending
within or with his taxable year. In addition, a unitholder who has a taxable year ending on a date other than December 31 and who
disposes of all of his common units following the close of Vanguard’s taxable year but before the close of his taxable year must include
his share of Vanguard’s income, gain, loss and deduction in income for his taxable year, with the result that he will be required to include
in income for his taxable year his share of more than twelve months of Vanguard’s income, gain, loss and deduction.
Please read “— Disposition of Common Units — Allocations Between Transferors and Transferees.”
206
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Oil and Natural Gas Taxation
Depletion Deductions.  Subject to the limitations on deductibility of losses discussed above (please read “— Tax Consequences of Unit
Ownership — Limitations on Deductibility of Losses”), unitholders will be entitled to deductions for the greater of either cost depletion or (if
otherwise allowable) percentage depletion with respect to Vanguard’s oil and natural gas interests. Although the Code requires each
unitholder to compute his own depletion allowance and maintain records of his share of the adjusted tax basis of the underlying property
for depletion and other purposes, Vanguard intends to furnish each of its unitholders with information relating to this computation for
federal income tax purposes. Each unitholder, however, remains responsible for calculating his own depletion allowance and maintaining
records of his share of the adjusted tax basis of the underlying property for depletion and other purposes.
Percentage depletion is generally available with respect to unitholders who qualify under the independent producer exemption contained
in Section 613A(c) of the Code. For this purpose, an independent producer is a person not directly or indirectly involved in the retail sale
of oil, natural gas, or derivative contracts or the operation of a major refinery. Percentage depletion is calculated as an amount generally
equal to 15% (and, in the case of marginal production, potentially a higher percentage) of the unitholder’s gross income from the
depletable property for the taxable year. The percentage depletion deduction with respect to any property is limited to 100% of the taxable
income of the unitholder from the property for each taxable year, computed without the depletion allowance. A unitholder that qualifies as
an independent producer may deduct percentage depletion only to the extent the unitholder’s average net daily production of domestic
crude oil, or the natural gas equivalent, does not exceed 1,000 barrels. This depletable amount may be allocated between oil and natural
gas production, with 6,000 cubic feet of domestic natural gas production regarded as equivalent to one barrel of crude oil. The 1,000-
barrel limitation must be allocated among the independent producer and controlled or related persons and family members in proportion to
the respective production by such persons during the period in question.
In addition to the foregoing limitations, the percentage depletion deduction otherwise available is limited to 65% of a unitholder’s total
taxable income from all sources for the year, computed without the depletion allowance, net operating loss carrybacks, or capital loss
carrybacks. Any percentage depletion deduction disallowed because of the 65% limitation may be deducted in the following taxable year
if the percentage depletion deduction for such year plus the deduction carryover does not exceed 65% of the unitholder’s total taxable
income for that year. The carryover period resulting from the 65% net income limitation is unlimited.
Unitholders that do not qualify under the independent producer exemption are generally restricted to depletion deductions based on cost
depletion. Cost depletion deductions are calculated by (1) dividing the unitholder’s share of the adjusted tax basis in the underlying
mineral property by the number of mineral units (barrels of oil and thousand cubic feet, or Mcf, of natural gas) remaining as of the
beginning of the taxable year and (2) multiplying the result by the number of mineral units sold within the taxable year. The total amount of
deductions based on cost depletion cannot exceed the unitholder’s share of the total adjusted tax basis in the property.
All or a portion of any gain recognized by a unitholder as a result of either the disposition by Vanguard of some or all of Vanguard’s oil and
natural gas interests or the disposition by the unitholder of some or all of his units may be taxed as ordinary income to the extent of
recapture of depletion deductions, except for percentage depletion deductions in excess of the tax basis of the property. The amount of the
recapture is generally limited to the amount of gain recognized on the disposition.
The foregoing discussion of depletion deductions does not purport to be a complete analysis of the complex legislation and Treasury
Regulations relating to the availability and calculation of depletion deductions by the unitholders. Further, because depletion is required to
be computed separately by each unitholder and not by Vanguard, no assurance can be given, and counsel is unable to express any
opinion, with respect to the availability or extent of percentage depletion deductions to the unitholders for any taxable year. Moreover, the
availability of percentage depletion may be reduced or eliminated if recently proposed (or similar) tax legislation is enacted. For a
discussion of such legislative proposals, please read “— Recent Legislative Developments.” Vanguard encourages each prospective
unitholder to consult his tax advisor to determine whether percentage depletion would be available to him.
207
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Deductions for Intangible Drilling and Development Costs.  Vanguard elects to currently deduct intangible drilling and development costs
(“IDCs”). IDCs generally include its expenses for wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, supplies and other items that are incidental to, and
necessary for, the drilling and preparation of wells for the production of oil, natural gas, or geothermal energy. The option to currently
deduct IDCs applies only to those items that do not have a salvage value.
Although Vanguard will elect to currently deduct IDCs, each unitholder will have the option of either currently deducting IDCs or
capitalizing all or part of the IDCs and amortizing them on a straight-line basis over a 60-month period, beginning with the taxable month
in which the expenditure is made. If a unitholder makes the election to amortize the IDCs over a 60-month period, no IDC preference
amount in respect of those IDCs will result for alternative minimum tax purposes.
Integrated oil companies must capitalize 30% of all their IDCs (other than IDCs paid or incurred with respect to oil and natural gas wells
located outside of the United States) and amortize these IDCs over 60 months beginning in the month in which those costs are paid or
incurred. If the taxpayer ceases to be an integrated oil company, it must continue to amortize those costs as long as it continues to own the
property to which the IDCs relate. An “integrated oil company” is a taxpayer that has economic interests in oil or natural gas properties and
also carries on substantial retailing or refining operations. An oil or natural gas producer is deemed to be a substantial retailer or refiner if
it is subject to the rules disqualifying retailers and refiners from taking percentage depletion. To qualify as an “independent producer” that
is not subject to these IDC deduction limits, a unitholder, either directly or indirectly through certain related parties, may not be involved in
the refining of more than 75,000 barrels of oil (or the equivalent amount of natural gas) on average for any day during the taxable year or in
the retail marketing of oil and natural gas products exceeding $5 million per year in the aggregate.
IDCs previously deducted that are allocable to property (directly or through ownership of an interest in a partnership) and that would have
been included in the adjusted tax basis of the property had the IDC deduction not been taken are recaptured to the extent of any gain
realized upon the disposition of the property or upon the disposition by a unitholder of interests in Vanguard. Recapture is generally
determined at the unitholder level. Where only a portion of the recapture property is sold, any IDCs related to the entire property are
recaptured to the extent of the gain realized on the portion of the property sold. In the case of a disposition of an undivided interest in a
property, a proportionate amount of the IDCs with respect to the property is treated as allocable to the transferred undivided interest to the
extent of any gain recognized. Please read “— Disposition of Units — Recognition of Gain or Loss.”
The election to currently deduct IDCs may be restricted or eliminated if recently proposed (or similar) tax legislation is enacted. For a
discussion of such legislative proposals, please read “— Recent Legislative Developments.”
Deduction for U.S. Production Activities.  Subject to the limitations on the deductibility of losses discussed above and the limitations
discussed below, unitholders will be entitled to a deduction, herein referred to as the Section 199 deduction, equal to 9% of the lesser of
(1) Vanguard’s qualified production activities income that is allocated to such unitholder or (2) the unitholder’s taxable income, but not to
exceed 50% of such unitholder’s IRS Form W-2 wages for the taxable year allocable to domestic production gross receipts.
Qualified production activities income is generally equal to gross receipts from domestic production activities reduced by cost of goods
sold allocable to those receipts, other expenses directly associated with those receipts, and a share of other deductions, expenses and
losses that are not directly allocable to those receipts or another class of income. The products produced must be manufactured,
produced, grown or extracted in whole or in significant part by the taxpayer in the United States.
For a partnership, the Section 199 deduction is determined at the partner level. To determine his Section 199 deduction, each unitholder
will aggregate his share of the qualified production activities income allocated to him from Vanguard with the unitholder’s qualified
production activities income from other sources. Each unitholder must take into account his distributive share of the expenses allocated to
him from Vanguard’s qualified production activities regardless of whether Vanguard otherwise has taxable income.
208
TABLE OF CONTENTS
However, Vanguard’s expenses that otherwise would be taken into account for purposes of computing the Section 199 deduction are
taken into account only if and to the extent the unitholder’s share of losses and deductions from all of Vanguard’s activities is not
disallowed by the tax basis rules, the at-risk rules or the passive activity loss rules. Please read “— Tax Consequences of Unit
Ownership — Limitations on Deductibility of Losses.”
The amount of a unitholder’s Section 199 deduction for each year is limited to 50% of the IRS Form W-2 wages actually or deemed paid
by the unitholder during the calendar year that are deducted in arriving at qualified production activities income. Each unitholder is treated
as having been allocated IRS Form W-2 wages from Vanguard equal to the unitholder’s allocable share of Vanguard’s wages that are
deducted in arriving at qualified production activities income for that taxable year. It is not anticipated that Vanguard or its subsidiaries will
pay material wages that will be allocated to its unitholders, and thus a unitholder’s ability to claim the Section 199 deduction may be
limited.
A unitholder’s otherwise allowable Section 199 deduction for each taxable year is reduced by 3% of the least of (1) the oil related qualified
production activities income of the taxpayer for the taxable year, (2) the qualified production activities income of the taxpayer for the
taxable year, or (3) the taxpayer’s taxable income for the taxable year (determined without regard to any Section 199 deduction). For this
purpose, the term “oil related qualified production activities income” means the qualified production activities income attributable to the
production, refining, processing, transportation, or distribution of oil, gas, or any primary production thereof. Vanguard expects that most or
all of its qualified production activities income will consist of oil related qualified production activities income.
This discussion of the Section 199 deduction does not purport to be a complete analysis of the complex legislation and Treasury authority
relating to the calculation of domestic production gross receipts, qualified production activities income, or IRS Form W-2 wages, or how
such items are allocated by Vanguard to unitholders. Further, because the Section 199 deduction is required to be computed separately
by each unitholder, no assurance can be given, and counsel is unable to express any opinion, as to the availability or extent of the
Section 199 deduction to the unitholders. Moreover, the availability of Section 199 deductions may be reduced or eliminated if recently
proposed (or similar) tax legislation is enacted. For a discussion of such legislative proposals, please read “— Recent Legislative
Developments.” Each prospective unitholder is encouraged to consult his tax advisor to determine whether the Section 199 deduction
would be available to him.
Lease Acquisition Costs.  The cost of acquiring oil and natural gas lease or similar property interests is a capital expenditure that must be
recovered through depletion deductions if the lease is productive. If a lease is proved worthless and abandoned, the cost of acquisition
less any depletion claimed may be deducted as an ordinary loss in the year the lease becomes worthless. Please read “— Tax Treatment
of Operations — Oil and Natural Gas Taxation — Depletion Deductions.”
Geophysical Costs.  The cost of geophysical exploration incurred in connection with the exploration and development of oil and natural
gas properties in the United States are deducted ratably over a 24-month period beginning on the date that such expense is paid or
incurred. This 24-month period is extended to 7 years in the case of major integrated oil companies.
Operating and Administrative Costs.  Amounts paid for operating a producing well are deductible as ordinary business expenses, as are
administrative costs to the extent they constitute ordinary and necessary business expenses that are reasonable in amount.
Recent Legislative Developments.  The present federal income tax treatment of publicly traded partnerships, including Vanguard, or an
investment in its common units, may be modified by administrative, legislative or judicial interpretation at any time. For example, the
Obama Administration’s budget proposal fiscal year 2016 recommends that publicly traded partnerships earning income from activities
related to fossil fuels be taxed as corporations beginning in 2021. From time to time, members of the U.S. Congress propose and consider
substantive changes to the existing federal income tax laws that affect publicly traded partnerships. One such legislative proposal would
have eliminated the qualifying income exception upon which Vanguard relies for its treatment as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax
purposes. Please read
209
TABLE OF CONTENTS
“Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of Vanguard Common Unit Ownership — Partnership Status.” Any modification to the
federal income tax laws and interpretations thereof may or may not be applied retroactively. Although Vanguard is unable to predict
whether any of these changes, or other proposals, will ultimately be enacted, any such changes could negatively impact the value of an
investment in its units.
In addition to the proposal regarding publicly traded partnerships described above, the Obama Administration’s budget proposal for fiscal
year 2016 includes proposals that would, among other things, eliminate or reduce certain key U.S. federal income tax incentives currently
available to oil and natural gas exploration and production companies. These changes include, but are not limited to, (1) the repeal of the
percentage depletion allowance for oil and natural gas properties, (2) the elimination of current deductions for intangible drilling and
development costs and certain environmental clean-up costs, (3) the elimination of the deduction for certain domestic production activities,
and (4) an extension of the amortization period for certain geological and geophysical expenditures. It is unclear whether these or similar
changes will be enacted and, if enacted, how soon any such changes could become effective. The passage of any legislation as a result
of these proposals or any other similar changes in U.S. federal income tax laws could eliminate or postpone certain tax deductions that
are currently available with respect to oil and natural gas exploration and development, and any such change could increase the taxable
income allocable to Vanguard’s unitholders and negatively impact the value of an investment in its units.
Tax Basis, Depreciation and Amortization
The tax bases of Vanguard’s assets will be used for purposes of computing depreciation and cost recovery deductions and, ultimately,
gain or loss on the disposition of these assets. The federal income tax burden associated with the difference between the fair market value
of Vanguard’s assets and their tax bases immediately prior to an offering will be borne by unitholders holding interests in Vanguard prior
to any such offering. Please read “— Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership — Allocation of Income, Gain, Loss and Deduction.”
To the extent allowable, Vanguard may elect to use the depreciation and cost recovery methods, including bonus depreciation to the
extent available, that will result in the largest deductions being taken in the early years after assets subject to these allowances are placed
in service. Please read “— Uniformity of Units.” Property it subsequently acquires or constructs may be depreciated using accelerated
methods permitted by the Code.
If Vanguard disposes of depreciable property by sale, foreclosure or otherwise, all or a portion of any gain, determined by reference to the
amount of depreciation previously deducted and the nature of the property, may be subject to the recapture rules and taxed as ordinary
income rather than capital gain. Similarly, a unitholder who has taken cost recovery or depreciation deductions with respect to property
Vanguard owns will likely be required to recapture some or all of those deductions as ordinary income upon a sale of his interest in
Vanguard. Please read “— Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership — Allocation of Income, Gain, Loss and Deduction” and “— Disposition
of Common Units — Recognition of Gain or Loss.”
The costs Vanguard incurs in selling its units (called “syndication expenses”) must be capitalized and cannot be deducted currently,
ratably or upon its termination. There are uncertainties regarding the classification of costs as organization expenses, which may be
amortized by Vanguard, and as syndication expenses, which may not be amortized by Vanguard. The underwriting discounts and
commissions Vanguard incurs will be treated as syndication expenses.
Valuation and Tax Basis of Vanguard’s Properties
The federal income tax consequences of the ownership and disposition of units will depend in part on Vanguard’s estimates of the relative
fair market values, and the initial tax bases, of Vanguard’s assets. Although Vanguard may from time to time consult with professional
appraisers regarding valuation matters, Vanguard will make many of the relative fair market value estimates itself. These estimates and
determinations of basis are subject to challenge and will not be binding on the IRS or the courts. If the estimates of fair market value or
basis are later found to be incorrect, the character and amount of items of
210
income, gain, loss or deductions previously reported by unitholders might change, and unitholders might be required to adjust their tax
liability for prior years and incur interest and penalties with respect to those adjustments.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Disposition of Common Units
Recognition of Gain or Loss
Gain or loss will be recognized on a sale of units equal to the difference between the amount realized and the unitholder’s tax basis for the
units sold. A unitholder’s amount realized will be measured by the sum of the cash or the fair market value of other property received by
him plus his share of Vanguard’s nonrecourse liabilities. Because the amount realized includes a unitholder’s share of Vanguard’s
nonrecourse liabilities, the gain recognized on the sale of units could result in a tax liability in excess of any cash received from the sale.
Prior distributions from Vanguard that in the aggregate were in excess of cumulative net taxable income for a common unit and, therefore,
decreased a unitholder’s tax basis in that common unit will, in effect, become taxable income if the common unit is sold at a price greater
than the unitholder’s tax basis in that common unit, even if the price received is less than his original cost.
Except as noted below, gain or loss recognized by a unitholder, other than a “dealer” in units, on the sale or exchange of a unit will
generally be taxable as capital gain or loss. Capital gain recognized by an individual on the sale of units held for more than twelve months
will generally be taxed at the U.S. federal income tax rate applicable to long-term capital gains. However, a portion of this gain or loss,
which will likely be substantial, will be separately computed and taxed as ordinary income or loss under Section 751 of the Code to the
extent attributable to assets giving rise to depreciation recapture, depletion recapture or other “unrealized receivables” or to “inventory
items” Vanguard owns. The term “unrealized receivables” includes potential recapture items, including depreciation and depletion
recapture. Ordinary income attributable to unrealized receivables and inventory items and depreciation and depletion recapture may
exceed net taxable gain realized upon the sale of a unit and may be recognized even if there is a net taxable loss realized on the sale of a
unit. Thus, a unitholder may recognize both ordinary income and a capital loss upon a sale of units. Capital losses may offset capital
gains and no more than $3,000 of ordinary income, in the case of individuals, and may only be used to offset capital gains in the case of
corporations. Both ordinary income and capital gain recognized on a sale of units may be subject to the NIIT in certain circumstances.
Please read “— Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership — Tax Rates.”
The IRS has ruled that a partner who acquires interests in a partnership in separate transactions must combine those interests
(presumably including all of his common units, Series A preferred units, Series B preferred units and Series C preferred units) and
maintain a single adjusted tax basis for all those interests. Upon a sale or other disposition of less than all of those interests, a portion of
that tax basis must be allocated to the interests sold using an “equitable apportionment” method, which generally means that the tax basis
allocated to the interest sold equals an amount that bears the same relation to the partner’s tax basis in his entire interest in the
partnership as the value of the interest sold bears to the value of the partner’s entire interest in the partnership. Treasury Regulations
under Section 1223 of the Code allow a selling unitholder who can identify common units transferred with an ascertainable holding period
to elect to use the actual holding period of the common units transferred. Thus, according to the ruling discussed above, a common
unitholder will be unable to select high or low basis common units to sell as would be the case with corporate stock, but, according to the
Treasury Regulations, may designate specific common units sold for purposes of determining the holding period of units transferred. A
unitholder electing to use the actual holding period of common units transferred must consistently use that identification method for all
subsequent sales or exchanges of common units. A unitholder considering the purchase of additional units or a sale of common units
purchased in separate transactions is urged to consult his tax advisor as to the possible consequences of this ruling and application of the
Treasury Regulations.
211
Specific provisions of the Code affect the taxation of some financial products and securities, including partnership interests, by treating a
taxpayer as having sold an “appreciated” partnership interest, one in which gain would be recognized if it were sold, assigned or
terminated at its fair market value, if the taxpayer or related persons enter(s) into:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
a short sale;
•
• an offsetting notional principal contract; or
•
a futures or forward contract;
in each case, with respect to the partnership interest or substantially identical property.
Moreover, if a taxpayer has previously entered into a short sale, an offsetting notional principal contract or a futures or forward contract
with respect to the partnership interest, the taxpayer will be treated as having sold that position if the taxpayer or a related person then
acquires the partnership interest or substantially identical property. The Secretary of the Treasury is also authorized to issue regulations
that treat a taxpayer that enters into transactions or positions that have substantially the same effect as the preceding transactions as
having constructively sold the financial position.
Allocations Between Transferors and Transferees
In general, Vanguard’s taxable income and losses will be determined annually, will be prorated on a monthly basis and will be
subsequently apportioned among the unitholders in proportion to the number of units owned by each of them as of the opening of the
applicable exchange on the first business day of the month. However, gain or loss realized on a sale or other disposition of Vanguard’s
assets other than in the ordinary course of business will be allocated among the unitholders in the month in which that gain or loss is
recognized. As a result, a unitholder transferring units may be allocated income, gain, loss and deduction realized after the date of
transfer.
Although simplifying conventions are contemplated by the Code and most publicly traded partnerships use similar simplifying
conventions, the use of this method may not be permitted under existing Treasury Regulations as there is no direct or indirect controlling
authority on this issue. The Department of the Treasury and the IRS have issued proposed Treasury Regulations that provide a safe
harbor pursuant to which a publicly traded partnership may use a similar monthly simplifying convention to allocate tax items among
transferor and transferee unitholders, although such tax items must be prorated on a daily basis. Existing publicly traded partnerships are
entitled to rely on these proposed Treasury Regulations; however, they are not binding on the IRS and are subject to change until final
Treasury Regulations are issued. Accordingly, Paul Hastings is unable to opine on the validity of this method of allocating income and
deductions between transferor and transferee unitholders because the issue has not been finally resolved by the IRS or the courts. If this
method is not allowed under the Treasury Regulations, or only applies to transfers of less than all of the unitholder’s interest, Vanguard’s
taxable income or losses might be reallocated among the unitholders. Vanguard is authorized to revise its method of allocation between
transferor and transferee unitholders, as well as unitholders whose interests vary during a taxable year, to conform to a method permitted
under future Treasury Regulations. A unitholder who owns units at any time during a quarter and who disposes of them prior to the record
date set for a cash distribution for that quarter will be allocated items of Vanguard’s income, gain, loss and deductions attributable to that
quarter through the month of disposition but will not be entitled to receive that cash distribution.
Notification Requirements
A unitholder who sells any of his units is generally required to notify Vanguard in writing of that sale within 30 days after the sale (or, if
earlier, January 15 of the year following the sale). A purchaser of units who purchases units from another unitholder is also generally
required to notify Vanguard in writing of that purchase within 30 days after the purchase. Upon receiving such notifications, Vanguard is
required to notify the IRS of that transaction and to furnish specified information to the transferor and transferee. Failure to notify Vanguard
of a purchase may, in some cases, lead to the imposition of penalties. However, these reporting requirements do not apply to a sale by an
individual who is a citizen of the United States and who effects the sale or exchange through a broker who will satisfy such requirements.
212
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Constructive Termination
Vanguard will be considered to have technically terminated its partnership for federal income tax purposes if there is a sale or exchange
of 50% or more of the total interests in its capital and profits within a twelve-month period. For purposes of determining whether the 50%
threshold has been met, multiple sales of the same interest will be counted only once. Vanguard’s technical termination would, among
other things, result in the closing of its taxable year for all unitholders, which would result in Vanguard filing two tax returns (and its
unitholders could receive two Schedule K-1s if relief was not available, as described below) for one fiscal year and could result in a
deferral of depreciation deductions allowable in computing its taxable income. In the case of a unitholder reporting on a taxable year other
than a fiscal year ending December 31, the closing of Vanguard’s taxable year may also result in more than twelve months of Vanguard’s
taxable income or loss being includable in his taxable income for the year of termination. Vanguard’s termination currently would not affect
its classification as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, but instead Vanguard would be treated as a new partnership for federal
income tax purposes. If treated as a new partnership, Vanguard must make new tax elections, including a new election under Section 754
of the Code, and could be subject to penalties if it is unable to determine that a termination occurred. The IRS has announced a publicly
traded partnership technical termination relief program whereby, if a publicly traded partnership that technically terminated requests
publicly traded partnership technical termination relief and such relief is granted by the IRS, among other things, the partnership will only
have to provide one Schedule K-1 to unitholders for the year notwithstanding two partnership tax years.
Uniformity of Units
Because Vanguard cannot match transferors and transferees of units, it must maintain uniformity of the economic and tax characteristics of
the units to a purchaser of these units. In the absence of uniformity, Vanguard may be unable to completely comply with a number of
federal income tax requirements, both statutory and regulatory. A lack of uniformity can result from a literal application of Treasury
Regulation Section 1.167(c)-1(a)(6). Any non-uniformity could have a negative impact on the value of the units. Please read “— Tax
Consequences of Unit Ownership — Section 754 Election.” Vanguard takes into account the portion of a Section 743(b) adjustment
attributable to unrealized appreciation in the value of Contributed Property, to the extent of any unamortized Book-Tax Disparity, using a
rate of depreciation or amortization derived from the depreciation or amortization method and useful life applied to the property’s
unamortized Book-Tax Disparity, or treat that portion as nonamortizable, to the extent attributable to property the common basis of which is
not amortizable, consistent with the regulations under Section 743 of the Code, even though that position may be inconsistent with
Treasury Regulation Section 1.167(c)-1(a)(6), which is not expected to directly apply to a material portion of Vanguard’s assets. Please
read “— Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership — Section 754 Election.” To the extent that the Section 743(b) adjustment is attributable to
appreciation in value in excess of the unamortized Book-Tax Disparity, Vanguard will apply the rules described in the Treasury
Regulations and legislative history. If Vanguard determines that this position cannot reasonably be taken, it may adopt a depreciation and
amortization position under which all purchasers acquiring units in the same month would receive depreciation and amortization
deductions, whether attributable to common basis or a Section 743(b) adjustment, based upon the same applicable rate as if they had
purchased a direct interest in Vanguard’s assets. If this position is adopted, it may result in lower annual depreciation and amortization
deductions than would otherwise be allowable to some unitholders and risk the loss of depreciation and amortization deductions not
taken in the year that these deductions are otherwise allowable. This position will not be adopted if Vanguard determines that the loss of
depreciation and amortization deductions will have a material adverse effect on the unitholders. If Vanguard chooses not to utilize this
aggregate method, it may use any other reasonable depreciation and amortization method to preserve the uniformity of the intrinsic tax
characteristics of any units that would not have a material adverse effect on the unitholders. In either case, and as stated above under
“— Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership — Section 754 Election,” Paul Hastings has not rendered an opinion with respect to these
methods. Moreover, the IRS may challenge any method of depreciating the Section 743(b) adjustment described in this paragraph. If this
challenge were sustained, the uniformity of units might be affected, and the gain from the sale of units might be increased without the
benefit of additional deductions. Please read “— Disposition of Common Units — Recognition of Gain or Loss.”
213
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Tax-Exempt Organizations and Other Investors
Ownership of units by employee benefit plans, other tax-exempt organizations, non-resident aliens, foreign corporations and other foreign
persons raises issues unique to those investors and, as described below to a limited extent, may have substantially adverse tax
consequences to them. If you are a tax-exempt entity or a non-U.S. person, you should consult your tax advisor before investing in
Vanguard’s common units. Employee benefit plans and most other organizations exempt from federal income tax, including IRAs and
other retirement plans, are subject to federal income tax on unrelated business taxable income. Virtually all of Vanguard’s income
allocated to a unitholder that is a tax-exempt organization will be unrelated business taxable income and will be taxable to it.
Non-resident aliens and foreign corporations, trusts or estates that own units will be considered to be engaged in business in the United
States because of the ownership of units. As a consequence, they will be required to file federal tax returns to report their share of
Vanguard’s income, gain, loss or deduction and pay federal income tax at regular rates on their share of Vanguard’s net income or gain.
Moreover, under rules applicable to publicly traded partnerships, Vanguard’s quarterly distribution to foreign unitholders will be subject to
withholding at the highest applicable effective tax rate. Each foreign unitholder must obtain a taxpayer identification number from the IRS
and submit that number to Vanguard’s transfer agent on a Form W-8BEN, W-8BEN-E or applicable substitute form in order to obtain credit
for these withholding taxes. A change in applicable law may require Vanguard to change these procedures.
In addition, because a foreign corporation that owns units will be treated as engaged in a U.S. trade or business, that corporation may be
subject to the U.S. branch profits tax at a rate of 30%, in addition to regular federal income tax, on its share of Vanguard’s earnings and
profits, as adjusted for changes in the foreign corporation’s “U.S. net equity,” that is effectively connected with the conduct of a U.S. trade
or business. That tax may be reduced or eliminated by an income tax treaty between the United States and the country in which the
foreign corporate unitholder is a “qualified resident.” In addition, this type of unitholder is subject to special information reporting
requirements under Section 6038C of the Code.
A foreign unitholder who sells or otherwise disposes of a common unit will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on gain realized from the
sale or disposition of that unit to the extent the gain is effectively connected with a U.S. trade or business of the foreign unitholder. Under a
ruling published by the IRS, interpreting the scope of “effectively connected income,” a foreign unitholder would be considered to be
engaged in a trade or business in the United States by virtue of the U.S. activities of the partnership, and part or all of that unitholder’s gain
would be effectively connected with that unitholder’s indirect U.S. trade or business. Moreover, under the Foreign Investment in Real
Property Tax Act, a foreign common unitholder generally will be subject to U.S. federal income tax upon the sale or disposition of a
common unit if (i) he owned (directly or constructively applying certain attribution rules) more than 5% of Vanguard’s common units at any
time during the five-year period ending on the date of such disposition and (ii) 50% or more of the fair market value of all of Vanguard’s
assets consisted of U.S. real property interests at any time during the shorter of the period during which such unitholder held the common
units or the five-year period ending on the date of disposition. Currently, more than 50% of Vanguard’s assets consist of U.S. real property
interests and it does not expect that to change in the foreseeable future. Therefore, foreign unitholders may be subject to federal income
tax on gain from the sale or disposition of their units. Recent changes in law may affect certain foreign unitholders. Please read
“— Administrative Matters — Additional Withholding Requirements.”
Administrative Matters
Information Returns and Audit Procedures
Vanguard intends to furnish to each unitholder, within 90 days after the close of each calendar year, specific tax information, including a
Schedule K-1, which describes such unitholder’s share of its income, gain, loss and deduction for Vanguard’s preceding taxable year. In
preparing this information, which will not be reviewed by counsel, Vanguard will take various accounting and reporting positions, some of
which have been mentioned earlier, to determine each unitholder’s share of income, gain, loss and deduction. Vanguard cannot assure
you that those positions will yield a result that conforms to the requirements of the Code, Treasury Regulations or administrative
interpretations of the IRS. Neither Vanguard nor Paul Hastings can
214
TABLE OF CONTENTS
assure prospective unitholders that the IRS will not successfully contend in court that those positions are impermissible. Any challenge by
the IRS could negatively affect the value of the units.
The IRS may audit Vanguard’s federal income tax information returns. Adjustments resulting from an IRS audit may require each
unitholder to adjust a prior year’s tax liability and possibly may result in an audit of his return. Any audit of a unitholder’s return could result
in adjustments not related to Vanguard’s returns as well as those related to Vanguard’s returns.
Partnerships generally are treated as separate entities for purposes of federal tax audits, judicial review of administrative adjustments by
the IRS and tax settlement proceedings. The tax treatment of partnership items of income, gain, loss and deduction are determined in a
partnership proceeding rather than in separate proceedings with the partners. The Code requires that one partner be designated as the
“tax matters partner” for these purposes. Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement states that an officer of Vanguard who is also a
member of Vanguard will be designated by the Vanguard board of directors as its tax matters partner.
The tax matters partner has made and will make some elections on Vanguard’s behalf and on behalf of unitholders. In addition, the tax
matters partner can extend the statute of limitations for assessment of tax deficiencies against unitholders for items in Vanguard’s returns.
The tax matters partner may bind a unitholder with less than a 1% profits interest in Vanguard to a settlement with the IRS unless that
unitholder elects, by filing a statement with the IRS, not to give that authority to the tax matters partner. The tax matters partner may seek
judicial review, by which all the unitholders are bound, of a final partnership administrative adjustment and, if the tax matters partner fails
to seek judicial review, judicial review may be sought by any unitholder having at least a 1% interest in profits or by any group of
unitholders having in the aggregate at least a 5% interest in profits. However, only one action for judicial review will go forward, and each
unitholder with an interest in the outcome may participate.
A unitholder must file a statement with the IRS identifying the treatment of any item on his federal income tax return that is not consistent
with the treatment of the item on Vanguard’s return. Intentional or negligent disregard of this consistency requirement may subject a
unitholder to substantial penalties.
Additional Withholding Requirements
Withholding taxes may apply to certain types of payments made to “foreign financial institutions” (as specially defined in the Code) and
certain other non-U.S. entities. Specifically, a 30% withholding tax may be imposed on interest, dividends and other fixed or determinable
annual or periodical gains, profits and income from sources within the United States (“FDAP Income”), or gross proceeds from the sale or
other disposition of any property of a type that can produce interest or dividends from sources within the United States (“Gross Proceeds”)
paid to a foreign financial institution or to a “non-financial foreign entity” (as specially defined in the Code), unless (i) the foreign financial
institution undertakes certain diligence and reporting, (ii) the non-financial foreign entity either certifies it does not have any substantial
U.S. owners or furnishes identifying information regarding each substantial U.S. owner or (iii) the foreign financial institution or non-
financial foreign entity otherwise qualifies for an exemption from these rules. If the payee is a foreign financial institution and is subject to
the diligence and reporting requirements in clause (i) above, it must enter into an agreement with the U.S. Treasury requiring, among other
things, that it undertake to identify accounts held by certain U.S. persons or U.S.-owned foreign entities, annually report certain information
about such accounts, and withhold 30% on payments to noncompliant foreign financial institutions and certain other account holders.
Foreign financial institutions located in jurisdictions that have an intergovernmental agreement with the United States governing these
requirements may be subject to different rules.
These rules generally will apply to payments of FDAP Income made on or after July 1, 2014 and to payments of relevant Gross Proceeds
made on or after January 1, 2017. Thus, to the extent Vanguard has FDAP Income or Gross Proceeds after these dates that are not
treated as effectively connected with a U.S. trade or business (please read “— Tax-Exempt Organizations and Other Investors”),
unitholders who are foreign financial institutions or certain other non-US entities may be subject to withholding on distributions they
receive from Vanguard, or their distributive share of Vanguard’s income, pursuant to the rules described above.
215
Prospective investors should consult their own tax advisors regarding the potential application of these withholding provisions to their
TABLE OF CONTENTS
investment in Vanguard’s units.
Nominee Reporting
Persons who hold an interest in Vanguard as a nominee for another person are required to furnish to Vanguard:
• the name, address and taxpayer identification number of the beneficial owner and the nominee;
• whether the beneficial owner is:
• a person that is not a U.S. person;
•a foreign government, an international organization or any wholly owned agency or instrumentality of either of the foregoing; or
•
• the amount and description of units held, acquired or transferred for the beneficial owner; and
specific information including the dates of acquisitions and transfers, means of acquisitions and transfers, and acquisition cost for
purchases, as well as the amount of net proceeds from dispositions.
a tax-exempt entity;
•
Brokers and financial institutions are required to furnish additional information, including whether they are U.S. persons and specific
information on units they acquire, hold or transfer for their own account. A penalty of $100 per failure, up to a maximum of $1,500,000 per
calendar year, is imposed by the Code for failure to report that information to Vanguard. The nominee is required to supply the beneficial
owner of the units with the information furnished to Vanguard.
Accuracy-Related Penalties
An additional tax equal to 20% of the amount of any portion of an underpayment of tax that is attributable to one or more specified causes,
including negligence or disregard of rules or regulations, substantial understatements of income tax and substantial valuation
misstatements, is imposed by the Code. No penalty will be imposed, however, for any portion of an underpayment if it is shown that there
was a reasonable cause for that portion and that the taxpayer acted in good faith regarding that portion.
For individuals, a substantial understatement of income tax in any taxable year exists if the amount of the understatement exceeds the
greater of 10% of the tax required to be shown on the return for the taxable year or $5,000 ($10,000 for most corporations). The amount of
any understatement subject to penalty generally is reduced if any portion is attributable to a position adopted on the return:
• for which there is, or was, “substantial authority”; or
•as to which there is a reasonable basis and the pertinent facts of that position are disclosed on the return.
If any item of income, gain, loss or deduction included in the distributive shares of unitholders might result in that kind of an
“understatement” of income for which no “substantial authority” exists, Vanguard must disclose the pertinent facts on its return. In addition,
Vanguard will make a reasonable effort to furnish sufficient information for unitholders to make adequate disclosure on their returns and to
take other actions as may be appropriate to permit unitholders to avoid liability for this penalty. More stringent rules apply to “tax shelters,”
which Vanguard does not believe includes it, or any of its investments, plans or arrangements.
A substantial valuation misstatement exists if (a) the value of any property, or the adjusted basis of any property, claimed on a tax return is
150% or more of the amount determined to be the correct amount of the valuation or adjusted basis, (b) the price for any property or
services (or for the use of property) claimed on any such return with respect to any transaction between persons described in Code
Section 482 is 200% or more (or 50% or less) of the amount determined under Section 482 to be the correct amount of such price, or (c)
the net Internal Revenue Code Section 482 transfer price adjustment for the taxable year exceeds the lesser of $5 million or 10% of the
taxpayer’s gross receipts. No penalty is imposed unless the portion of the
216
TABLE OF CONTENTS
underpayment attributable to a substantial valuation misstatement exceeds $5,000 ($10,000 for most corporations). If the valuation
claimed on a return is 200% or more than the correct valuation or certain other thresholds are met, the penalty imposed increases to 40%.
Vanguard does not anticipate making any valuation misstatements.
In addition, the 20% accuracy-related penalty also applies to any portion of an underpayment of tax that is attributable to transactions
lacking economic substance. To the extent that such transactions are not disclosed, the penalty imposed is increased to 40%.
Additionally, there is no reasonable cause defense to the imposition of this penalty to such transactions.
Reportable Transactions
If Vanguard were to engage in a “reportable transaction,” it (and possibly you and others) would be required to make a detailed disclosure
of the transaction to the IRS. A transaction may be a reportable transaction based upon any of several factors, including the fact that it is a
type of tax avoidance transaction publicly identified by the IRS as a “listed transaction” or that it produces certain kinds of losses for
partnerships, individuals, S corporations, and trusts in excess of $2 million in any single year, or $4 million in any combination of six
successive tax years. Vanguard’s participation in a reportable transaction could increase the likelihood that its federal income tax
information return (and possibly your tax return) would be audited by the IRS. Please read “— Information Returns and Audit Procedures.”
Moreover, if Vanguard were to participate in a reportable transaction with a significant purpose to avoid or evade tax, or in any listed
transaction, you may be subject to the following additional consequences:
•
accuracy-related penalties with a broader scope, significantly narrower exceptions, and potentially greater amounts than described
above at “— Accuracy-Related Penalties”;
for those persons otherwise entitled to deduct interest on federal tax deficiencies, nondeductibility of interest on any resulting tax liability;
and
• in the case of a listed transaction, an extended statute of limitations.
•
Vanguard does not expect to engage in any “reportable transactions.”
State, Local, Foreign and Other Tax Considerations
In addition to federal income taxes, you likely will be subject to other taxes, such as state, local and foreign income taxes, unincorporated
business taxes, and estate, inheritance or intangible taxes that may be imposed by the various jurisdictions in which Vanguard does
business or owns property or in which you are a resident. Although an analysis of those various taxes is not presented here, each
prospective unitholder should consider their potential impact on his investment in Vanguard. Vanguard currently owns property or does
business in many states. Several of these states impose a personal income tax on individuals; certain of these states also impose an
income tax on corporations and other entities. Vanguard may also own property or do business in other jurisdictions in the future.
Although you may not be required to file a return and pay taxes in some jurisdictions because your income from that jurisdiction falls
below the filing and payment requirement, you will be required to file income tax returns and to pay income taxes in many of these
jurisdictions in which Vanguard does business or owns property and may be subject to penalties for failure to comply with those
requirements. In some jurisdictions, tax losses may not produce a tax benefit in the year incurred and may not be available to offset
income in subsequent taxable years. Some of the jurisdictions may require Vanguard, or Vanguard may elect, to withhold a percentage of
income from amounts to be distributed to a unitholder who is not a resident of the jurisdiction. Withholding, the amount of which may be
greater or less than a particular unitholder’s income tax liability to the jurisdiction, generally does not relieve a nonresident unitholder from
the obligation to file an income tax return. Amounts withheld will be treated as if distributed to unitholders for purposes of determining the
amounts distributed by Vanguard. Please read “— Tax Consequences of Unit Ownership — Entity-Level Collections.” Based on current
law and Vanguard’s estimate of its future operations, Vanguard anticipates that any amounts required to be withheld will not be material.
217
TABLE OF CONTENTS
It is the responsibility of each unitholder to investigate the legal and tax consequences, under the laws of pertinent states,
localities and foreign jurisdictions, of his investment in Vanguard. Accordingly, each prospective unitholder is urged to consult
his own tax counsel or other advisor with regard to those matters. Further, it is the responsibility of each unitholder to file all
state, local and foreign, as well as U.S. federal tax returns, that may be required of him. Paul Hastings has not rendered an
opinion on the state, local, alternative minimum tax or foreign tax consequences of an investment in Vanguard.
218
TABLE OF CONTENTS
DESCRIPTION OF VANGUARD COMMON UNITS
Vanguard common units represent limited liability company interests in Vanguard. Vanguard common units entitle the holders to
participate in cash distributions and to exercise the rights and privileges available to unitholders under the Vanguard limited liability
company agreement.
Where Common Units Are Traded
Vanguard’s outstanding common units are listed on the NASDAQ under the symbol “VNR.” The common units received by LRE
unitholders in the merger will also be listed on the NASDAQ.
Issuance of Additional Units
Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement authorizes Vanguard to issue an unlimited number of additional securities and rights to
buy securities for the consideration and on the terms and conditions determined by the Vanguard board of directors without the approval
of the Vanguard common unitholders. It is possible that Vanguard will fund acquisitions or other initiatives through the issuance of
additional common units or other equity securities. Holders of any additional common units Vanguard issues will be entitled to share
equally with the then-existing holders of common units and holders of other equity securities entitled to participate in Vanguard’s
distributions of available cash. In addition, the issuance of additional common units or other equity securities may dilute the value of the
interests of the then-existing holders of common units in Vanguard’s net assets. In accordance with Delaware law and the provisions of
Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement, Vanguard may also issue additional securities that, as determined by the board of
directors of Vanguard, may have special voting rights to which the common units are not entitled. The holders of common units do not
have preemptive rights to acquire additional common units or other securities.
Voting Rights
Vanguard’s common unitholders have the right to vote with respect to the election of directors to the board of directors of Vanguard,
certain amendments to Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement, the merger of Vanguard or the sale of all or substantially all of
Vanguard’s assets, and the dissolution of Vanguard.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
Compushare is the registrar and transfer agent for the common units. Vanguard will pay all fees charged by the transfer agent for transfers
of common units except the following that must be paid by common unitholders:
• surety bond premiums to replace lost or stolen certificates, taxes and other governmental charges;
• special charges for services requested by a common unitholder; and
•
other similar fees or charges.
There is no charge to common unitholders for disbursements of Vanguard’s cash distributions. Vanguard will indemnify the transfer agent,
its agents and each of their stockholders, directors, officers and employees against all claims and losses that may arise out of acts
performed or omitted for its activities in that capacity, except for any liability due to any gross negligence or intentional misconduct of the
indemnified person or entity.
The transfer agent may at any time resign, by notice to Vanguard, or be removed by Vanguard. The resignation or removal of the transfer
agent will become effective upon Vanguard’s appointment of a successor transfer agent and registrar and its acceptance of the
appointment. If no successor has been appointed and has accepted the appointment within 30 days after notice of the resignation or
removal, Vanguard is authorized to act as the transfer agent and registrar until a successor is appointed.
219
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Transfer of Common Units
By transfer of common units in accordance with Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement, each transferee of common units shall be
admitted as a Vanguard unitholder with respect to the common units transferred when such transfer is recorded in Vanguard’s books and
records. Each transferee who has completed and delivered a transfer application:
•
• becomes the record holder of common units;
automatically agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of, and is deemed to have executed Vanguard’s limited liability company
agreement;
•represents that the transferee has the capacity, power and authority to enter into Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement;
grants powers of attorney to Vanguard’s officers and the liquidator of Vanguard as specified in Vanguard’s limited liability company
agreement; and
• makes the consents and waivers contained in Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement.
•
An assignee will become a unitholder of Vanguard for the transferred common units upon the recording of the name of the assignee on
Vanguard’s books and records.
Until a unit has been transferred on Vanguard’s books, Vanguard and the transfer agent, notwithstanding any notice to the contrary, may
treat the record holder of the unit as the absolute owner for all purposes, except as otherwise required by law or stock exchange
regulations.
Summary of Limited Liability Company Agreement
A summary of the important provisions of the Vanguard liability company agreement is included in the reports filed with the SEC,
particularly Vanguard’s Form S-1 filed on April 25, 2007, as amended, and under the caption “Comparison of Rights of Vanguard
Common Unitholders and LRE Unitholders” in this proxy statement/prospectus.
220
TABLE OF CONTENTS
COMPARISON OF RIGHTS OF VANGUARD COMMON
UNITHOLDERS AND LRE UNITHOLDERS
The rights of Vanguard common unitholders are currently governed by Vanguard’s Fifth Amended and Restated Limited Liability
Company Agreement, as amended, which is referred to as the Vanguard limited liability company agreement, and the Delaware Limited
Liability Company Act, which is referred to as the Delaware LLC Act. The rights of LRE’s unitholders are currently governed by LRE’s
First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership, as amended, which is referred to as the LRE partnership agreement, the
Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of LRE GP, LLC and the Delaware Revised Uniform Limited Partnership
Act, which is referred to as the Delaware LP Act. If the merger is completed, the rights of former LRE unitholders will be governed by the
Vanguard limited liability company agreement and the Delaware LLC Act.
There are many differences between the rights of LRE unitholders and the rights of Vanguard unitholders. The following description
summarizes the material differences that may affect the rights of Vanguard common unitholders and LRE common unitholders but does
not purport to be a complete statement of all those differences or a complete description of the specific provisions referred to in this
summary. The identification of specific differences is not intended to indicate that other equally significant or more significant differences
do not exist. LRE unitholders should read carefully the relevant provisions of the Vanguard limited liability company agreement and the
LRE partnership agreement. Copies of the documents referred to in this summary may be obtained as described under “Where You Can
Find More Information.”
Purpose
LRE
Vanguard
Vanguard is permitted to engage, directly or
indirectly, in any business activity that is
approved by the Vanguard board of
directors and that lawfully may be
conducted by a limited liability company
organized under Delaware law; provided,
Vanguard shall not engage, directly or
indirectly, in any business activity that the
Vanguard board of directors determines
would cause Vanguard to be treated as an
association taxable as a corporation or
otherwise taxable as an entity for federal
income tax purpose.
LRE is permitted to engage, directly or
indirectly, in any business activity that is
approved by LRE GP and that lawfully
may be conducted by a limited
partnership organized under Delaware
law; provided, LRE GP shall not cause
 
LRE to engage, directly or indirectly, in
any business activity that LRE GP
determines would cause LRE to be
treated as an association taxable as a
corporation or otherwise taxable as an
entity for federal income tax purpose.
221
Outstanding Units
LRE
As of July 31, 2015, 2015, LRE had
 
outstanding 28,074,433 common units.
Vanguard
As of July 31, 2015, Vanguard had
outstanding (a) 86,604,907 common units,
(b) 420,000 Class B units, (c) 2,581,873
Series A preferred units (“Series A
preferred units”), (d) 7,000,000 Series B
preferred units (“Series B preferred units”)
and (e) 4,300,000 Series C preferred units
(“Series C preferred units” and together
with Series A preferred units and Series B
preferred units, the “preferred units,” and
holders of preferred units cumulatively
known as “preferred unitholders”).
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Issuance of Additional Securities
Vanguard
The Vanguard limited liability company
agreement authorizes Vanguard to issue
an unlimited number of additional equity
securities and rights to buy securities for
the consideration and on the terms and
conditions determined by the Vanguard
board of directors without the approval of
Vanguard’s unitholders, but subject to any
approval rights specifically granted to the
preferred unitholders.
It is possible that Vanguard will fund
acquisitions or other initiatives through the
issuance of additional common units or
other equity securities. Holders of any
additional common units Vanguard issues
will be entitled to share equally with the
then-existing holders of common units and
holders of other equity securities entitled to
participate in Vanguard’s distributions of
available cash. In addition, the issuance of
additional common units or other equity
securities may dilute the value of the
interests of the then-existing holders of
LRE
The LRE partnership agreement
authorizes LRE to issue an unlimited
number of additional equity securities and
 
rights to buy securities for the
consideration and on the terms and
conditions determined by LRE GP without
the approval of LRE’s limited partners.
It is possible that LRE will fund
acquisitions or other initiatives through
the issuance of additional common units
or other equity securities. Holders of any
additional common units LRE issues will
be entitled to share equally with the then-
existing holders of common units and
 
holders of other equity securities entitled
to participate in LRE’s distributions of
available cash. In addition, the issuance
of additional common units or other equity
securities may dilute the value of the
interests of the then-existing holders of
222
common units in Vanguard’s net assets.
In accordance with Delaware law and the
provisions of the Vanguard limited liability
company agreement, Vanguard may also
issue additional securities that, as
determined by the Vanguard board of
directors, may have special voting rights to
which the common units are not entitled.
The holders of common units do not have
preemptive rights to acquire additional
common units or other securities.
common units in LRE’s net assets.
In accordance with Delaware law and the
provisions of the LRE partnership
agreement, LRE may also issue
additional partnership interests that, as
determined by LRE GP, may have special
 
voting rights to which the common units
are not entitled. The holders of common
units do not have preemptive rights to
acquire additional common units or other
securities.
Distributions of Available Cash
Vanguard
General.  The Vanguard limited liability
company agreement requires that
Vanguard distribute all of its available cash
to holders of Vanguard units within 90 days
following the end of each quarter.
LRE
General.  The LRE partnership
agreement requires that LRE distribute all
 
of its available cash to holders of LRE
units within 45 days following the end of
each quarter.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard
Definition of Available Cash.
Available cash for any quarter consists of
all cash and cash equivalents on hand at
the end of that quarter, plus working capital
borrowings made after the end of such
quarter, less any cash reserves established
by the Vanguard board of directors to (i)
provide for the proper conduct of
Vanguard’s business (including reserves
for future capital expenditures, including
drilling and acquisitions, and for anticipated
future credit needs), (ii) comply with
applicable law or debt service obligations,
(iii) provide for payments to the preferred
unitholders and (iv) provide funds for
distributions to the unitholders of Vanguard
for any one or more of the next four
quarters.
No monthly distribution may be declared or
paid or set apart for payment on any
common unit or Class B unit (other than a
distribution payable solely in units of
common units or Class B units) unless full
cumulative distributions have been or
contemporaneously are being paid or
provided for on all outstanding preferred
units through the most recent respective
distribution payment dates.
Series A Preferred Unit Distribution
Preference.  Holders of Series A preferred
units will be entitled to receive, when, as
and if declared by the board of directors out
of legally available funds for such purpose,
cumulative cash monthly distributions. The
distribution rate for the Series A preferred
units will be 7.875% per annum of the
$25.00 liquidation preference per unit
(equal to $1.96875 per unit per annum).
LRE
 Definition of Available Cash.
Available cash for any quarter consists of
all cash and cash equivalents on hand at
the end of that quarter, plus, if the LRE
GP so determines, working capital
borrowings made after the end of such
quarter, less the amount of cash reserves
established by LRE GP to (i) provide for
 
the proper conduct of LRE’s business
(including reserves for future capital
expenditures and for anticipated future
credit needs), (ii) comply with applicable
law or debt service obligations or (iii)
provide funds for distributions to the
unitholders of LRE (including LRE GP) for
any one or more of the next four quarters.
The decision to make any distribution is
determined by LRE GP, taking into
 
consideration the terms of the LRE
partnership agreement.
223
The “distribution payment date” for the
Series A preferred units is the 15th day of
each month.
Distributions will accumulate in each
monthly distribution period from and
including the preceding Series A
distribution payment date or the initial issue
date, as the case may be, to but excluding
the applicable Series A distribution
payment date for such monthly distribution
period. Distributions will accrue on
accumulated distributions at a rate of
7.875% per annum per $25.00 stated
liquidation preference per Series A
preferred unit.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard
Series B Unit Distribution
Preference.  Holders of Series B preferred
units will be entitled to receive, when, as
and if declared by the board of directors out
of legally available funds for such purpose,
cumulative cash monthly distributions. The
distribution rate for the Series B preferred
units will be 7.675% per annum of the
$25.00 liquidation preference per unit
(equal to $1.91875 per unit per annum).
The “distribution payment date” for the
Series B preferred units is the 15th day of
each month.
Distributions will accumulate in each
monthly distribution period from and
including the preceding Series B
distribution payment date or the initial issue
date, as the case may be, to but excluding
the applicable Series B distribution
payment date for such monthly distribution
period. Distributions will accrue on
accumulated distributions at a rate of
7.675% per annum per $25.00 stated
liquidation preference per Series B
preferred units.
Series C Unit Distribution
Preference.  Holders of Series C preferred
units will be entitled to receive, when, as
and if declared by the board of directors out
of legally available funds for such purpose,
cumulative cash monthly distributions. The
distribution rate for the Series C preferred
units will be 7.75% per annum of the
$25.00 liquidation preference per unit
(equal to $1.9375 per unit per annum). The
“distribution payment date” for the Series C
units is the 15th day of each month.
Distributions will accumulate in each
monthly distribution period from and
including the preceding Series C
distribution payment date or the initial issue
date, as the case may be, to but excluding
the applicable Series C distribution
LRE
payment date for such monthly distribution
period. Distributions will accrue on
accumulated distributions at a rate of 7.75%
per annum per $25.00 stated liquidation
preference per Series C preferred unit.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Distributions of Cash upon Liquidation
Vanguard
General.  Upon Vanguard’s dissolution, the
liquidator authorized to wind up Vanguard’s
affairs will, acting with all of the powers of
the Vanguard board of directors necessary
or appropriate to carry out the duties and
functions of the liquidator, liquidate
Vanguard’s assets and apply the proceeds
of the liquidation first to the payment of
Vanguard’s creditors. Vanguard will
distribute any remaining proceeds to the
unitholders in accordance with their
respective capital account balances, as
adjusted to reflect any gain or loss upon the
sale or other disposition of Vanguard’s
assets in liquidation.
Preferred Unit Liquidation Preference.  The
preferred unitholders will be specially
allocated items of Vanguard’s gross
income and gain in a manner designed to
achieve, in the event of any liquidation,
dissolution or winding up of Vanguard’s
affairs, whether voluntary or involuntary, a
liquidation preference of $25.00 per unit in
cash (“preferred unit liquidation
preference”). In addition, preferred
unitholders will be entitled to receive an
amount equal to accumulated and unpaid
distributions thereon to the date fixed for
payment of such amount (whether or not
declared) prior to Vanguard making any
liquidation distributions.
 
If the amount of Vanguard’s gross income
and gain available to be specially allocated
to the preferred unitholders is less than the
amount necessary to cause the capital
account with respect to each preferred unit
to equal the liquidation preference of
$25.00 per unit, then the amount that a
preferred unitholders would receive upon
liquidation may be less than the preferred
unit liquidation preference, even though
there may be cash available for distribution
to the holders of common units or Class B
units with respect to their capital accounts.
The rights of the preferred unitholders to
receive the liquidation preference will be
subject to the proportional rights of other
preferred unitholders.
LRE
General.  Upon LRE’s dissolution, the
liquidator authorized to wind up LRE’s
affairs will, acting with all of the powers of
LRE GP necessary or appropriate to care
out the duties and functions of the
liquidator and liquidate LRE’s assets and
apply the proceeds of the liquidation first
 
to the payment of LRE’s creditors. LRE
will distribute any remaining proceeds to
the unitholders and LRE GP in
accordance with their respective capital
account balances, as adjusted to reflect
any gain or loss upon the sale or other
disposition of LRE’s assets in liquidation.
Manner of Adjustments for Gain.  Any
 
gain will be allocated to the unitholders
as follows:
•
first, to LRE GP and the holders of units
 
who have negative balances in their
capital accounts to the extent of and in
proportion to those negative balances;
•
second, 99.9% to the common
unitholders, pro rata, and 0.1% to LRE
GP, until the capital account for each
 
common unit is equal to the sum of: (1)
the unrecovered initial unit price and (2)
the amount of the minimum quarterly
distribution for the quarter during which
LRE’s liquidation occurs;
•
third, 99.9% to all unitholders, pro rata,
and 0.1% to LRE GP, until LRR allocates
under this paragraph an amount per unit
equal to: (1) the sum of the excess of the
first target distribution per unit over the
minimum quarterly distribution per unit for
 
each quarter of LRE’s existence; less (2)
the cumulative amount per unit of any
distributions of available cash from
operating surplus in excess of the
minimum quarterly distribution per unit
that LRE distributed 99.9% to the
unitholders, pro rata, and 0.1% to LRE
GP, for each quarter of LRE’s existence;
224
225
226
Vanguard
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE
•
fourth, 86.9% to all unitholders, pro rata,
and 13.1% to LRE GP, until LRE allocates
under this paragraph an amount per unit
equal to: (1) the sum of the excess of the
second target distribution per unit over the
first target distribution per unit for each
 
quarter of LRE’s existence; less (2) the
cumulative amount per unit of any
distributions of available cash from
operating surplus in excess of the first
target distribution per unit that LRE
distributed 86.9% to the unitholders, pro
rata, and 13.1% to LRE GP for each quarter
of LRE’s existence; and
•
 
thereafter, 76.9% to all unitholders, pro rata,
and 23.1% to LRE GP.
The percentage interests set forth above for
LRE GP include its 0.1% general partner
 
interest and assume LRE GP has not
transferred the incentive distribution rights.
Manner of Adjustment for Losses.  After
making allocations of loss to LRE GP and
the unitholders in a manner intended to
 
offset in reverse order the allocations of
gains that have previously been allocated,
losses will be allocated as follows:
•
first, 99.9% to the holders of common units,
in proportion to the positive balances in
 
their capital accounts and 0.1% to LRE GP,
until the capital accounts of the common
unitholders have been reduced to zero; and
•
 
thereafter, 100% to LRE GP.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Merger, Sale or Other Disposition of Assets
Vanguard
A merger involving Vanguard requires the
prior consent of Vanguard board of
directors. However, the Vanguard board of
directors will have no duty or obligation to
consent to any merger or consolidation and
may decline to do so free of any fiduciary
duty or obligation whatsoever to Vanguard
or the unitholders, including any duty to act
in good faith.
The Vanguard board of directors is
LRE
A merger involving LRE requires the prior
consent of LRE GP. However, LRE GP
will have no duty or obligation to consent
to any merger or consolidation and may
 
decline to do so free of any fiduciary duty
or obligation whatsoever to LRE or the
limited partners, including any duty to act
in good faith.
generally prohibited, without the prior
approval of the holders of a unit majority,
from causing Vanguard, among other
things, to sell, exchange or otherwise
dispose of all or substantially all of
Vanguard and its subsidiaries’ assets in a
single transaction or a series of related
transactions, including by way of merger,
consolidation or other combination or sale
of ownership interests of Vanguard’s
subsidiaries. The Vanguard board of
directors may, however, mortgage, pledge,
hypothecate or grant a security interest in
all or substantially all of Vanguard’s assets
without that approval. The Vanguard board
of directors may also sell all or substantially
all of Vanguard’s assets under a
foreclosure or other realization upon the
encumbrances above without that approval.
If the conditions specified in the Vanguard
limited liability company agreement are
satisfied, the Vanguard board of directors
may merge Vanguard or any of its
subsidiaries into, or convey all of
Vanguard’s assets to, a newly formed entity
if the sole purpose of that merger or
conveyance is to effect a mere change in
Vanguard’s legal form into another limited
liability entity, the Vanguard board of
directors has received an opinion of
counsel regarding limited liability and tax
matters, and the governing instruments of
the new entity provide the unitholders and
the Vanguard board of directors with the
same rights and obligations as contained in
the Vanguard limited liability company
agreement.
LRE GP is generally prohibited, without
the prior approval of the holders of a unit
majority, from causing LRE, among other
things, to sell, exchange or otherwise
dispose of all or substantially all of LRE
and its subsidiaries’ assets in a single
transaction or a series of related
transactions, including by way of merger,
consolidation or other combination or sale
 
of ownership interests of LRE’s
subsidiaries. LRE GP may, however,
mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or grant a
security interest in all or substantially all
of LRE’s assets without that approval.
LRE GP may also sell all or substantially
all of LRE’s assets under a foreclosure or
other realization upon the encumbrances
above without that approval.
If the conditions specified in the LRE
partnership agreement are satisfied, LRE
GP may convert LRE or any of its
subsidiaries into a new limited liability
entity or merge LRE or any of its
subsidiaries into, or convey all of LRE’s
assets to, a newly formed entity if the sole
purpose of that conversion, merger or
conveyance is to effect a mere change in
 
LRE’s legal form into another limited
liability entity, LRE GP has received an
opinion of counsel regarding limited
liability and tax matters, and the
governing instruments of the new entity
provide the limited partners and LRE GP
with the same rights and obligations as
contained in the LRE partnership
agreement.
227
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard
Finally, the Vanguard board of directors
may consummate any merger or
consolidation without the prior approval of
Vanguard’s unitholders if Vanguard is the
surviving entity in the transaction, the
Vanguard board of directors has received
an opinion of counsel regarding limited
liability and tax matters, the transaction will
not result in a material amendment to the
Vanguard limited liability company
agreement (other than an amendment that
the Vanguard board of directors could
adopt without the consent of the
unitholders), each of Vanguard’s units will
be an identical unit of Vanguard following
the transaction, and the equity interests to
be issued do not exceed 20% of the
outstanding limited liability interests of
Vanguard immediately prior to the
transaction.
The Vanguard unitholders are not entitled
to dissenters’ rights of appraisal under the
LRE
Finally, LRE GP may consummate any
merger or consolidation without the prior
approval of LRE’s unitholders if LRE is
the surviving entity in the transaction,
LRE GP has received an opinion of
counsel regarding limited liability and tax
matters, the transaction will not result in a
material amendment to the LRE
 
partnership agreement (other than an
amendment that LRE GP could adopt
without the consent of other unitholders),
each of LRE’s units will be an identical
unit of LRE following the transaction, and
the partnership interests to be issued do
not exceed 20% of the outstanding
partnership interests of LRE immediately
prior to the transaction.
The LRE unitholders are not entitled to
dissenters’ rights of appraisal under the
Vanguard limited liability company
agreement or applicable Delaware law in
the event of a conversion, merger or
consolidation, a sale of all or substantially
all of Vanguard’s assets or any other
transaction or event.
LRE partnership agreement or applicable
Delaware law in the event of a
 
conversion, merger or consolidation, a
sale of substantially all of the assets of
LRE or any other similar transaction or
event.
Election of Directors
Vanguard
At Vanguard’s annual meeting of
unitholders, members of the Vanguard
board of directors are elected by
Vanguard unitholders and will be subject
to re-election on an annual basis at
Vanguard’s next annual meeting of
unitholders.
Any director of Vanguard may be
removed at any time by the holders of at
least 66 2/3% of the outstanding
Vanguard units then entitled to vote at an
election of directors.
LRE
LRE GP’s directors are elected for one-year
terms by LRM, the managing member of
LRE GP. LRE GP’s directors hold office
 
until the earlier of their death, resignation,
removal or disqualification or until their
successors have been appointed and
qualified.
Meetings; Voting; Voting Rights
Vanguard
Except as described below regarding a
person or group owning 20% or more of
any class of units then outstanding,
Vanguard’s unitholders are entitled to vote
on the following matters:
•
the election of directors to the Vanguard
board of directors;
LRE
Except as described below regarding a
person or group owning 20% or more of
 
any class of units then outstanding, LRE’s
limited partners are entitled to vote on the
following matters:
•
certain amendments to the LRE
partnership agreement (as discussed
 
below under “— Amendment of Limited
Liability Company Agreement or
Partnership Agreement”);
Vanguard
•
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE
•
certain amendments to the Vanguard
the merger of LRE or the sale of
limited liability company agreement (as
 
substantially all of LRE’s assets (as
discussed below under “— Amendment of
discussed above under “— Merger, Sale or
Limited Liability Company Agreement or
Other Disposition of Assets”); and
Partnership Agreement”);
•
the merger of Vanguard or the sale of
substantially all of Vanguard’s assets (as
discussed above under “— Merger, Sale
or Other Disposition of Assets”); and
•
the dissolution of Vanguard (as discussed
below under “— Dissolution”).
Any action required or permitted to be
taken by Vanguard’s unitholders must be
•
 
the dissolution of LRE (as discussed below
under “— Dissolution”).
Any action that is required or permitted to
be taken by the unitholders may be taken
228
effected at a duly called annual or special
meeting of unitholders and may not be
effected by any consent in writing by such
unitholders. Vanguard holds an annual
meeting each year.
either at a meeting of the unitholders or
without a meeting if consents in writing
 
describing the action so taken are signed
by holders of the number of units necessary
to authorize or take that action at a meeting.
Meetings of the unitholders may only be
called by a majority of the Vanguard
board of directors. Unitholders may vote
either in person or by proxy at meetings.
The holders of a majority of the
outstanding units of the class or classes
for which a meeting has been called,
represented in person or by proxy, will
constitute a quorum unless any action by
the unitholders requires approval by
holders of a greater percentage of the
units, in which case the quorum shall be
the greater percentage.
Meetings of the unitholders may be called
by LRE GP or by unitholders owning at
least 20% of the outstanding units of the
class for which a meeting is proposed.
Unitholders may vote either in person or by
proxy at meetings. The holders of a majority
of the outstanding units of the class or
 
classes for which a meeting has been
called, represented in person or by proxy,
will constitute a quorum unless any action
by the unitholders requires approval by
holders of a greater percentage of the units,
in which case the quorum will be the
greater percentage.
229
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard
All notices of meetings of unitholders shall
be sent or otherwise given in accordance
with the Vanguard limited liability company
agreement not less than 10 nor more than
60 days before the date of the meeting. The
notice shall specify the place, date and
hour of the meeting and (i) in the case of a
special meeting, the general nature of the
business to be transacted (no business
other than that specified in the notice may
be transacted) or (ii) in the case of the
annual meeting, those matters which the
Vanguard board of directors, at the time of
giving the notice, intends to present for
action by the unitholders (but any proper
matter may be presented at the meeting for
such action). The notice of any meeting at
which directors are to be elected shall
include the name of any nominee or
nominees who, at the time of the notice, the
board of directors intends to present for
election. Any previously scheduled meeting
of the unitholders may be postponed, and
any special meeting of the unitholders may
be cancelled, by resolution of the Vanguard
board of directors upon public notice given
prior to the date previously scheduled for
such meeting of unitholders. Any notice,
demand, request, report or proxy material
required or permitted to be given or made to
record holders of units under the Vanguard
limited liability company agreement will be
delivered to the record holder by Vanguard
or by the transfer agent.
Each record holder of a unit has a vote
according to his percentage interest in
LRE
All notices of meetings of unitholders
shall be sent or otherwise given in
accordance with the LRE partnership
agreement not less than 10 nor more than
60 days before the date of the meeting.
Any notice, demand, request, report or
 
proxy material required or permitted to be
given or made to record holders of
common units under the LRE partnership
agreement will be delivered to the record
holder by LRE or by the transfer agent.
Each record holder of a unit has a vote
according to his or her percentage
interest in LRE, although additional
limited partner interests having special
voting rights could be issued (as
Vanguard, although additional units having
special voting rights could be issued (as
discussed under “— Issuance of Additional
Securities” above). However, if at any time
any person or group, other than a direct
transferee from Vanguard that is
specifically approved by the Vanguard
board of directors, beneficially owns 20% or
more of any class of units then outstanding,
that person or group will lose voting rights
on all of its units and the units may not be
voted on any matter and will not be
considered to be outstanding when
sending notices of a meeting of unitholders,
calculating required votes, determining the
presence of a quorum or for other similar
purposes. Units held in nominee or street
name accounts will be voted by the broker
or other nominee in accordance with the
instruction of the beneficial owner unless
the arrangement between the beneficial
owner and its nominee provides otherwise.
discussed above under “— Issuance of
Additional Securities”). However, if at any
time any person or group, other than LRE
GP and its affiliates or a direct or
subsequently approved transferee of LRE
GP or its affiliates and specifically
approved by LRE GP, acquires, in the
aggregate, beneficial ownership of 20%
or more of any class of units then
 
outstanding, that person or group will lose
voting rights on all of its units and the
units may not be voted on any matter and
will not be considered to be outstanding
when sending notices of a meeting of
unitholders, calculating required votes,
determining the presence of a quorum or
for other similar purposes. Common units
held in nominee or street name account
will be voted by the broker or other
nominee in accordance with the
instruction of the beneficial owner unless
the arrangement between the beneficial
owner and his nominee provides
otherwise.
230
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard
Units held by Vanguard on behalf of non-
citizen assignees shall be voted in the
same ratios as the votes of unitholders on
other units are cast.
LRE
Units held by LRE GP on behalf of non-
citizen assignees shall be voted in the
 
same ratios as the votes of unitholders on
other units are cast.
Withdrawal or Removal of the General Partner; Election of General Partner
Vanguard
Vanguard, as a limited liability company,
does not have a general partner.
LRE
Except as described below, LRE GP has
agreed not to withdraw voluntarily as the
general partner of LRE prior to December
31, 2021 without obtaining the approval of
the holders of a majority of the LRE
outstanding common units, excluding
common units held by LRE GP and its
affiliates, and furnishing an opinion of
counsel regarding limited liability and tax
matters. On or after December 31, 2021,
LRE GP may withdraw as the general
partner without first obtaining approval of
any unitholder by giving at least 90 days’
written notice, and that withdrawal will not
 
constitute a violation of the LRE partnership
agreement. Notwithstanding the information
above, LRE GP may withdraw as the
general partner without unitholder approval
upon 90 days’ notice to LRE’s limited
partners if at least 50% of the outstanding
common units are held or controlled by one
person and its affiliates other than LRE GP
and its affiliates. In addition, the LRE
partnership agreement permits LRE GP in
some instances to sell or otherwise transfer
231
Vanguard
all of the general partner interest in LRE
without the approval of the unitholders (as
discussed below under “— Transfer of
General Partner Interests”).
Upon withdrawal of LRE GP under any
circumstance other than as a result of a
transfer by LRE GP of all or a part of its
general partner interest in LRE, the holders
of a unit majority may select a successor
general partner. If a successor is not
elected, or is elected but an opinion of
counsel regarding limited liability and tax
 
matters is not obtained, LRE will be
dissolved, wound up and liquidated, unless
within a specified period of time after that
withdrawal, the holders of a unit majority
agree in writing to continue the business of
LRE and to appoint a successor general
partner (as discussed below under
“— Dissolution”).
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE
LRE GP may not be removed unless that
removal is approved by the vote of the
holders of not less than 66 2/3% of LRE’s
outstanding units, voting together as a
single class, including units held by LRE
GP and its affiliates, and LRE receives an
opinion of counsel regarding limited liability
and tax matters. Any removal of LRE GP is
 
also subject to the approval of a successor
general partner by the vote of the holders of
a majority of LRE’s outstanding common
units, voting as a single class. The
ownership of more than 33 1/3% of the
outstanding units of LRE by LRE GP and
its affiliates gives LRE GP the practical
ability to prevent LRE GP’s removal.
The LRE partnership agreement also
provides that if LRE GP is removed as the
 
general partner under circumstances where
cause does not exist:
•
 
all cumulative common unit arrearages on
the common units will be extinguished; and
•
LRE GP will have the right to convert its
general partner interest and its incentive
 
distribution rights into common units or to
receive cash in exchange for those
interests based on the fair market value of
the interests at the time.
In the event of removal of LRE GP under
circumstances where cause exists or
withdrawal of LRE GP where that
withdrawal violates the LRE partnership
agreement, a successor general partner
will have the option to purchase the
departing general partner’s general partner
interest and incentive distribution rights for
a cash payment equal to the fair market
value of those interests. Under all other
circumstances where LRE GP withdraws or
is removed by the limited partners, the
departing general partner will have the
option to require the successor general
partner to purchase the general partner
 
interest of the departing general partner
and its incentive distribution rights for fair
market value. In each case, this fair market
value will be determined by agreement
between the departing general partner and
the successor general partner. If no
agreement is reached, an independent
investment banking firm or other
independent expert selected by the
departing general partner and the
successor general partner will determine
the fair market value. If the departing
general partner and the successor general
partner cannot agree upon an expert, then
an expert chosen by agreement of the
experts selected by each of them will
determine the fair market value.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE
If the option described above is not
exercised by either the departing general
partner or the successor general partner,
the departing general partner’s general
partner interest and its incentive distribution
rights will automatically convert into
 
common units equal to the fair market value
of those interests as determined by an
investment banking firm or other
independent expert selected in the manner
described in the preceding paragraph.
In addition, LRE will be required to
reimburse the departing general partner for
all amounts due the departing general
partner, including, without limitation, all
 
employee-related liabilities, including
severance liabilities, incurred for the
termination of any employees employed by
the departing general partner or its affiliates
for LRE’s benefit.
Transfer of General Partner Interests
232
Vanguard
Vanguard
LRE
LRE GP may transfer without a vote of
LRE’s unitholders all, but not less than all,
of its general partner interest in LRE to an
affiliate or another person (other than an
individual) in connection with its merger or
consolidation with or into, or sale of all, or
 
substantially all, of its assets to, such
person. The approval of a majority of the
outstanding LRE common units, excluding
Vanguard, as a limited liability company,
does not have a general partner.
233
LRE common units held by LRE GP and its
affiliates, is required in other circumstances
for a transfer of the general partner interest
to a third party prior to December 31, 2021.
No or Limited Preemptive Right
Vanguard
The holders of Vanguard units do not
have preemptive rights to acquire
additional common units or other
securities.
LRE
The holders of LRE common units do not
have preemptive rights to acquire
additional common units or other
 
partnership interests. LRE GP and its
affiliates have limited preemptive rights to
acquire additional common units and other
equity securities.
Limited Call Right
Vanguard
If at any time any person owns more than
90% of Vanguard’s then-issued and
outstanding units of any class, such
person will have the right, which it may
assign in whole or in part to Vanguard or
its affiliates, to acquire all, but not less than
all, of the remaining units of the class held
by unaffiliated persons as of a record date
to be selected by Vanguard management,
on at least 10 but not more than 60 days’
notice.
LRE
If at any time LRE GP and its affiliates own
more than 80% of LRE’s then-issued and
outstanding limited partner interests of any
class, LRE GP has the right, which it may
assign in whole or in part to its affiliates or
 
LRE, to acquire all, but not less than all, of
the limited partner interests of the class
held by unaffiliated persons as of a record
date to be selected by LRE GP, on at least
10 but not more than 60 days’ notice.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard
The purchase price in the event of this
purchase is the greater of:
•
the highest cash price paid by such person
or any of its affiliates for any units of the
class purchased within the 90 days
preceding the date on which such person
first mails notice of its election to purchase
those units; and
•
the average of the daily closing prices of
the units of such class over the 20 trading
days preceding the date three days before
the date the notice is mailed.
The Vanguard unitholders are not entitled
to dissenters’ rights of appraisal under the
Vanguard limited liability company
agreement or applicable Delaware law if
this limited call right is exercised. As a
result of this limited call right, a holder of
membership interests in Vanguard may
have his membership interests purchased
at an undesirable time or price. The tax
LRE
The purchase price in the event of this
 
purchase is the greater of:
•
the highest cash price paid by LRE GP or
any of its affiliates for any limited partner
interests of the class purchased within the
 
90 days preceding the date on which LRE
GP first mails notice of its election to
purchase those limited partner interests;
and
•
the average of the daily closing prices of
the limited partner interests of such class
 
over the 20 trading days preceding the
date three days before the date the notice
is mailed.
The LRE unitholders are not entitled to
dissenters’ rights of appraisal under the
LRE partnership agreement or applicable
Delaware law if this limited call right is
exercised. As a result of this limited call
right, a holder of limited partner interests
may have his limited partner interests
 
purchased at an undesirable time or price.
The federal income tax consequences to
consequences to a unitholder of the
exercise of this call right are the same as a
sale by that unitholder of his units in the
market.
a unitholder of the exercise of this call
right are the same as a sale by that
unitholder of his common units in the
market.
Amendment of Limited Liability Company Agreement or Partnership Agreement
Vanguard
General.  Amendments to the Vanguard
limited liability company agreement may
be proposed only by or with the consent
of the Vanguard board of directors.
Except as described below, an
amendment must be approved by the
holders of a unit majority.
Prohibited Amendments.
No amendment may:
•
LRE
General.  Amendments to the LRE
partnership agreement may be proposed
only by LRE GP. However, LRE GP will
have no duty or obligation to propose any
amendment and may decline to do so free
of any fiduciary duty or obligation
whatsoever to LRE or LRE’s limited
partners, including any duty to act in good
faith or in the best interests of LRE or LRE
limited partners. To adopt a proposed
 
amendment, other than the amendments
discussed below under “— No Unitholder
Approval,” LRE GP is required to seek
written approval of the holders of the
number of units required to approve the
amendment or call a meeting of LRE’s
limited partners to consider and vote upon
the proposed amendment. Except as
described below, an amendment must be
approved by the holders of a unit majority.
 Prohibited Amendments.
 No amendment may be:
•
enlarge the obligations of any Vanguard
unitholder without its consent, unless
approved by the holders of a majority of
the type or class of units so affected;
enlarge the obligations of any limited
partner without its consent, unless
 
approved by the holders of a majority of the
type or class of limited partner interests so
affected; or
234
Vanguard
•
provide that Vanguard is not dissolved
upon an election to dissolve Vanguard by
the Vanguard board of directors that is
approved by the holders of a unit majority;
•
change the term of existence of Vanguard;
or
•
give any person the right to dissolve
Vanguard other than the Vanguard board of
directors’ right to dissolve Vanguard with
the approval of the holders of a unit
majority.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE
•
enlarge the obligations of, restrict in any
way any action by or rights of, or reduce
in any way the amounts distributable,
 
reimbursable or otherwise payable by
LRE to LRE GP or any of its affiliates
without the consent of LRE GP, which
consent may be given or withheld in its
sole discretion.
The provision of the Vanguard limited
liability company agreement that prevents
the amendments set forth above can be
amended only upon the approval of the
holders of at least 75% of the outstanding
units, voting together as a single class.
No Unitholder Approval
The Vanguard board of directors may
generally make amendments to the
Vanguard limited liability company
agreement without the approval of any
unitholder to reflect:
•
a change in Vanguard’s name, principal
place of business, registered agent or
registered office;
•
the admission, substitution, withdrawal or
removal of members in accordance with the
Vanguard limited liability company
agreement;
•
The provision of the LRE partnership
agreement that prevents the amendments
 
set forth above can be amended only
upon the approval of the holders of at
least 90% of the outstanding units voting
together as a single class.
 No Unitholder Approval.
LRE GP may generally make
amendments to the LRE partnership
 
agreement without the approval of any
limited partner to reflect:
•
a change in LRE’s name, principal place
 
of business, registered agent or
registered office;
•
the admission, substitution, withdrawal or
 
removal of partners in accordance with
the LRE partnership agreement;
•
a change that the Vanguard board of
directors determines to be necessary or
appropriate for Vanguard to qualify or
continue Vanguard’s qualification as a
company in which Vanguard’s members
have limited liability under the laws of any
state or to ensure that neither Vanguard,
Vanguard’s operating subsidiaries nor any
of its other subsidiaries will be treated as
an association taxable as a corporation or
otherwise taxed as an entity for federal
income tax purposes;
•
a change in Vanguard’s fiscal year or
taxable year and related changes;
a change that LRE GP determines to be
necessary or appropriate for LRE to
qualify or to continue LRE’s qualification
as a limited partnership or other entity in
which the limited partners have limited
 
liability under the laws of any state or to
ensure that neither LRE, nor any of its
subsidiaries will be treated as an
association taxable as a corporation or
otherwise taxed as an entity for federal
income tax purposes;
•
 
a change in LRE’s fiscal year or taxable
year and related changes;
Vanguard
•
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE
•
an amendment that is necessary, in the
opinion of Vanguard’s counsel, to prevent
Vanguard, members of the Vanguard board
of directors, or Vanguard’s officers, agents
or trustees from in any manner being
subjected to the provisions of the
Investment Company Act of 1940, the
Investment Advisors Act of 1940, or “plan
asset” regulations adopted under the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act
of 1974, or ERISA, whether or not
substantially similar to plan asset
regulations currently applied or proposed;
•
an amendment the Vanguard board of
directors determines to be necessary or
appropriate for the authorization of
an amendment that is necessary, in the
opinion of LRE’s counsel, to prevent LRE
or LRE GP or the directors, officers,
agents or trustees of LRE GP from in any
manner being subjected to the provisions
 
of the Investment Company Act of 1940,
the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, or
“plan asset” regulations adopted under
the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 1974, or ERISA, whether
or not substantially similar to plan asset
regulations currently applied or proposed;
•
an amendment that LRE GP determines
 
to be necessary or appropriate for the
235
additional securities or rights to acquire
securities;
•
any amendment expressly permitted in
Vanguard’s limited liability company
agreement to be made by the Vanguard
board of directors acting alone;
•
an amendment effected, necessitated or
contemplated by a merger agreement that
has been approved under the terms of
Vanguard’s limited liability company
agreement;
•
any amendment that the Vanguard board of
directors determines to be necessary or
appropriate for the formation by Vanguard
of, or Vanguard’s investment in, any
corporation, partnership or other entity, as
otherwise permitted by Vanguard’s limited
liability company agreement;
•
a merger, conversion or conveyance
effected in accordance with the Vanguard
limited liability company agreement;
•
an amendment that requires, in connection
with a transfer of units, the assignees of
units to provide proof to Vanguard of such
assignee’s status as an eligible assignee;
and
•
authorization or issuance of additional
securities or rights to acquire securities;
•
any amendment expressly permitted in
 
the LRE partnership agreement to be
made by LRE GP acting alone;
•
an amendment effected, necessitated or
 
contemplated by a merger agreement that
has been approved under the terms of the
LRE partnership agreement;
•
any amendment that LRE GP determines
to be necessary or appropriate for the
 
formation by LRE of, or LRE’s investment
in, any corporation, partnership other
entity, as otherwise permitted by the LRE
partnership agreement;
•
a merger, conversion or conveyance
 
effected in accordance with the LRE
partnership agreement; or
•
any other amendments substantially
 
similar to any of the matters described in
the clauses above.
any other amendments substantially similar
to any of the matters described in the
clauses above.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard
In addition, the Vanguard board of
directors may make amendments to the
Vanguard limited liability company
agreement without the approval of any
unitholder or assignee if the Vanguard
board of directors determines that those
amendments:
•
do not adversely affect the unitholders
(including any particular class of
unitholders as compared to other classes
of unitholders) in any material respect;
•
LRE
In addition, LRE GP may make
amendments to the LRE partnership
agreement without the approval of any
 
limited partner if LRE GP determines that
those amendments:
•
do not adversely affect LRE’s limited
 
partners (or any particular class of limited
partners) in any material respect;
•
are necessary or appropriate to satisfy any
requirements, conditions or guidelines
contained in any opinion, directive, order,
ruling or regulation of any federal or state
are necessary or appropriate to satisfy any
requirements, conditions or guidelines
 
contained in any opinion, directive, order,
ruling or regulation of any federal or state
236
agency or judicial authority or contained in
any federal or state statute;
•
agency or judicial authority or contained in
any federal or state statute;
are necessary or appropriate to facilitate
the trading of units or to comply with any
rule, regulation, guideline or requirement
of any securities exchange on which the
units are or will be listed for trading,
compliance with any of which the
Vanguard board of directors deems to be
in the best interests of Vanguard and
Vanguard’s unitholders;
•
are necessary or appropriate for any
action taken by the Vanguard board of
directors relating to splits or combinations
of units under the provisions of
Vanguard’s limited liability company
agreement; or
•
are required to effect the intent expressed
in the prospectus related to Vanguard’s
initial public offering or the intent of the
provisions of Vanguard’s limited liability
company agreement or are otherwise
contemplated by Vanguard’s limited
liability company agreement.
Opinion of Counsel and Unitholder
Approval.
The Vanguard board of directors will not
be required to obtain an opinion of
counsel that an amendment will not result
in a loss of limited liability to Vanguard’s
unitholders or result in Vanguard’s being
treated as an entity for federal income tax
purposes if one of the amendments
described above under “— No Unitholder
Approval” should occur. No other
amendments to Vanguard’s limited
liability company agreement will become
effective without the approval of holders of
at least 90% of the outstanding units
voting as a single class unless Vanguard
obtains an opinion of counsel to the effect
that the amendment will not affect the
limited liability under applicable law of
any Vanguard unitholder.
•
are necessary or appropriate to facilitate
the trading of LRE’s units or to comply with
 
any rule, regulation, guideline or
requirement of any securities exchange on
which LRE’s units are or will be listed for
trading;
•
are necessary or appropriate for any action
 
taken by LRE GP relating to splits or
combinations of units under the provisions
of the LRE partnership agreement; or
•
are required to effect the intent of the
 
provisions of the LRE partnership
agreement or are otherwise contemplated
by the LRE partnership agreement.
Opinion of Counsel and Unitholder
 
Approval.
LRE GP will not be required to obtain an
opinion of counsel that an amendment will
not result in a loss of limited liability to
LRE’s limited partners or result in LRE
being treated as an association taxable as
a corporation or otherwise taxable as an
entity for federal income tax purposes in
connection with any of the amendments
described above under “— No Unitholder
 
Approval.” No other amendments to the
LRE partnership agreement will become
effective without the approval of holders of
at least 90% of the outstanding units voting
as a single class unless LRE first obtains
an opinion of counsel to the effect that the
amendment will not affect the limited
liability under Delaware law of any of
LRE’s limited partners.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard
Any amendment that would have a
material adverse effect on the rights or
preferences of any type or class of
outstanding units in relation to other
classes of units will require the approval
of the holders of a majority of the type or
class of units so affected.
LRE
Any amendment that would have a material
adverse effect on the rights or preferences
of any type or class of outstanding units in
 
relation to other classes of units will require
the approval of the holders of a majority of
the type or class of units so affected.
Any amendment that reduces the voting
percentage required to take any action
other than to remove the general partner or
237
Any amendment that reduces the voting
percentage required to take any action is
required to be approved by the affirmative
vote of unitholders whose aggregate
outstanding units constitute not less than
the voting requirement sought to be
reduced.
call a meeting of unitholders is required to
be approved by the affirmative vote of
limited partners whose aggregate
outstanding units constitute not less than
the voting requirement sought to be
 
reduced. Any amendment that would
increase the percentage of units required to
remove the general partner or call a
meeting of unitholders must be approved
by the affirmative vote of limited partners
whose aggregate outstanding units
constitute not less than the percentage
sought to be increased.
Indemnification
Vanguard
Under the Vanguard limited liability
company agreement and subject to
specified limitations, Vanguard will
indemnify the following persons, to the
fullest extent permitted by law, from and
against all losses, claims, damages or
similar events:
•
any person who is or was a director, officer
or tax matters partner of Vanguard;
•
any person who is or was a member,
partner, manager, director, officer, fiduciary
or trustee of any subsidiary of Vanguard or
its affiliates;
•
any person who is or was serving at the
request of Vanguard as a director,
manager, officer, tax matters partner,
fiduciary or trustee of another person; and
•
any person designated by Vanguard.
Additionally, Vanguard may indemnify from
and against all losses, claims, damages or
similar events any person is or was an
employee (other than an officer) or agent of
Vanguard that is made party to any
threatened or pending action.
LRE
Under the LRE partnership agreement
and subject to specified limitations, LRE
will indemnify the following persons, to the
 
fullest extent permitted by law, from and
against all losses, claims, damages or
similar events:
•
 
LRE GP;
•
 
any departing general partner;
•
 
any person who is or was an affiliate of
LRE GP or any departing general partner;
•
any person who is or was a director,
officer, manager, managing member,
 
general partner, director, officer,
employee, agent, fiduciary or trustee of
any entity set forth in the preceding three
bullet points;
•
any person who is or was serving at the
request of LRE GP, any departing general
partner or any of their affiliates as an
 
officer, director, manager, managing
member, general partner, employee,
agent fiduciary or trustee of another
person;
•
any person who controls an LRE general
partner or departing general partner; and
•
 
any person designated by LRE GP.
238
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE
Vanguard
Any indemnification under the Vanguard
Any indemnification under the LRE
limited liability company agreement will be
partnership agreement will be made only
made only out of Vanguard’s assets, and
out of LRE’s assets and LRE GP shall not
no member of Vanguard will be personally
be personally liable for, or have any
liable for, or have any obligation to
obligation to contribute or lend funds or
contribute or lend funds or assets to
assets to LRE to enable LRE to
Vanguard to enable Vanguard to effectuate,
effectuate, indemnification. LRE may
 
indemnification. Vanguard may purchase
purchase insurance against liabilities
insurance against liabilities asserted
asserted against and expenses incurred
against and expenses incurred by persons
by persons for LRE’s activities,
for Vanguard’s activities, regardless of
regardless of whether LRE would have
whether Vanguard would have the power to
the power to indemnify the person against
indemnify the person against liabilities
liabilities under the LRE partnership
under the Vanguard limited liability
agreement.
company agreement.
Fiduciary Duties; Conflicts of Interest
Vanguard
The Vanguard limited liability company
agreement limits the liability of the
Vanguard board of directors and eliminates
the fiduciary duties it owes to Vanguard
and the holders of Vanguard units and
replaces such fiduciary duties with
contractual duties and standards. The
Vanguard limited liability company
agreement also restricts the remedies
available to holders of Vanguard units for
actions that might otherwise constitute a
breach of the duties that the Vanguard
board of directors owes to the Vanguard
unitholders.
The Vanguard limited liability company
agreement permits Vanguard’s directors,
officers and their affiliates to invest or
engage in other businesses or activities
that compete with Vanguard, provided that
no Vanguard confidential information is
used in connection with such activity.
Whenever a potential conflict arises
between an affiliate of Vanguard and
Vanguard and its subsidiaries, the
Vanguard board of directors will resolve the
conflict. The Vanguard board of directors
will not be in breach of its obligations under
the Vanguard limited liability company
agreement or its duties to Vanguard or the
Vanguard unitholders if the resolution of the
conflict is:
•
LRE
The LRE partnership agreement limits the
liability of LRE GP and eliminates the
fiduciary duties it owes to holders of LRE
common units and replaces such
fiduciary duties with contractual duties
 
and standards. The LRE partnership
agreement also restricts the remedies
available to holders of LRE common units
for actions that might otherwise constitute
a breach of the duties that LRE GP owes
to LRE’s unitholders.
Although LRE GP has agreed that its sole
business is to act as general partner of
LRE, the LRE partnership agreement
permits LRE GP’s directors, officers and
 
their affiliates to invest or engage in other
businesses or activities that compete with
LRE, provided that no LRE confidential
information is used in connection with
such activity.
Whenever a potential conflict arises
between LRE GP or its affiliates, on the
one hand, and LRE or its limited partners,
on the other hand, LRE GP will resolve
 
that conflict. LRE GP will not be in breach
of its obligations under the LRE
partnership agreement or its duties to
LRE or LRE’s unitholders if the resolution
of the conflict is:
•
approved by the conflicts committee,
although the Vanguard board of directors is
not obligated to seek such approval;
•
approved by the conflicts committee,
 
although LRE GP is not obligated to seek
such approval;
•
approved by the vote of a majority of the
outstanding common units of Vanguard,
approved by the vote of a majority of the
 
outstanding common units of LRE,
239
240
excluding any common units owned by any
interested party;
excluding any common units owned by
LRE GP or any of its affiliates;
Vanguard
•
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE
•
on terms no less favorable to Vanguard
than those generally being provided to or
available from unrelated third parties; or
•
on terms no less favorable to LRE than
 
those generally being provided to or
available from unrelated third parties; or
•
fair and reasonable to Vanguard, taking
into account the totality of the relationships
among the parties involved, including other
transactions that may be particularly
favorable or advantageous to Vanguard.
As required by the Vanguard limited liability
company agreement, the conflicts
committee must be composed of entirely
one or more independent directors. Any
matters approved by the conflicts
committee in good faith will be conclusively
deemed to be fair and reasonable to
Vanguard, approved by all of Vanguard’s
unitholders and not a breach by the
Vanguard board of directors of any duties it
may owe Vanguard or its unitholders. If the
Vanguard board of directors does not seek
approval from the conflicts committee and it
determines that the resolution or course of
action taken with respect to the conflict of
interest satisfies either of the standards set
forth in the third or fourth bullet points
above, then it will be presumed that, in
making its decision, the board of directors
acted in good faith, and in any proceeding
brought by or on behalf of any unitholder or
Vanguard, the person bringing or
prosecuting such proceeding will have the
burden of overcoming such presumption.
When the Vanguard limited liability
company agreement requires someone to
act in good faith, it requires that person to
believe that the determination or other
action is in the best interests of Vanguard.
fair and reasonable to LRE, taking into
account the totality of the relationships
 
among the parties involved, including
other transactions that may be particularly
favorable or advantageous to LRE.
As required by the LRE partnership
agreement, the conflicts committee must
be composed of entirely one or more
independent directors. Any matters
approved by the conflicts committee in
good faith will be conclusively deemed to
be fair and reasonable to LRE, approved
by all of LRE’s partners and not a breach
by LRE GP of any duties it may owe LRE
or its unitholders. If LRE GP does not
seek approval from the conflicts
committee and its board of directors
determines that the resolution or course of
action taken with respect to the conflict of
 
interest satisfies either of the standards
set forth in the third or fourth bullet points
above, then it will be presumed that, in
making its decision, the board of directors
acted in good faith, and in any proceeding
brought by or on behalf of any limited
partner or LRE, the person bringing or
prosecuting such proceeding will have
the burden of overcoming such
presumption. When the LRE partnership
agreement requires someone to act in
good faith, it requires that person to
believe that the determination or other
action is in, or not opposed to, the best
interests of LRE.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Anti-Takeover Provisions
LRE
Vanguard
The Vanguard limited liability company
agreement contains specific provisions
that are intended to discourage a person
or group from attempting to take control of
The LRE partnership agreement contains
specific provisions that are intended to
discourage a person or group from
attempting to remove LRE GP or otherwise
change the management of LRE GP
without the approval of LRE GP.
 
The LRE partnership agreement restricts
the voting rights of unitholders by providing
that any units held by a person (other than
LRE GP and its affiliates) that owns 20% or
more of any class of units then outstanding
cannot vote on any matter; provided that
this loss of voting rights does not apply to
any person or group that acquires the units
from LRE GP or its affiliates and any
transferees of that person or group
approved by LRE GP or to any person or
group who acquires the units with the prior
approval of the board of directors of LRE
 
GP.
 
If LRE GP is removed without cause and no
units held by LRE GP and its affiliates are
voted in favor of that removal, the LRE
partnership agreement provides that,
among other things, (i) any existing
arrearages in payment of the minimum
quarterly distribution on the common units
will be extinguished and (ii) LRE GP will
have the right to convert its general partner
interest and incentive distribution rights into
common units or receive cash in exchange
for those interests.
 
Section 203 of the DGCL does not apply to
LRE because it is organized as a limited
partnership and the LRE partnership
agreement does not incorporate its
restrictions.
Vanguard without the approval of the
Vanguard board of directors.
 
The Vanguard limited liability agreement
restricts the voting rights of unitholders by
providing that any units held by a person
that owns 20% or more of any class of
units then outstanding, other than persons
who acquire such units from Vanguard
with the prior approval of the Vanguard
board of directors, cannot vote on any
matter.
 
The Vanguard limited liability company
agreement provides that Vanguard has
elected to have Section 203 of the
Delaware General Corporation Law
(“DGCL”) apply to transactions in which
an interested common unitholder (as
described below) seeks to enter into a
merger or business combination with
Vanguard. Under this provision, such an
interested common unitholder will not be
permitted to enter into a merger or
business combination with Vanguard
unless:
•
prior to such time, the Vanguard board of
directors approved either the business
combination or the transaction that
resulted in the common unitholder’s
becoming an interested common
unitholder;
•
upon consummation of the transaction
that resulted in the common unitholder
becoming an interested common
unitholder, the interested common
unitholder owned at least 85% of
Vanguard’s outstanding common units at
the time the transaction commenced,
excluding for purposes of determining the
number of common units outstanding
those common units owned:
•
by persons who are directors and also
officers; and
•
by employee common unit plans in which
employee participants do not have the
right to determine confidentially whether
common units held subject to the plan will
be tendered in a tender or exchange offer;
or
241
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LRE
Vanguard
•
at or subsequent to such time the business
combination is approved by the Vanguard
board of directors and authorized at an
annual or special meeting of Vanguard’s
common unitholders, and not by written
consent, by the affirmative vote of the
holders of at least 66 2/3% of Vanguard’s
outstanding voting common units that are
not owned by the interested common
unitholder.
Section 203 of the DGCL defines “business
combination” to include:
•
any merger or consolidation involving the
company and the interested common
unitholder;
•
subject to certain exceptions, any
transaction that results in the issuance or
transfer by the company of any common
units of Vanguard to the interested common
unitholder;
•
any transaction involving Vanguard that
has the effect of increasing the
proportionate share of the units of any class
or series of Vanguard beneficially owned
by the interested common unitholder; or
•
the receipt by the interested common
unitholder of the benefit of any loans,
advances, guarantees, pledges or other
financial benefits provided by or through
Vanguard.
In general, by reference to Section 203 of
the DGCL, an “interested common
unitholder” is any person or entity that
beneficially owns (or within three years has
owned) 15% or more of the outstanding
common units of Vanguard and any entity
or person affiliated with or controlling or
controlled by such entity or person.
The existence of this provision would be
expected to have an anti-takeover effect
with respect to transactions not approved in
advance by the Vanguard board of
directors, including discouraging attempts
that might result in a premium over the
market price for common units held by
common unitholders.
242
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Dissolution
Vanguard
Vanguard will continue as a limited liability
company until dissolved under the
Vanguard limited liability company
LRE
LRE will continue as a limited partnership
 
until dissolved under the LRE partnership
agreement. Vanguard will dissolve upon:
•
agreement. LRE will dissolve upon:
•
the election of the Vanguard board of
directors to dissolve Vanguard, if approved
by the holders of a unit majority;
•
the sale, exchange or other disposition of
all or substantially all of the assets and
properties of Vanguard’s and its
subsidiaries;
•
the entry of a decree of judicial dissolution
of Vanguard; or
•
the withdrawal or removal of LRE GP,
 
unless a successor general partner is
admitted;
•
the election of LRE GP to dissolve LRE, if
approved by the holders of a unit majority;
•
 
the entry of a decree of judicial
dissolution of LRE; or
•
there being no members, unless Vanguard
is continued without dissolution in
accordance with applicable Delaware law.
there being no limited partners, unless
 
LRE is continued without dissolution in
accordance with applicable Delaware
law.
Transfer of Units; Status as Member, Limited Partner or Assignee
Vanguard
By transfer of units in accordance with the
Vanguard limited liability company
agreement, each transferee of units shall
be admitted as a Vanguard unitholder with
respect to the units transferred when such
transfer and admission is reflected in
Vanguard’s books and records. Each
transferee:
•
automatically agrees to be bound by the
terms and conditions of, and is deemed to
have executed Vanguard’s limited liability
company agreement;
•
LRE
By transfer of common units in
accordance with LRE’s partnership
agreement, each transferee of common
units shall be admitted as a limited partner
 
with respect to the common units
transferred when such transfer and
admission are reflected in LRE’s books
and records. Each transferee:
•
automatically agrees to be bound by the
 
terms and conditions of LRE’s partnership
agreement;
•
becomes the record holder of the units
transferred;
represents that the transferee has the
 
capacity, power and authority to enter into
LRE’s partnership agreement; and
•
•
represents that the transferee has the
capacity, power and authority to enter into
the Vanguard limited liability company
agreement;
•
grants powers of attorney to Vanguard’s
officers and liquidator as specified in the
Vanguard limited liability company
agreement; and
•
makes the consents and waivers contained
in the Vanguard limited liability company
agreement.
Until a unit has been transferred on
Vanguard’s books, Vanguard and the
transfer agent may treat the record holder
of the unit as the absolute owner for all
purposes, except as otherwise required by
law or stock exchange regulations.
makes the consents, acknowledgements
 
and waivers contained in LRE’s
partnership agreement.
Until a common unit has been transferred
on LRE’s books, LRE and the transfer
agent may treat the record holder of the
 
unit as the absolute owner for all
purposes, except as otherwise required by
law or stock exchange regulations.
243
244
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard
The Vanguard board of directors may
request that a transferee of common units
certify that such transferee is eligible to
hold Vanguard common units.
Vanguard units are securities and any
transfers are subject to the laws governing
transfers of securities.
LRE
LRE GP may request that a transferee of
 
common units certify that such transferee
is eligible to hold LRE common units.
LRE units are securities and any transfers
 
are subject to the laws governing
transfers of securities.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROPOSAL 2: ADVISORY VOTE ON MERGER-RELATED
NAMED EXECUTIVE OFFICER COMPENSATION
As required by Section 14A of the Exchange Act and the applicable SEC rules issued thereunder, LRE is required to submit a proposal to
its unitholders for a non-binding, advisory vote to approve the payment by LRE of certain compensation to the named executive officers of
LRE that is based on or otherwise relates to the merger. This proposal, commonly known as “say-on-golden parachutes,” and which we
refer to as the “merger-related compensation proposal,” gives LRE’s unitholders the opportunity to vote, on a non-binding, advisory basis,
on the compensation that the LRE named executive officers may be entitled to receive from LRE that is based on or otherwise relates to
the merger. This compensation is summarized in the table and narrative disclosure under “Proposal 1: The Merger — Interests of
Directors and Executive Officers of LRE GP in the Merger” under the sub-headings “Treatment of LTIP Unit Awards”, “Severance
Arrangements” and “Quantification of Payments and Benefits to LRE’s Named Executive Officers”, including the footnotes to the table.
The board of directors of LRE GP encourages you to review carefully the information disclosed in this proxy statement/prospectus
regarding the merger-related compensation payable to certain of LRE’s named executive officers.
The board of directors of LRE GP unanimously recommends that LRE’s unitholders approve the following resolution:
“RESOLVED, that the unitholders of LRR Energy, L.P. hereby approve, on a non-binding, advisory basis, the compensation to be paid or
become payable by LRR Energy, L.P. to certain of its named executive officers that is based on or otherwise relates to the merger as
disclosed pursuant to Item 402(t) of Regulation S-K in the Golden Parachute Compensation table and the footnotes to that table.”
The vote on the merger-related compensation proposal is a vote separate and apart from the vote on the proposal to approve the merger
agreement. Accordingly, you may vote to approve the merger agreement and vote not to approve the compensation proposal and vice
versa. Because the vote on the compensation proposal is advisory only, it will not be binding on either LRE or Vanguard. Accordingly, if
the merger agreement is approved and the merger is completed, the compensation will be payable, subject only to the conditions
applicable thereto, regardless of the outcome of the non-binding, advisory vote of LRE’s unitholders.
To adopt the above resolution approving the merger-related compensation of the LRE named executive officers on a non-binding,
advisory basis, the holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units must vote in
favor of such adoption.
The board of directors of LRE GP unanimously recommends you vote “FOR” the merger-related compensation proposal.
245
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROPOSAL 3: ADJOURNMENT OF THE LRE SPECIAL
MEETING
LRE unitholders are being asked to approve a proposal to adjourn the LRE special meeting if necessary to solicit additional proxies if
there are not sufficient votes to approve the merger agreement at the time of the LRE special meeting. If this proposal is approved, the
LRE special meeting could be adjourned to any date. If the LRE special meeting is adjourned, LRE unitholders who have already
submitted their proxies will be able to revoke them at any time prior to their use. If you return a proxy and do not indicate how you wish to
vote on any proposal, or if you indicate that you wish to vote in favor of the approval of the merger agreement but do not indicate a choice
on the adjournment proposal, your LRE common units will be voted in favor of the adjournment proposal. But if you indicate that you wish
to vote against the approval of the merger agreement, your LRE common units will only be voted in favor of the adjournment proposal if
you indicate that you wish to vote in favor of that proposal. If a quorum is present at, and if a limited partner vote is solicited on adjourment
of, the meeting, the affirmative vote of the holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE
common units will be required to approve the adjournment of the LRE special meeting, If a quorum is not present at the meeting, the
affirmative vote of the holders, as of the record date of the special meeting, of a majority of the outstanding LRE common units present and
entitled to be voted at such meeting represented either in person or by proxy will be required to approve the proposal.
The board of directors of LRE GP unanimously recommends that you vote “FOR” the adjournment of the LRE special meeting if
necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are not sufficient votes to approve the merger agreement at the time of the LRE
special meeting.
246
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the Vanguard common units to be issued in connection with the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement and
being offered hereby, certain tax matters relating to those common units and certain U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger
will be passed upon for Vanguard by Paul Hastings LLP, Houston, Texas. Certain U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger
will be passed upon for LRE by Andrews Kurth LLP, Houston, Texas.
247
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Vanguard and its subsidiaries as of December 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 and for each of
the three years in the period ended December 31, 2014 and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of Vanguard’s internal control
over financial reporting as of December 31, 2014, and the statement of revenues and direct operating expenses of the oil and gas
properties Vanguard acquired from Bill Barrett Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2013, which appears in Vanguard’s Current
Report on Form 8-K/A filed with the SEC on November 3, 2014, incorporated by reference in this proxy statement/prospectus, have been
so incorporated in reliance on the reports of BDO USA, LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, incorporated herein by
reference, given on the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
The information incorporated herein by reference regarding estimated quantities of Vanguard’s proved reserves as of December 31, 2014
was prepared or derived from estimates prepared by Vanguard’s internal reservoir engineers, a substantial portion of which was audited
by DeGolyer and MacNaughton, an independent reserve engineer. These estimates are incorporated herein by reference in reliance upon
the authority of the firm as an expert in these matters.
The financial statements and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting (which is included
in Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting) incorporated in this Prospectus by reference to the Annual Report
on Form 10-K of LRR Energy, L.P. for the year ended December 31, 2014 have been so incorporated in reliance on the report of
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, given on the authority of said firm as experts in auditing
and accounting.
The information incorporated herein by reference regarding estimated quantities of LRE’s proved reserves as of December 31, 2014 was
prepared or derived from estimates prepared by each of LRE’s independent reserve engineers, Miller and Lents, Ltd., Netherland, Sewell
& Associates, Inc. and Ryder Scott Petroleum Consultants. These estimates are incorporated herein by reference in reliance upon the
authority of the firm as an expert in these matters.
The consolidated financial statements of Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P. as of December 31, 2014 and 2013, and for each of the years
in the three-year period ended December 31, 2014, and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2014 have been incorporated by reference herein in reliance upon the reports of KPMG LLP, independent
registered public accounting firm, incorporated by reference herein, and upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and
The information incorporated herein by reference regarding estimated quantities of Eagle Rock’s proved reserves as of December 31,
2014 was prepared or derived from estimates prepared by Eagle Rock’s independent reserve engineer, Cawley, Gillespie & Associates,
Inc. These estimates are incorporated herein by reference in reliance upon the authority of the firm as an expert in these matters.
auditing.
248
TABLE OF CONTENTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
Vanguard has filed with the SEC a registration statement under the Securities Act of which this proxy statement/prospectus forms a part,
which registers the Vanguard common units to be issued to LRE unitholders in connection with the transactions contemplated by the
merger agreement. The registration statement, including the exhibits and schedules attached to the registration statement, contains
additional relevant information about Vanguard and its common units. The rules and regulations of the SEC allow Vanguard, LRE and
Eagle Rock to omit certain information that is included in the registration statement from this proxy statement/prospectus.
Vanguard’s Filings (SEC File No. 001-33756)
Vanguard files annual, quarterly and special reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. The SEC allows Vanguard to
“incorporate by reference” into this proxy statement/prospectus the information it files with the SEC, which means that Vanguard can
disclose important information to you by referring you to those documents. This proxy statement/prospectus contains summaries of certain
provisions contained in some of the documents described herein, but reference is made to the actual documents for complete information.
All of the summaries are qualified in their entirety by reference to the actual documents. The information incorporated by reference is an
important part of this proxy statement/prospectus, and information that Vanguard files later with the SEC will automatically update and
supersede this information as well as the information included in this proxy statement/prospectus. Some documents or information, such
as that called for by Items 2.02 and 7.01 of Form 8-K, or the exhibits related thereto under Item 9.01 of Form 8-K, are deemed furnished
and not filed in accordance with SEC rules. None of those documents and none of the information contained therein is incorporated by
reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. Vanguard incorporates by reference the documents listed below that it has previously filed
with the SEC:
•
• Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, filed on March 2, 2015;
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015, filed on May 4, 2015 and the quarter ended June 30, 2015, filed on
August 4, 2015;
Current Reports on Form 8-K or 8-K/A filed on September 16, 2014, October 1, 2014, November 3, 2014, February 13, 2015 (two reports),
March 12, 2015 (two reports), March 25, 2015, April 21, 2015, April 22, 2015, May 22, 2015 (two reports), May 26, 2015, May 27, 2015,
June 4, 2015 and July 8, 2015;
• Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A filed on April 20, 2015; and
the description of the Vanguard common units contained in the Registration Statement filed on Form 8-A filed on April 22, 2013 and any
subsequent amendment thereto filed for the purpose of updating such description.
•
•
Vanguard also incorporates by reference additional documents that it files with the SEC under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 and 15(d) of the
Exchange Act, after the date of the initial registration statement and prior to the effectiveness of the registration statement, as well as
between the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and the date on which the LRE special meeting is held. These documents include
periodic reports, such as Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K, as well as
proxy statements. To the extent that any information contained in any Current Report on Form 8-K incorporated by referenced into this
document (or any exhibit thereto) was furnished under Item 2.02 or 7.01 of Form 8-K, rather than filed, with the SEC, such information or
exhibit is specifically not incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus.
249
Vanguard will provide a copy of any document incorporated by reference in this proxy statement/prospectus and any exhibit specifically
incorporated by reference in the documents it incorporates by reference, without charge, by written or oral request directed to Vanguard at
TABLE OF CONTENTS
the following address and telephone number:
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC
Attention: Investor Relations
5847 San Felipe, Suite 3000
Houston, Texas 77507
832-327-2255
investorrelations@vnrllc.com
LRE’s Filings (SEC File No. 001-35344)
LRE files annual, quarterly and special reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. The SEC allows LRE to
“incorporate by reference” into this proxy statement/prospectus the information it files with the SEC, which means that LRE can disclose
important information to you by referring you to those documents. This proxy statement/prospectus contains summaries of certain
provisions contained in some of the documents described herein, but reference is made to the actual documents for complete information.
All of the summaries are qualified in their entirety by reference to the actual documents. The information incorporated by reference is an
important part of this proxy statement/prospectus, and information that LRE files later with the SEC will automatically update and
supersede this information as well as the information included in this proxy statement/prospectus. Some documents or information, such
as that called for by Items 2.02 and 7.01 of Form 8-K, or the exhibits related thereto under Item 9.01 of Form 8-K, are deemed furnished
and not filed in accordance with SEC rules. None of those documents and none of the information contained therein is incorporated by
reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. LRE incorporates by reference the documents listed below that it has previously filed with
the SEC:
•
• Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, filed on March 4, 2015;
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015, filed on May 6, 2015 and for the quarter ended June 30, 2015, filed
on August 4, 2015;
Current Reports on Form 8-K or 8-K/A filed on April 21, 2015, April 22, 2015, April 30, 2015, May 6, 2015, May 19, 2015, May 26, 2015
and July 30, 2015; and
the description of the LRE common units contained in the Registration Statement filed on Form 8-A filed on November 9, 2011 and any
subsequent amendment thereto filed for the purpose of updating such description.
•
•
LRE also incorporates by reference additional documents that it files with the SEC under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 and 15(d) of the
Exchange Act, after the date of the initial registration statement and prior to the effectiveness of the registration statement, as well as
between the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and the date on which the LRE special meeting is held. These documents include
periodic reports, such as Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K. To the extent
that any information contained in any Current Report on Form 8-K incorporated by referenced into this document (or any exhibit thereto)
was furnished under Item 2.02 or 7.01 of Form 8-K, rather than filed, with the SEC, such information or exhibit is specifically not
incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus.
LRE will provide a copy of any document incorporated by reference in this proxy statement/prospectus and any exhibit specifically
incorporated by reference in the documents it incorporates by reference, without charge, by written or oral request directed to LRE at the
following address and telephone number:
LRR Energy, L.P.
Heritage Plaza
1111 Bagby Street
Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 292-9510
250
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Eagle Rock’s Filings (SEC File No. 001-330164)
Eagle Rock files annual, quarterly and special reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. The SEC allows Vanguard
to “incorporate by reference” into this proxy statement/prospectus the information that Eagle Rock has filed with the SEC, which means
that Vanguard can dislose important information about Eagle Rock to you by referring you to those documents. This proxy
statement/prospectus contains summaries of certain provisions contained in some of the documents described herein, but reference is
made to the actual documents for complete information. All of the summaries are qualified in their entirety by reference to the actual
documents. The information incorporated by reference is an important part of this proxy statement/prospectus, and information that Eagle
Rock files later with the SEC will automatically update and supersede this information as well as the information included in this proxy
statement/prospectus. Some documents or information, such as that called for by Items 2.02 and 7.01 of Form 8-K, or the exhibits related
thereto under Item 9.01 of Form 8-K, are deemed furnished and not filed in accordance with SEC rules. None of those documents and
none of the information contained therein is incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus. Vanguard incorporates by
reference the Eagle Rock documents listed below that it has previously filed with the SEC:
• Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, filed on March 2, 2015; and
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015, filed on May 1, 2015 and for the quarter ended June 30, 2015, filed
on July 31, 2015.
•
Vanguard also incorporates by reference additional documents that Eagle Rock files with the SEC under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 and
15(d) of the Exchange Act, after the date of the initial registration statement and prior to the effectiveness of the registration statement, as
well as between the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and the date on which the LRE special meeting is held. These documents
include periodic reports, such as Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K. To
the extent that any information contained in any Current Report on Form 8-K incorporated by referenced into this document (or any exhibit
thereto) was furnished under Item 2.02 or 7.01 of Form 8-K, rather than filed, with the SEC, such information or exhibit is specifically not
incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus.
Vanguard, LRE and Eagle Rock also make available free of charge on their internet websites at www.vnrllc.com, www.lrrenergy.com and
www.eaglerockenergy.com, respectively, the reports and other information filed by Vanguard, LRE and Eagle Rock with the SEC, as soon
as reasonably practicable after such material is electronically filed or furnished to the SEC. None of Vanguard’s, LRE’s or Eagle Rock’s
websites, and none of the information contained on their websites, is part of this proxy statement/prospectus or the documents
incorporated by reference.
The SEC maintains an Internet website that contains reports, proxy and information statements and other material that are filed through
the SEC’s Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis and Retrieval (EDGAR) System. This system can be accessed at www.sec.gov. You can
find information that Vanguard, LRE and Eagle Rock file with the SEC by reference to their names or to their SEC file numbers. You also
may read and copy any document Vanguard, LRE or Eagle Rock files with the SEC at the SEC’s public reference room located at 100 F
Street, N.E., Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further information about the public
reference room and its copy charges.
None of Vanguard, LRE or Eagle Rock has authorized anyone to give any information or make any representation about the merger,
Vanguard, LRE or Eagle Rock that is different from, or in addition to, that contained in this proxy statement/prospectus or in any of the
materials that have been incorporated by reference. Therefore, if any one distributes this type of information, you should not rely on it. If
you are in a jurisdiction where offers to exchange or sell, or solicitations of offers to exchange or purchase, the securities offered by this
proxy statement/prospectus or the solicitation of proxies is unlawful, or you are a person to whom it is unlawful to direct these types or
activities, then the offer presented in this proxy statement/prospectus does not extend to you. The information contained in this proxy
statement/prospectus speaks only as of its date, or in the case of information in a document incorporated by reference, as of the date of
such document, unless the information specifically indicates that another date applies.
251
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The information concerning Vanguard contained in this proxy statement/prospectus or incorporated by reference has been provided by
Vanguard, and the information concerning LRE contained in this proxy statement/prospectus has been provided by LRE.
In order to receive timely delivery of requested documents in advance of the LRE special meeting, your request should be
received no later than September 2, 2015. If you request any documents, Vanguard or LRE will mail them to you by first class
mail, or another equally prompt means, within one business day after receipt of your request.
252
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PURCHASE AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER
BY AND AMONG
VANGUARD NATURAL RESOURCES, LLC,
LIGHTHOUSE MERGER SUB, LLC,
LIME ROCK MANAGEMENT LP,
LIME ROCK RESOURCES A, L.P.,
LIME ROCK RESOURCES B, L.P.,
LIME ROCK RESOURCES C, L.P.,
LIME ROCK RESOURCES II-A, L.P.,
LIME ROCK RESOURCES II-C, L.P.,
LRR ENERGY, L.P.
AND
LRE GP, LLC
DATED AS OF APRIL 20, 2015
A-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I CERTAIN DEFINITIONS
1.1
Certain Definitions
1.2
Interpretation
ARTICLE II PURCHASE OF GP MEMBERSHIP INTERESTS; THE MERGER;
EFFECTS OF THE MERGER
2.1
Purchase of GP Membership Interests
2.2
The Merger
2.3
Closing
ARTICLE III MERGER CONSIDERATION; EXCHANGE PROCEDURES
3.1
Merger Consideration
3.2
Rights As Unitholders; Unit Transfers
3.3
Page
  A-6
A-6
A-
  
15
A-
  
16
A-
  
16
A-
  
17
A-
  
17
A-
  
18
A-
  
18
A-
  
18
3.3
Exchange of Certificates
3.4
Anti-Dilution Provisions
3.5
Treatment of the Partnership LTIP
ARTICLE IV ACTIONS PENDING CLOSING
4.1
Conduct of Business by the Partnership
4.2
Conduct of Business by Parent
ARTICLE V REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE
PARTNERSHIP ENTITIES
5.1
Organization, General Authority and Standing
5.2
Capitalization
5.3
Equity Interests in Other Entities
5.4
Power, Authority and Approvals of Transactions
5.5
No Violations or Defaults
5.6
Consents and Approvals
5.7
Financial Reports and the Partnership SEC Documents
5.8
Internal Controls and Procedures
5.9
Absence of Undisclosed Liabilities
5.10
Absence of Certain Changes or Events
5.11
Compliance with Applicable Law; Permits
5.12
Material Contracts
5.13
Environmental Matters
5.14
Reserve Report
5.15
Title to Properties
5.16
Litigation
5.17
Information Supplied
5.18
Tax Matters
5.19
A-
  
19
A-
  
22
A-
  
22
A-
  
22
A-
  
22
A-
  
24
A-
  
25
A-
  
26
A-
  
26
A-
  
27
A-
  
27
A-
  
27
A-
  
27
A-
  
28
A-
  
28
A-
  
29
A-
  
29
A-
  
29
A-
  
30
A-
  
31
A-
  
31
A-
  
32
A-
  
32
A-
  
32
A-
  
32
5.19
Employee Benefits and Employment Matters
5.20
Intellectual Property
5.21
Related Party Transactions
TABLE OF CONTENTS
A-2
5.22
Insurance
5.23
Regulatory Matters
5.24
Derivatives
5.25
State Takeover Statutes
5.26
Partnership Unitholder Approval
5.27
Financial Advisors
5.28
No Other Representations and Warranties
ARTICLE VI REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF PARENT AND
MERGER SUB
6.1
Organization, General Authority and Standing
6.2
Capitalization
6.3
Equity Interests in other Entities
6.4
Power, Authority and Approvals of Transactions
6.5
No Violations or Defaults
6.6
Consents and Approvals
6.7
Financial Reports and Parent SEC Documents
6.8
Internal Controls and Procedures
6.9
Absence of Undisclosed Liabilities
6.10
Absence of Certain Changes or Events
6.11
A-
33
A-
  
35
A-
  
35
Page
A-
  
35
A-
  
36
A-
  
36
A-
  
36
A-
  
36
A-
  
36
A-
  
36
A-
  
37
A-
  
37
A-
  
37
A-
  
38
A-
  
38
A-
  
38
A-
  
38
A-
  
39
A-
  
39
A-
39
A-
  
40
A-
  
40
Compliance with Applicable Law; Permits
6.12
Material Contracts
6.13
Environmental Matters
6.14
Reserve Report
6.15
Title to Properties
6.16
Litigation
6.17
Information Supplied
6.18
Tax Matters
6.19
Employee Benefits
6.20
Intellectual Property
6.21
Related Party Transactions
6.22
Insurance
6.23
Derivatives
6.24
Availability of Funds
6.25
Financial Advisors
6.26
Operations of Merger Sub
6.27
Regulatory Matters
6.28
No Other Representations and Warranties
ARTICLE VII COVENANTS
7.1
Consummation of the Transactions
7.2
Registration Statement; Proxy Statement
7.3
Alternative Proposals; Change in Recommendation
7.4
Access to Information; Confidentiality
TABLE OF CONTENTS
A-3
A-
  
40
A-
  
41
A-
  
42
A-
  
42
A-
  
42
A-
  
42
A-
  
42
A-
  
43
A-
  
45
A-
  
45
A-
  
45
A-
  
45
A-
  
45
A-
  
45
A-
  
45
A-
  
46
A-
  
46
A-
  
46
A-
  
46
A-
  
47
A-
  
49
A-
  
52
Financing Cooperation
ARTICLE VIII CONDITIONS TO CONSUMMATION OF THE TRANSACTIONS  A-58 
8.1
7.5
Public Statements
7.6
Confidentiality
7.7
Takeover Laws
7.8
New Common Units Listed
7.9
Third-Party Approvals
7.10
Indemnification; Directors’ and Officers’ Insurance
7.11
Notification of Certain Matters
7.12
Section 16 Matters
7.13
Distributions
7.14
Transaction Litigation
7.15
Mutual Closing Conditions
8.2
Additional GP Seller and Partnership Conditions to Closing
8.3
Additional Parent Conditions to Closing
ARTICLE IX TERMINATION
9.1
Termination of Agreement
9.2
Procedure Upon Termination
9.3
Effect of Termination
9.4
Fees and Expenses
ARTICLE X MISCELLANEOUS
10.1
Amendment or Supplement
10.2
Counterparts
10.3
Governing Law
10.4
Notices
10.5
Assignment
10.6
Page
A-53
A-53
A-54
A-54
A-54
A-54
A-56
A-57
A-57
A-57
A-57
A-58
A-58
A-59
A-60
A-60
A-61
A-61
A-61
A-62
A-62
A-63
A-63
A-63
A-64
10.6
Entire Understanding; No Third-Party Beneficiaries
10.7
Severability
10.8
Jurisdiction
10.9
Waiver of Jury Trial
10.10
No Recourse
10.11
Specific Performance
10.12
Survival
10.13
No Recourse to Financing Sources
ANNEX:
Annex A
Voting and Support Agreement
Annex B
Registration Rights Agreement
EXHIBIT:
Exhibit A
Form of Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement
A-4
A-64
A-64
A-64
A-65
A-65
A-65
A-66
A-66
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PURCHASE AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER
This PURCHASE AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER, dated as of April 20, 2015 (this “Agreement”), is entered into by and among
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Parent”), Lighthouse Merger Sub, LLC, a Delaware limited
liability company and wholly owned indirect subsidiary of Parent (“Merger Sub” and, together with Parent, the “Parent Entities”), Lime
Rock Management LP, a Delaware limited partnership (“Management”), Lime Rock Resources A, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership
(“LRR A”), Lime Rock Resources B, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (“LRR B”), Lime Rock Resources C, L.P., a Delaware limited
partnership (“LRR C”), Lime Rock Resources II-A, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (“LRR II-A”), Lime Rock Resources II-C, L.P., a
Delaware limited partnership (“LRR II-C” and together with LRR A, LRR B, LRR C and LRR II-A, the “Fund Entities,” and together with
Management, the “GP Sellers”), LRR Energy, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (the “Partnership”), and LRE GP, LLC, a Delaware
limited liability company (“Partnership GP,” and, together with the GP Sellers and the Partnership, the “Partnership Entities”).
RECITALS
WHEREAS, GP Sellers own all of the limited liability company interests (the “GP Membership Interests”) in Partnership GP and are the
sole members of the Partnership GP; and
WHEREAS, the general partners of each GP Seller have approved and declared advisable this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby; and
WHEREAS, Partnership GP is the sole general partner of the Partnership and owns all of the general partner units in the Partnership and
all of the IDRs; and
WHEREAS, the Conflicts Committee has (a) determined that this Agreement is advisable to and in the best interests of the Partnership
and the Partnership Unitholders who are not Affiliates of the General Partner, (b) approved this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby by Special Approval (as defined in the Existing Partnership Agreement) and (c) recommended adoption of this
Agreement by the Partnership Board; and
WHEREAS, the Partnership Board has (a) determined that it is in the best interests of the Partnership, the Partnership Unitholders and the
GP Sellers, and declared it advisable, for the Partnership and the Partnership GP to enter into this Agreement, (b) approved the execution,
delivery and performance of this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby by the Partnership and the Partnership GP and (c)
resolved to submit this Agreement to a vote of the Partnership Unitholders and recommend approval of this Agreement by the Partnership
Unitholders; and
WHEREAS, the Parent Board has (a) determined that it is in the best interests of Parent and the Parent Unitholders, and declared it
advisable, for Parent to enter into this Agreement, and (b) approved the execution, delivery and performance by Parent of this Agreement
and the transactions contemplated hereby; and
WHEREAS, Parent, as the managing member of Merger Sub, has approved and declared advisable this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby and has approved the execution, delivery and performance by Merger Sub of this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby; and
WHEREAS, as a condition to Parent’s willingness to enter into this Agreement, Parent and the Partnership Entities have entered into a
Voting and Support Agreement, dated as of the date of this Agreement and attached hereto as Annex A (the “Voting Agreement”),
pursuant to which, among other things, LRR A, LRR B and LRR C, as holders of certain of the issued and outstanding Partnership
Common Units, have each agreed to vote to adopt this Agreement and take certain other actions in furtherance of the Merger, in each
case on the terms and subject to the conditions provided for in the Voting Agreement;
WHEREAS, concurrently with execution of this Agreement, certain holders of the issued and outstanding Partnership Common Units and
GP Membership Interests have entered into a Registration Rights Agreement with Parent, dated as of the date of this Agreement and
attached hereto as Annex B (the “Registration Rights Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, Parent will file a registration
statement with the SEC to register for resale certain New Common Units issued pursuant to Section 2.1(c) and Section 3.1; and
A-5
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and the respective representations, warranties, covenants, agreements and
conditions contained herein, the Parties hereto agree as follows:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I
CERTAIN DEFINITIONS
1.1 Certain Definitions.  As used in this Agreement, the following terms have the meanings set forth below:
“Action” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.10(a).
“Additional Member” has the meaning set forth in the Parent Agreement.
“Affiliate” means, with respect to a specified Person, any other Person, whether now in existence or hereafter created, directly or indirectly
controlling, controlled by or under direct or indirect common control with such specified Person. For purposes of this definition and the
definition of Subsidiary, “control” (including, with correlative meanings, “controlling,” “controlled by” and “under common control
with”) means, with respect to a Person, the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of such Person, directly
or indirectly, whether through the ownership of equity interests, including, but not limited to, voting securities, by contract or agency or
otherwise.
“Agreement” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“Alternative Proposal” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.3(i)(i).
“Antitrust Laws” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.1(a).
“Average Closing Price” means, as of any date, the average of the closing sale prices of a Parent Common Unit as reported on the
NASDAQ Global Select Market for the 10 consecutive full trading days (in which such Parent Common Units are traded on the NASDAQ
Global Select Market) ending at the close of trading on the full trading day immediately preceding such date.
“Balance Sheet Date” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.9.
“Book-Entry Units” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.2.
“Business Day” means any day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which banks are authorized or required to be closed in
New York City, New York.
“CERCLA” means the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. §9601 et seq., as amended.
“Certificate” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.2.
“Certificate of Merger” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.2(b).
“Claim” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.10(a).
“Closing” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.3.
“Closing Date” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.3.
“Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. §1 et seq., as amended.
“Commodity Derivative Instrument” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.12(a)(vii).
“Confidentiality Agreement” means that certain Mutual Non-Disclosure Agreement entered into by and between Parent and the
Partnership dated as of March 6, 2015.
“Conflicts Committee” has the meaning set forth in the Existing Partnership Agreement.
“Disguised Sale” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.3(k).
“DLLCA” means the Delaware Limited Liability Company Act, 6 Del.C. §18-101 et seq., as amended.
“DRULPA” means the Delaware Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act, 6 Del.C. §17-101 et seq., as amended.
A-6
TABLE OF CONTENTS
“Effective Time” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.2(b).
“Employee Benefit Plan” means:
(a) any “employee benefit plan” (within the meaning of Section 3(3) of ERISA, regardless of whether such plan is subject to ERISA), and
(b) any personnel policy (oral or written), unit option, restricted unit, unit purchase plan, equity compensation plan, phantom equity or
appreciation rights plan, collective bargaining agreement, bonus plan or arrangement, incentive award plan or arrangement, vacation or
holiday pay policy, retention or severance pay plan, policy or agreement, deferred compensation agreement or arrangement, change in
control, hospitalization or other medical, dental, vision, accident, disability, life or other insurance, executive compensation or
supplemental income arrangement, consulting agreement, employment agreement, and other employee benefit plan, agreement,
arrangement, program, practice, or understanding.
“Employees” means all individuals employed by the Partnership or any of its Affiliates whose employment primarily or materially relates
to the Partnership, including any such individual who (i) is employed through Insperity or its Affiliates or (ii) is absent due to vacation,
family leave, short-term disability or other approved leaves of absences, as of the date of this Agreement.
“Environmental Laws” means any Law that relates to:
(a) the protection of human health, safety or the environment (including air, surface water, groundwater, surface land, subsurface land,
plant and animal life, any other natural resource or any matter arising out of or relating to pollution or contamination), or
(b) the use, storage, recycling, treatment, generation, transportation, processing, handling, labeling, production, management, disposal or
Release of Hazardous Materials, in each case as in effect at the date of this Agreement.
“Environmental Permit” means any permit, license, regulation, consent, certification, variance, exemption, approval or other authorization
required under any Environmental Law.
“Equity Distribution Agreement” means Equity Distribution Agreement, dated March 12, 2015, by and among Parent and its subsidiaries
and Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC, UBS Securities LLC, BMO Capital Markets Corp., MLV & Co. LLC, SunTrust Robinson
Humphrey, Inc. and BB&T Capital Markets, a division of BB&T Securities, LLC, as managers.
“ERISA” means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 29 U.S.C. §1001 et seq., as amended.
“ERISA Affiliate” means any Person under common control with the Partnership or Parent, as applicable, within the meaning of Section
414(b), (k), or (m) of the Code or Section 4001 of ERISA.
“Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 15 U.S.C. §78a et seq., as amended, and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
“Exchange Agent” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.3(a).
“Exchange Fund” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.3(a).
“Exchange Ratio” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.1(c).
“Existing Partnership Agreement” means the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of LRR Energy, L.P.,
“Excluded Units” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.1(d).
dated as of November 16, 2011, as amended from time to time.
“Expenses” has the meaning set forth in Section 9.4(h).
“Financing Sources” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.13.
“Finance Related Parties” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.13.
A-7
TABLE OF CONTENTS
“Fund Entities” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“GAAP” means U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
“Governmental Authority” means any national, state, local, county, parish or municipal government, domestic or foreign, any agency,
board, bureau, commission, court, tribunal, subdivision, department or other governmental or regulatory authority or instrumentality, or any
arbitrator or arbitral body, in each case that has jurisdiction over Parent or the Partnership, as the case may be, or any of their respective
Subsidiaries or any of their or their respective Subsidiaries’ properties or assets.
“GP Assignment” has the meaning set forth in Section 8.3(f).
“GP Membership Interests” has the meaning set forth in the Recitals.
“GP Sellers” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“GP Purchase” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1(a).
“GP Purchase Price” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.1(c).
“Hazardous Material” means any substance, material or waste that is listed, defined, designated, classified or otherwise regulated as
hazardous, toxic, radioactive, dangerous or a “pollutant” or “contaminant” pursuant to any Environmental Law, including petroleum and
petroleum by-products, PCBs and asbestos.
“HSR Act” means the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, 15 U.S.C. §18a et seq., as amended, and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
“Hydrocarbons” means crude oil, natural gas, condensate, drip gas and natural gas liquids (including coalbed gas) and other liquids or
gaseous hydrocarbons or any combination thereof produced or associated therewith.
“IDR” means that certain Incentive Distribution Right (as defined in the Existing Partnership Agreement) initially issued to Partnership GP.
“Indebtedness” of any Person means:
(a) indebtedness created, issued or incurred by such Person for borrowed money (whether by loan or the issuance and sale of debt
securities or the sale of property of such Person to another Person subject to an understanding or agreement, contingent or otherwise, to
repurchase such property);
(b) obligations of such Person to pay the deferred purchase or acquisition price for any property of such Person;
(c) obligations of such Person in respect of letters of credit or similar instruments issued or accepted by banks and other financial
institutions for the account of such Person;
(d) obligations of such Person to pay rent or other amounts under a lease of (or other agreement conveying the right to use) any property
to such Person to the extent such obligations are required to be classified and accounted for as a capital lease on a balance sheet of such
Person under GAAP;
(e) indebtedness of others as described in clauses (a) through (d) above in any manner guaranteed by such Person or for which it is or
may become contingently liable;
but Indebtedness does not include accounts payable to trade creditors, or accrued expenses arising in the ordinary course of business
consistent with past practice, in each case, that are not yet due and payable, or are being disputed in good faith, and the endorsement of
negotiable instruments for collection in the ordinary course of business.
“Indemnification Expenses” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.10(a).
“Indemnified Parties” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.10(a).
“Indemnitees” has the meaning set forth in the Existing Partnership Agreement.
“Insperity” means Insperity, Inc.
A-8
TABLE OF CONTENTS
“Insperity Employee Benefit Plan” means a Partnership Employee Benefit Plan that is sponsored by Insperity Holdings, Inc. or its
Affiliates.
“Intellectual Property” means all intellectual property and similar proprietary rights, including intellectual property rights in the following:
(a) trademarks, service marks, trade dress, logos, slogans, trade names and corporate names, all applications and registrations for the
foregoing, including all renewals of the same, (b) inventions (regardless of whether patentable), patents and patent applications, including
divisions, continuations, continuations-in-part and renewal applications, and including renewals, extensions, reexaminations and
reissues, (c) confidential information, trade secrets and know-how and (d) copyrightable works of authorship (including databases and
other compilations of information), copyrights, computer software, industrial designs and other design rights, and registrations and
applications therefor, and all renewals, extensions, restorations and reversions thereof.
“Intervening Event” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.3(e).
“Knowledge” means the actual knowledge, after reasonable inquiry, of, in the case of the Partnership, the individuals listed in Section 1.1
of the Partnership Disclosure Schedule and in the case of Parent, the individuals listed on Section 1.1 of the Parent Disclosure Schedule.
“Law” means any law, rule, regulation, ordinance, code, judgment, order, treaty, convention, governmental directive or other legally
enforceable requirement, U.S. or non-U.S., of any Governmental Authority, including common law.
“Letter of Transmittal” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.3(b).
“Lien” means any mortgage, lien, charge, restriction (including restrictions on transfer), pledge, security interest, option, right of first offer or
refusal, preemptive right, lease or sublease, claim, right of any third party, covenant, right of way, easement, encroachment or
encumbrance.
“LRR A” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“LRR B” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“LRR C” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“LRR II-A” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“LRR II-C” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“Management” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“Material Adverse Effect” means, when used with respect to a Person, any change, event, development, circumstance, condition
(financial or otherwise), occurrence or effect that, individually or in the aggregate, would reasonably be expected to have a material
adverse effect on the business, assets, liabilities, condition (financial or otherwise) or results of operations of such Person and its
Subsidiaries taken as a whole, but none of the following changes, events, developments, conditions, occurrences or effects (either alone
or in combination) will be taken into account for purposes of determining whether a Material Adverse Effect has occurred:
(a) changes in the general economic, financial, credit or securities markets, including prevailing interest rates or currency rates, or
regulatory or political conditions and changes in oil, natural gas, condensate or natural gas liquids prices or the prices of other
commodities, including changes in price differentials;
(b) changes in general economic conditions in the:
(i) oil and gas exploration and production industry;
(ii) the natural gas gathering, compressing, treating, processing and transportation industry generally;
(iii) the natural gas liquids fractionating and transportation industry generally;
A-9
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(iv) the crude oil and condensate logistics and marketing industry generally; and
(v) the natural gas marketing and trading industry generally (including in each case changes in the laws affecting such industries);
(c) the outbreak or escalation of hostilities involving the United States, the declaration by the United States of a national emergency or war
or the occurrence of any other calamity or crisis, including acts of terrorism;
(d) any hurricane, tornado, flood, earthquake or other natural disaster;
(e) with respect to the Partnership only, the identity of, or actions or omissions of Parent, or its Affiliates, or any action taken pursuant to or
in accordance with this Agreement or at the request of or with the consent of Parent;
(f) the announcement or pendency of this Agreement (including, for the avoidance of doubt, performance of this Agreement);
(g) any change in the market price or trading volume of the common units of such Person or any securities owned by such Person (it being
understood and agreed that the exception in this clause (g) shall not preclude any Party from asserting that the facts, circumstances,
changes, events, developments, conditions, occurrences or effects giving rise to such change should be deemed to constitute, or be taken
into account in determining whether there has been a Material Adverse Effect);
(h) any failure to meet any internal or published budgets, predictions, financial projections or estimates or forecasts of revenues, earnings
or other financial metrics for any period (it being understood and agreed that the exception in this clause (h) shall not preclude any Party
from asserting that the facts, circumstances, changes, events, developments, conditions, occurrences or effects giving rise to such failure
should be deemed to constitute, or be taken into account in determining whether there has been, a Material Adverse Effect);
(i) any changes in GAAP (or authoritative interpretation of GAAP);
(j) changes in any Laws or regulations applicable to such Person or the industries in which such Person operates or applicable
accounting regulations or the interpretations thereof; and
(k) any legal proceedings commenced by or involving any current or former member, partner or equityholder of such Person (on their own
behalf or on behalf of such Person) arising out of or related to this Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby;
provided, however, that any change, event, development, circumstance, condition, occurrence or effect referred to in clauses (a), (b), (c) or
(d) will be taken into account for purposes of determining whether a Material Adverse Effect has occurred if and to the extent that such
change, event, development, circumstance, condition, occurrence or effect disproportionately affects such Person, as compared to other
similarly situated Persons operating in the industries in which such Person operates.
“Maximum Amount” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.10(d).
“Merger” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.2(a).
“Merger Consideration” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.1(c).
“Merger Sub” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“NASDAQ” means NASDAQ Stock Market LLC.
“New Common Units” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.1(c).
“New Common Unit Issuance” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.1(c).
“Notice Period” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.3(d)(i).
A-10
TABLE OF CONTENTS
“Oil and Gas Properties” means all interests in and rights with respect to oil, gas, mineral, and similar properties of any kind and nature,
including working, leasehold and mineral interests and operating rights and royalties, overriding royalties, production payments, net profit
interests and other non-working interests and non-operating interests (including all oil and gas leases, operating agreements, unitization
and pooling agreements and orders, division orders, transfer orders, mineral deeds, royalty deeds, and in each case, interests
thereunder), surface interests, fee interests, reversionary interests, reservations, and concessions.
“Other Parties” means, (a) with respect to any Partnership Entity, the Parent Entities, and (b) with respect to any Parent Entity, the
Partnership Entities.
“Outside Date” has the meaning set forth in Section 9.1(e).
“Parent” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“Parent Agreement” means the Fifth Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of Parent, dated September 15, 2014,
as amended from time to time.
“Parent Assignee” means any “Assignee” as such term is defined in the Parent Agreement.
“Parent Board” means the board of directors of Parent.
“Parent Class B Unit” means the class B units representing limited liability company interests of Parent, having the rights and obligations
specified with respect to “Class B Units” as set forth in the Parent Agreement.
“Parent Common Units” means the common units representing limited liability company interests of Parent having the rights and
obligations specified with respect to the “Common Units” as set forth in the Parent Agreement.
“Parent Disclosure Schedule” has the meaning set forth in Section 4.2.
“Parent Employee Benefit Plan” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.19(a).
“Parent Entities” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“Parent Financial Statements” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.7(b).
“Parent Intellectual Property” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.20.
“Parent Material Adverse Effect” has the meaning set forth in Article VI.
“Parent Material Agreement” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.12.
“Parent Member” means any “Member” as such term is defined in the Parent Agreement.
“Parent Membership Interest” means any “Member Interest” as such term is defined in the Parent Agreement.
“Parent Permits” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.11(b).
“Parent Preferred Units” means, collectively, the Parent Series A Preferred Units, the Parent Series B Preferred Units and the Parent
Series C Preferred Units.
“Parent Reserve Report” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.14.
“Parent SEC Documents” has the meaning set forth in Article VI.
“Parent Series A Preferred Units” means the equity interests in Parent having the rights and obligations specified with respect to the
“Series A Preferred Units” as set forth in the Parent Agreement.
“Parent Series B Preferred Units” means the equity interests in Parent having the rights and obligations specified with respect to the
“Series B Preferred Units” as set forth in the Parent Agreement.
“Parent Series C Preferred Units” means the equity interests in Parent having the rights and obligations specified with respect to the
“Series C Preferred Units” as set forth in the Parent Agreement.
A-11
“Parent Unitholders” means, collectively, the holders of outstanding Parent Common Units, Parent Class B Units and Parent Preferred
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Units.
“Partnership” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“Partnership Board” means the board of directors of Partnership GP, the general partner of the Partnership.
“Partnership Board Recommendation” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.2(b).
“Partnership Certificate of Limited Partnership” means the certificate of limited partnership of the Partnership as filed with the Secretary
of State of the State of Delaware on April 28, 2011.
“Partnership Change in Recommendation” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.3(c).
“Partnership Common Units” means the common units representing limited partner interests of the Partnership having the rights and
obligations specified with respect to the “Common Units” as set forth in the Existing Partnership Agreement.
“Partnership Disclosure Schedule” has the meaning set forth in Section 4.1.
“Partnership Employee Benefit Plan” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.19(a).
“Partnership Entities” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“Partnership Financial Statements” has the meaning set forth Section 5.7(b).
“Partnership GP” has the meaning set forth in the Preamble.
“Partnership GP LLC Agreement” means the Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of LRE GP, LLC dated as of
November 16, 2011.
“Partnership Intellectual Property” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.20.
“Partnership LTIP” means the LRE GP, LLC Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended from time to time.
“Partnership Material Adverse Effect” has the meaning set forth in Article V.
“Partnership Material Agreement” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.12(a).
“Partnership Meeting” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.6.
“Partnership Parties” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.13.
“Partnership Permits” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.11(b).
“Partnership Related Party Transaction” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.21.
“Partnership Reserve Reports” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.14.
“Partnership Restricted Units” means Partnership Common Units issued under the Partnership LTIP and subject to a risk of forfeiture
thereunder.
“Partnership SEC Documents” has the meaning set forth in Article V.
“Partnership Unitholder Approval” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.26.
“Partnership Unitholders” means the holders of outstanding Partnership Common Units.
“Party” means a party to this Agreement.
“Permitted Encumbrances” means:
(a) to the extent waived prior to the Effective Time, preferential purchase rights, rights of first refusal, purchase options and similar rights
granted pursuant to any contracts, including joint operating agreements, joint ownership agreements, stockholders agreements, organic
documents and other similar agreements and documents;
A-12
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(b) contractual or statutory mechanic’s, materialmen’s, warehouseman’s, journeyman’s and carrier’s Liens and other similar Liens arising
in the ordinary course of business for amounts not yet delinquent and Liens for Taxes or assessments that are not yet delinquent or, in all
instances, if delinquent, that are being contested in good faith in the ordinary course of business and for which adequate reserves have
been established by the Party responsible for payment thereof;
(c) lease burdens payable to third parties that are deducted in the calculation of discounted present value in the Partnership Reserve
Reports or the Parent Reserve Report, as applicable, including any royalty, overriding royalty, net profits interest, production payment,
carried interest or reversionary working interest;
(d) (i) contractual or statutory Liens securing obligations for labor, services, materials and supplies furnished to mineral interests, or (ii)
Liens on pipeline or pipeline facilities that arise out of operation of Law, or (iii) Liens arising in the ordinary course of business under
operating agreements, joint venture agreements, partnership agreements, oil and gas leases, farm-out agreements, division orders,
contracts for the sale, purchase, transportation, processing or exchange of oil, gas or other Hydrocarbons, unitization and pooling
declarations and agreements, area of mutual interest agreements, development agreements, joint ownership arrangements and other
agreements that are customary in the oil and gas business, provided, however, that, in the case of any Lien described in the foregoing
clauses (i), (ii) or (iii), such Lien (A) secures obligations that are not Indebtedness and are not delinquent and (B) has no material adverse
effect on the value, use or operation of the property encumbered thereby;
(e) Liens incurred in the ordinary course of business on cash or securities pledged in connection with workmen’s compensation,
unemployment insurance or other forms of governmental insurance or benefits, or to secure performance of tenders, statutory obligations,
leases and contracts (other than for Indebtedness) entered into in the ordinary course of business (including lessee and operator
obligations under statute, governmental regulations or instruments related to the ownership, exploration and production of oil, gas and
minerals on state, federal or foreign lands or waters) or to secure obligations on surety or appeal bonds;
(f) pre-judgment Liens and judgment Liens in existence less than 15 days after the entry thereof or with respect to which execution has
been stayed or the payment of which is covered in full (subject to a customary deductible) by insurance;
(g) Liens resulting from the deposit of funds or evidences of Indebtedness in trust for the purpose of defeasing Indebtedness of the
Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries, to the extent existing on the date of this Agreement;
(h) customary Liens for the fees, costs and expenses of trustees and escrow agents pursuant to the indenture, escrow agreement or other
similar agreement establishing such trust or escrow arrangement;
(i) such title defects as Parent (in the case of title defects with respect to properties or assets of the Partnership or its Subsidiaries) or the
Partnership (in the case of title defects with respect to properties or assets of Parent or its Subsidiaries), as applicable, may have
expressly waived in writing;
(j) rights reserved to or vested in any Governmental Authority to control or regulate any of the Partnership’s or Parent’s or their respective
Subsidiaries’ properties or assets in any manner;
(k) Liens existing on the date of this Agreement securing any Indebtedness;
(l) all easements, zoning restrictions, rights-of-way, servitudes, permits, surface leases and other similar rights in respect of surface
operations, and easements for pipelines, streets, alleys, highways, telephone lines, power lines, railways and other easements and rights-
of-way, on, over or in respect of any of the properties of the Partnership or Parent or any of their respective Subsidiaries that are
customarily granted in the oil and gas industry and (i) do not materially interfere with the operation, value or use of the property or asset
affected or (ii) increase the burdens payable to third parties that are deducted in the calculation of discounted present value in the
Partnership Reserve Reports or Parent Reserve Report, as applicable, including any royalty, overriding royalty, net profits interest,
production payment, carried interest or reversionary working interest;
A-13
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(m) any Liens discharged at or prior to the Effective Time; and
(n) all other Liens, defects and irregularities not arising in connection with Indebtedness, and any encroachments, overlapping
improvements, and other state of facts as would be shown on an accurate survey of any real property, that are not such as to materially
interfere with the operation, value or use of the property or asset affected.
“Person” or “person” means any individual, corporation, limited liability company, limited or general partnership, limited liability
partnership, joint venture, association, joint stock company, trust, unincorporated organization, Governmental Authority, or any group
comprised of two or more of the foregoing.
“Proceedings” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.16.
“Proxy Statement” has the meaning set forth in Section 5.6.
“Registration Rights Agreement” has the meaning set forth in the Recitals.
“Registration Statement” has the meaning set forth in Section 6.6.
“Release” means any depositing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, placing, emitting, discarding, abandoning, emptying, discharging,
migrating, injecting, escaping, leaching, seeping, dumping or disposing into the indoor or outdoor environment.
“Representatives” means with respect to a Person, its directors, officers, employees, agents and representatives, including any
investment banker, financial advisor, attorney, accountant or other advisor, agent or representative.
“Rights” means, with respect to any Person, (a) options, warrants, preemptive rights, subscriptions, calls or other rights, convertible
securities, exchangeable securities, agreements or commitments of any character obligating such person (or the general partner of such
person) to issue, transfer or sell any partnership or other equity interest of such person or any of its Subsidiaries or any securities
convertible into or exchangeable for such partnership interests or equity interests, or (b) contractual obligations of such person (or the
general partner of such person) to repurchase, redeem or otherwise acquire any partnership interest or other equity interest in such person
or any of its Subsidiaries or any such securities or agreements listed in clause (a) of this definition.
“SEC” means the Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Securities Act” means the Securities Act of 1933, 15 U.S.C. §77a et seq., as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to a Person, any Person, whether incorporated or unincorporated, of which (a) at least 50% of the
securities or ownership interests having by their terms ordinary voting power to elect a majority of the board of directors or other Persons
performing similar functions, (b) a general partner interest or (c) a managing member interest, is directly or indirectly owned or controlled
by such Person or by one or more of its respective Subsidiaries.
“Superior Proposal” has the meaning set forth in Section 7.3(i)(ii).
“Surviving Entity” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.2(a).
“Takeover Law” means any “fair price,” “moratorium,” “control share acquisition,” “business combination” or any other anti-takeover statute
or similar statute enacted under state or federal law.
“Tax Law” means any Law relating to Taxes.
“Tax Return” means any return, report or similar filing (including any attached schedules, supplements and additional or supporting
material) filed or required to be filed with respect to Taxes, including any information return, claim for refund, amended return or
declaration of estimated Taxes (and including any amendments with respect thereto).
A-14
TABLE OF CONTENTS
“Taxes” means all taxes, charges, fees, levies or other assessments, including all net income, gross income, gross receipts, sales, use, ad
valorem, goods and services, capital, transfer, franchise, profits, license, withholding, payroll, employment, employer health, excise,
estimated, severance, stamp, occupation, property or other taxes, custom duties, or other similar assessments or charges of any kind
whatsoever, together with any interest and any penalties, additions to tax or additional amounts imposed by any Governmental Authority,
whether disputed or not.
“Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement” means a Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement, substantially in
the form of Exhibit A to this Agreement.
“Termination Fee” has the meaning set forth in Section 9.4(g).
“Transactions” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.2(a).
“Voting Agreement” has the meaning set forth in the Recitals.
“Willful Breach” has the meaning set forth in Section 9.3.
1.2 Interpretation.  Unless expressly provided for elsewhere in this Agreement, this Agreement will be interpreted in accordance with the
following provisions:
(a) the words “this Agreement,” “herein,” “hereby,” “hereunder,” “hereof,” and other equivalent words refer to this Agreement as an entirety
and not solely to the particular portion, article, section, subsection or other subdivision of this Agreement in which any such word is used;
(b) examples are not to be construed to limit, expressly or by implication, the matter they illustrate;
(c) the word “including” and its derivatives means “including without limitation” and is a term of illustration and not of limitation;
(d) all definitions set forth herein are deemed applicable whether the words defined are used herein in the singular or in the plural and
correlative forms of defined terms have corresponding meanings;
(e) the word “or” is not exclusive, and has the inclusive meaning represented by the phrase “and/or”;
(f) a defined term has its defined meaning throughout this Agreement and each exhibit and schedule to this Agreement, regardless of
whether it appears before or after the place where it is defined;
(g) all references to prices, values or monetary amounts refer to United States dollars;
(h) wherever used herein, any pronoun or pronouns will be deemed to include both the singular and plural and to cover all genders;
(i) this Agreement has been jointly prepared by the Parties, and this Agreement will not be construed against any Person as the principal
draftsperson hereof or thereof and no consideration may be given to any fact or presumption that any Party had a greater or lesser hand in
drafting this Agreement;
(j) the captions of the articles, sections or subsections appearing in this Agreement are inserted only as a matter of convenience and in no
way define, limit, construe or describe the scope or extent of such section, or in any way affect this Agreement;
(k) any references herein to a particular Section, Article, Annex or Schedule means a Section or Article of, or an Annex or Schedule to,
this Agreement unless otherwise expressly stated herein;
(l) the Annexes and Schedules attached to this Agreement are incorporated herein by reference and will be considered part of this
Agreement;
(m) unless otherwise specified herein, all accounting terms used herein will be interpreted, and all determinations with respect to
accounting matters hereunder will be made, in accordance with GAAP, applied on a consistent basis;
A-15
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(n) all references to days mean calendar days unless otherwise provided; and
(o) all references to time mean Houston, Texas time.
ARTICLE II
PURCHASE OF GP MEMBERSHIP INTERESTS; THE MERGER;
EFFECTS OF THE MERGER
2.1 Purchase of GP Membership Interests.
(a) Agreement to Sell and Purchase GP Membership Interests.  On the Closing Date and upon the terms and subject to the conditions set
forth in this Agreement, in consideration of the GP Purchase Price, GP Sellers shall sell, assign, transfer, convey and deliver to Parent,
and Parent shall purchase and accept from GP Sellers, the GP Membership Interests (the “GP Purchase”), free and clear of all Liens
except for (i) restrictions on transfer arising under applicable securities Laws, (ii) the applicable terms and conditions of the Existing
Partnership Agreement and (iii) the applicable terms and conditions of the Partnership GP LLC Agreement.
(b) Acknowledgements.  Parent hereby agrees, and GP Sellers hereby acknowledge, that effective simultaneously with the Closing and
Parent’s acquisition of all of the GP Membership Interests by delivery of the GP Assignment by GP Sellers to Parent, Parent hereby
agrees to:
(i) accept, adopt, be bound by and subject to the terms and conditions of the Partnership GP LLC Agreement, and Parent acknowledges
that Partnership GP is a party to, bound by and subject to the terms and conditions of, the Existing Partnership Agreement; and
(ii) assume and agree to pay, perform and discharge when due all of the GP Sellers’ obligations, duties and liabilities under the
Partnership GP LLC Agreement from and after the consummation of the Closing. Effective simultaneously with the Closing, the GP Sellers
will cause Parent to be admitted as the sole member of Partnership GP with the right to participate in the management of the business and
affairs, and to exercise all of the rights and powers of the sole member, of Partnership GP, and concurrently therewith each GP Seller will
cease to be a member of Partnership GP and cease to have or exercise any right or power as a member of Partnership GP, except for the
rights of indemnification as provided by the Partnership GP LLC Agreement and the Partnership Agreement. The assignment and transfer
of the GP Membership Interests, the admission of Parent as the sole member of Partnership GP and each GP Seller ceasing to be a
member of Partnership GP will not dissolve Partnership GP, and Partnership GP will continue without dissolution after the Closing.
(c) Purchase Price.  At the Closing, Parent shall issue and deliver to GP Sellers, 12,320 Parent Common Units in the aggregate (the “GP
Purchase Price”), with such Parent Common Units comprising the GP Purchase Price allocated to the GP Sellers as set forth on Section
2.1(c) of the Partnership Disclosure Schedule.
(d) Anti-Dilution Provisions.  In the event that the outstanding Parent Common Units shall have been changed into a different number of
units or a different class after the date of this Agreement by reason of any subdivisions, reclassifications, splits, unit distributions,
combinations or exchanges of Parent Common Units, the GP Purchase Price will be correspondingly adjusted to provide to the GP
Sellers the same economic effect as contemplated by this Agreement prior to such event.
(e) Fractional New Common Units.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, any GP Seller who would otherwise have
been entitled to receive a fraction of a New Common Unit pursuant to Section 2.1(c) will receive from Parent, in lieu thereof, cash (without
interest rounded up to the nearest whole cent) in an amount equal to the product of (i) the Average Closing Price as of the Closing Date
and (ii) the fraction of a New Common Unit that such holder would otherwise be entitled to receive pursuant to Section 2.1(c), which
amount of cash, if any, shall be paid to the appropriate GP Seller at Closing, subject to and in accordance with the terms of this
Agreement.
A-16
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(f) Tax Characterization of GP Purchase.  The GP Sellers and Parent each acknowledges and agrees that for federal income Tax
purposes the GP Purchase will be treated as an “assets-over” partnership merger transaction under Treasury Regulations Sections 1.708-
1(c)(1) and 1.708-1(c)(3)(i), whereby Partnership GP will be the terminating partnership and Parent will be the resulting partnership. As a
result, for U.S. federal income Tax purposes the GP Purchase will be treated as a contribution of all of the assets of Partnership GP to
Parent in exchange for the GP Purchase Price, the cash received in lieu of fractional Parent Common Units and the assumption of
liabilities. To the maximum extent possible, any cash received in lieu of fractional Parent Common Units and other cash deemed received
in exchange for Partnership GP’s assets shall be treated as a reimbursement of preformation capital expenditures described in Treasury
Regulation Section 1.707-4(d). To the extent any cash received in lieu of fractional Parent Common Units and other cash deemed
received in exchange for Partnership GP’s assets exceeds the amount that can be so treated, such excess cash will be treated as
proceeds of a Disguised Sale. Each of the GP Sellers and Parent agrees to prepare and file all U.S. federal income Tax Returns in
accordance with the foregoing and shall not take any position inconsistent therewith on any such Tax Return, or in the course of any audit,
litigation or other proceeding with respect to U.S. federal income Taxes, except as otherwise required by applicable Laws following a final
determination by a court of competent jurisdiction or other final administrative decision by an applicable Governmental Authority.
2.2 The Merger.
(a) The Merger and Surviving Entity.  Upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Agreement, and in accordance with the
DRULPA and the DLLCA, at the Effective Time, Merger Sub will merge with and into the Partnership (the “Merger” and, together with the
GP Purchase, the “Transactions”), the separate existence of Merger Sub will cease, and the Partnership will survive and continue to exist
as a Delaware limited partnership (the Partnership, as the surviving entity in the Merger, sometimes being referred to herein as the
“Surviving Entity ”).
(b) Effectiveness and Effects of the Merger.  Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, the Merger will become effective upon the filing of
a properly executed certificate of merger (the “Certificate of Merger”) with the office of the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware or
such later date and time as may be agreed to by Parent and the Partnership and set forth in such Certificate of Merger (the “Effective
Time”), in accordance with the DRULPA. The Merger will have the effects set forth in this Agreement and the applicable provisions of the
DRULPA and the DLLCA.
(c) Certificate of Limited Partnership and Agreement of Limited Partnership.  At the Effective Time, (i) the Partnership Certificate of Limited
Partnership will remain unchanged and will be the certificate of limited partnership of the Surviving Entity until duly amended in
accordance with applicable Law and (ii) the Existing Partnership Agreement will remain unchanged and will be the agreement of limited
partnership of the Surviving Entity until duly amended in accordance with the terms thereof and applicable Law.
(d) Admission as Partner.  At the Effective Time, (i) by virtue of the Merger, and without any action on the part of Parent, Merger Sub, the
Partnership, the Partnership GP or any holder of Parent Securities or Partnership Common Units, Parent shall be admitted as the sole
limited partner of the Partnership and will hold all Partnership Common Units, (ii) Partnership GP shall continue as the sole general
partner of the Partnership and (iii) the Partnership shall continue without dissolution.
2.3 Closing.  Subject to the provisions of Article VIII, the closing of the Transactions and the other transactions contemplated hereby (the
“Closing”) will occur on (a) the third Business Day after the day on which the last of the conditions set forth in Article VIII (excluding
conditions that, by their nature, cannot be satisfied until the Closing Date, but subject to the satisfaction or waiver of those conditions)
have been satisfied or waived in accordance with the terms of this Agreement or (b) such other date to which Parent and the Partnership
may agree in writing. The date on which the Closing occurs is referred to as the “Closing Date.” The Closing of the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement will take place at the offices of Paul Hastings LLP, 600 Travis Street, 58th Floor, Houston, Texas 77002,
at 10:00 a.m. Houston time on the Closing Date.
A-17
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE III
MERGER CONSIDERATION; EXCHANGE PROCEDURES
3.1 Merger Consideration.  Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, at the Effective Time, by virtue of the Merger and without any
action on the part of Parent, Merger Sub, the Partnership, Partnership GP, or any holder of Parent securities or Partnership Common
Units:
(a) All of the limited liability company interests in Merger Sub outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time will be automatically
converted into 1,000 Partnership Common Units.
(b) The general partner interest in the Partnership issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time will remain outstanding
in the Surviving Entity in the form set forth in the Existing Partnership Agreement, and Partnership GP, as the holder of such general
partner interest, will continue as the sole general partner of the Surviving Entity as set forth in the Existing Partnership Agreement. At the
Effective Time, the books and records of the Partnership will be revised to reflect that all limited partners of the Partnership immediately
prior to the Effective Time cease to be limited partners of the Partnership pursuant to the terms of this Agreement and that Parent is the
sole limited partner of the Partnership, and the Partnership will continue without dissolution.
(c) Each Partnership Common Unit issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time (excluding any Excluded Units) will be
converted into the right to receive 0.550 Parent Common Units (the “Merger Consideration,” and such ratio, the “Exchange Ratio”),
which Parent Common Units will be duly authorized, validly issued and fully paid in accordance with applicable Laws and the Parent
Agreement, as applicable (such Parent Common Units described in this clause (c) and the Parent Common Units issued to the GP Sellers
as the GP Purchase Price are referred to collectively herein as the “New Common Units,” and the issuance of the New Common Units as
part of the Merger Consideration and GP Purchase Price pursuant to this Agreement is referred to herein as the “New Common Unit
Issuance”).
(d) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, at the Effective Time, each Partnership Common Unit (if any) owned
immediately prior to the Effective Time by the Partnership or its wholly owned Subsidiaries or by Parent or its wholly owned Subsidiaries
(collectively, the “Excluded Units”) will automatically be cancelled and cease to exist and no consideration will be received therefor.
3.2 Rights As Unitholders; Unit Transfers.  All Partnership Common Units converted into the right to receive the Merger Consideration
pursuant to Section 3.1(c) will cease to be outstanding and will automatically be canceled and will cease to exist when converted as a
result of and pursuant to the Merger. At the Effective Time, each holder of a certificate representing Partnership Common Units (a
“Certificate”) and each holder of non-certificated Partnership Common Units represented by book-entry (“Book-Entry Units”) will cease
to be a limited partner of the Partnership and cease to have any rights with respect thereto, except the right to receive (a) the Merger
Consideration, and the right to be admitted as an Additional Member of Parent in connection therewith, (b) any cash to be paid in lieu of
any fractional New Common Unit in accordance with Section 3.3(d), and (c) any distributions in accordance with Section 3.3(c), in each
case, to be issued or paid, without interest, in consideration therefor in accordance with Section 3.3; provided, however, that the rights of
(i) any holder of the Partnership Restricted Units will be as set forth in Section 3.5, and (ii) any holder of Excluded Units will be as set forth
in Section 3.1(d). In addition, holders as of the relevant record date of Partnership Common Units immediately prior to the Effective Time
will have continued rights to any distribution, without interest, with respect to such units with a record date occurring prior to the Effective
Time that may have been declared or made by the Partnership with respect to such Partnership Common Units in accordance with the
terms of the Existing Partnership Agreement and this Agreement and which remains unpaid as of the Effective Time. Such distributions by
the Partnership are not part of the Merger Consideration, and will be paid on the payment date set therefor to such holders of Partnership
Common Units regardless of whether they exchange their Partnership Common Units pursuant to Section 3.3. At the Effective Time, the
unit transfer books of the Partnership will be closed immediately and there will be no further registration of transfers on the unit transfer
books of the Partnership with respect to Partnership Common Units.
A-18
TABLE OF CONTENTS
3.3 Exchange of Certificates.
(a) Exchange Agent.  Prior to the Effective Time, Parent will appoint a commercial bank or trust company reasonably acceptable to the
Partnership to act as exchange agent hereunder for the purpose of exchanging Partnership Common Units for the Merger Consideration
as required by this Article III (the “Exchange Agent”). Promptly after the Effective Time, Parent will deposit, or cause to be deposited, with
the Exchange Agent for the benefit of the holders of the applicable Partnership Common Units, for exchange in accordance with this
Article III, through the Exchange Agent, New Common Units and cash as required by this Article III. Parent agrees to make available to the
Exchange Agent, from time to time as needed, cash sufficient to pay any distributions pursuant to Section 3.3(c) and to make payments in
lieu of any fractional New Common Units pursuant to Section 3.3(d), in each case without interest. Any cash (including as payment for any
fractional New Common Units in accordance with Section 3.3(d) and any distributions with respect to such fractional New Common Units
in accordance with Section 3.3(c)) and New Common Units deposited with the Exchange Agent are hereinafter referred to as the
“Exchange Fund.” The Exchange Agent will, pursuant to irrevocable instructions, deliver the Merger Consideration contemplated to be
paid for Partnership Common Units pursuant to this Agreement out of the Exchange Fund. Except as contemplated by Sections 3.3(c) and
3.3(d), the Exchange Fund will not be used for any other purpose.
(b) Exchange Procedures.  Promptly after the Effective Time, Parent will instruct the Exchange Agent to mail to each record holder of
Partnership Common Units as of the Effective Time (other than holders of Excluded Units) (i) a letter of transmittal (specifying that in
respect of certificated Partnership Common Units, delivery will be effected, and risk of loss and title to the Certificates will pass, only upon
proper delivery of the Certificates to the Exchange Agent, and which will be in customary form and agreed to by Parent and the
Partnership prior to the Effective Time) (the “Letter of Transmittal”), and (ii) instructions (in customary form and agreed to by Parent and
the Partnership prior to the Effective Time) for use in effecting the surrender of the Certificates or Book-Entry Units in exchange for the
Merger Consideration payable in respect of Partnership Common Units represented by such Certificates or Book-Entry Units, as
applicable. Promptly after the Effective Time, upon surrender of Certificates, if any, for cancellation to the Exchange Agent together with
such letters of transmittal, properly completed and duly executed, and such other documents (including in respect of Book-Entry Units) as
may reasonably be required pursuant to such instructions, each holder who held Partnership Common Units immediately prior to the
Effective Time (other than (x) holders of the Partnership Restricted Units and (y) holders of Excluded Units) will be entitled to receive upon
surrender of the Certificates or Book-Entry Units therefor (A) New Common Units representing, in the aggregate, the whole number of
New Common Units that such holder has the right to receive pursuant to this Article III (after taking into account all Partnership Common
Units then held by such holder), and (B) a check in an amount equal to the aggregate amount of cash that such holder has the right to
receive pursuant to this Article III, including cash payable in lieu of any fractional New Common Units pursuant to Section 3.3(d) and
distributions pursuant to Section 3.3(c). No interest will be paid or accrued on any Merger Consideration, any cash payment in lieu of
fractional New Common Units, or any Parent distributions payable pursuant to Section 3.3(c). In the event of a transfer of ownership of
Partnership Common Units that is not registered in the transfer records of the Partnership, the Merger Consideration payable in respect of
such Partnership Common Units may be paid to a transferee, if the Certificate representing such Partnership Common Units or evidence
of ownership of the Book-Entry Units is presented to the Exchange Agent, and in the case of both certificated and Book-Entry Units,
accompanied by all documents reasonably required to evidence and effect such transfer and the Person requesting such exchange will
pay to the Exchange Agent in advance any transfer or other Taxes required by reason of the delivery of the Merger Consideration in any
name other than that of the record holder of such Partnership Common Units, or will establish to the satisfaction of the Exchange Agent
that such Taxes have been paid or are not payable. Until such required documentation has been delivered and Certificates, if any, have
been surrendered, as contemplated by this Section 3.3, each Certificate or Book-Entry Unit representing a Partnership Common Unit
(other than an Excluded Unit) will be deemed at any time after the Effective Time to represent only the right to receive upon such delivery
and surrender the Merger Consideration
A-19
TABLE OF CONTENTS
payable in respect of Partnership Common Units, and (without the necessity of such surrender) any cash or distributions to which such
holder is entitled pursuant to this Section 3.3.
(c) Distributions with Respect to Unexchanged Partnership Common Units.  No distributions declared or made with respect to Parent
Common Units with a record date after the Effective Time will be paid to the holder of any Partnership Common Units with respect to New
Common Units that such holder would be entitled to receive in accordance herewith and no cash payment in lieu of fractional New
Common Units will be paid to any such holder until such holder has delivered the required documentation and surrendered any
Certificates or Book-Entry Units as contemplated by this Section 3.3. Subject to applicable Law, following compliance with the
requirements of Section 3.3(b), there will be paid to such holder of New Common Units issuable in exchange therefor, without interest, (i)
promptly after the time of such compliance, the amount of any cash payable in lieu of fractional New Common Units to which such holder
is entitled pursuant to Section 3.3(d) (which shall be paid by the Exchange Agent as provided therein) and the amount of distributions with
a record date after the Effective Time theretofore paid with respect to New Common Units and payable with respect to such New Common
Units, and (ii) promptly after such compliance, or, if later, at the appropriate payment date, the amount of distributions with a record date
after the Effective Time, but prior to such delivery and surrender and a payment date subsequent to such compliance payable with respect
to such New Common Units (which shall be paid by Parent).
(d) Fractional New Common Units.  No certificates or scrip of New Common Units representing fractional New Common Units or book
entry credit of the same will be issued upon the surrender of Partnership Common Units outstanding immediately prior to the Effective
Time in accordance with Section 3.3(b), and such fractional interests will not entitle the owner thereof to vote or to have any rights as a
holder of any New Common Units. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, each holder of Partnership Common Units
converted in the Merger who would otherwise have been entitled to receive a fraction of a New Common Unit (after taking into account all
Partnership Common Units exchanged by such holder) will receive, in lieu thereof, cash (without interest rounded up to the nearest whole
cent) in an amount equal to the product of (i) the Average Closing Price as of the Closing Date and (ii) the fraction of a New Common Unit
that such holder would otherwise be entitled to receive pursuant to this Article III. As promptly as practicable after the determination of the
amount of cash, if any, to be paid to holders of fractional interests, Parent will cause the Exchange Agent to forward payments to such
holders of fractional interests subject to and in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.
(e) Further Rights in Partnership Common Units.  The Merger Consideration issued upon conversion of a Partnership Common Unit in
accordance with the terms of this Agreement (including any cash paid pursuant to Section 3.3(d)) and any declared distributions to be
paid on Partnership Common Units as described in Section 3.3(c) will be deemed to have been issued in full satisfaction of all rights
pertaining to such Partnership Common Unit.
(f) Termination of Exchange Fund.  Any portion of the Exchange Fund that remains undistributed to the holders of Partnership Common
Units after 180 days following the Effective Time will be delivered to Parent upon demand by Parent and, from and after such delivery, any
former holders of Partnership Common Units who have not theretofore complied with this Article III will thereafter look only to Parent for
the Merger Consideration payable in respect of such Partnership Common Units, any cash in lieu of fractional New Common Units to
which they are entitled pursuant to Section 3.3(d), or any distributions with respect to New Common Units to which they are entitled
pursuant to Section 3.3(c), in each case, without any interest thereon. Any amounts remaining unclaimed by holders of Partnership
Common Units immediately prior to such time as such amounts would otherwise escheat to or become the property of any Governmental
Authority will, to the extent permitted by applicable Law, be held by Parent. Without limitation of the foregoing, after 180 days following the
Effective Time any amounts remaining unclaimed by holders of Partnership Common Units will become the property of Parent, subject to
the legitimate claims of any Person previously entitled thereto under abandoned property, escheat or similar laws.
A-20
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(g) Lost Certificates.  If any Certificate is lost, stolen or destroyed, upon the making of an affidavit of that fact by the Person claiming such
Certificate to be lost, stolen or destroyed and, if required by Parent, the posting by such Person of an indemnity agreement or a bond, in
such amount reasonably determined by Parent, as indemnity against any claim that may be made against it with respect to such
Certificate, the Exchange Agent will pay in exchange for such lost, stolen or destroyed Certificate the Merger Consideration payable in
respect of Partnership Common Units represented by such Certificate and any distributions to which the holders thereof are entitled
pursuant to Section 3.3(c) and any cash payable in lieu of fractional New Common Units to which the holders thereof are entitled pursuant
to Section 3.3(d).
(h) Withholding.  Parent and the Exchange Agent are entitled to deduct and withhold from the consideration otherwise payable pursuant to
this Agreement to any holder of Partnership Common Units such amounts as Parent or the Exchange Agent reasonably deems to be
required to deduct and withhold under the Code or any provision of state, local, or foreign Tax Law, with respect to the making of such
payment; provided, however, that Parent or the Exchange Agent, as applicable, will provide reasonable notice to the applicable holders of
Partnership Common Units prior to deducting and withholding any amounts pursuant to this Section 3.3(h). To the extent that amounts are
so deducted and withheld, such amounts will be treated for all purposes of this Agreement as having been paid to the holder of
Partnership Common Units in respect of whom such deduction and withholding was made by Parent or the Exchange Agent. The Parties
agree that the Partnership intends to deliver to Parent a valid certificate of non-foreign status pursuant to U.S. Treasury Regulations
Section 1.1445-2(b) such that no withholding will be required pursuant to Section 1445 of the Code.
(i) Book Entry and Admission of Holders of New Common Units as Additional Members of Parent.  All New Common Units to be issued in
the Merger will be issued in book-entry form, without physical certificates. Upon the issuance of New Common Units to the holders of
Partnership Common Units in accordance with this Section 3.3 and the execution and delivery by such holder of a completed and
executed Letter of Transmittal, Parent and the Parent Board will be deemed to have automatically consented to the admission of such
holder as a member of Parent in respect of its New Common Units such holder shall be automatically admitted as a member of Parent and
such admission will be reflected on the books and records of Parent.
(j) Investment of the Exchange Fund.  Parent will cause the Exchange Agent to invest the Exchange Fund as directed by Parent on a daily
basis, in Parent’s sole discretion; provided, however, that no such investment or loss thereon affects the amounts payable or the timing of
the amounts payable to the Partnership Unitholders pursuant to the other provisions of this Section 3.3. Any interest and other income
resulting from such investments will be paid promptly to Parent.
(k) Tax Characterization of Merger and Cash Received.  The Partnership and Parent each acknowledges and agrees that for federal
income Tax purposes the transactions consummated pursuant to this Agreement will be treated as an “assets-over” partnership merger
transaction under Treasury Regulations Sections 1.708-1(c)(1) and 1.708-1(c)(3)(i), whereby the Partnership will be the terminating
partnership and Parent will be the resulting partnership. As a result, the transactions consummated pursuant to this Agreement shall be
treated for U.S. federal income Tax purposes as a contribution of all of the assets of the Partnership to Parent in exchange for the Merger
Consideration, the cash received in lieu of fractional Parent Common Units and the assumption of liabilities. To the maximum extent
possible, any cash received in lieu of fractional Parent Common Units and other cash deemed received in exchange for the assets shall
be treated as a reimbursement of preformation capital expenditures described in Treasury Regulation Section 1.707-4(d). To the extent
any cash received in lieu of fractional Parent Common Units and other cash deemed received in exchange for the assets exceeds the
amount that can be so treated, such excess cash will be treated as proceeds of a disguised sale transaction described in Section 707(a)
(2)(B) of the Code (a “Disguised Sale”). Each of the Partnership and Parent agrees to prepare and file all U.S. federal income Tax
Returns in accordance with the foregoing and shall not take any position inconsistent therewith on any such Tax Return, or in the course
of any audit, litigation or other proceeding with respect to U.S. federal income Taxes, except as otherwise required by
A-21
TABLE OF CONTENTS
applicable Laws following a final determination by a court of competent jurisdiction or other final administrative decision by an applicable
Governmental Authority.
3.4 Anti-Dilution Provisions.  Without limiting the covenants in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, in the event the outstanding Partnership Common
Units or Parent Common Units shall have been changed into a different number of units or a different class after the date of this
Agreement by reason of any subdivisions, reclassifications, splits, unit distributions, combinations or exchanges of Partnership Common
Units or Parent Common Units, the Exchange Ratio will be correspondingly adjusted to provide to the holders of such Partnership
Common Units and Partnership Restricted Units the same economic effect as contemplated by this Agreement prior to such event.
3.5 Treatment of the Partnership LTIP.  Immediately prior to the Effective Time, any award of Partnership Restricted Units that is subject
to time-based vesting and that is outstanding and unvested immediately prior to the Effective Time will, automatically and without any
action on the part of the holder thereof, become fully vested and the restrictions with respect thereto shall lapse and such Partnership
Restricted Units shall be deemed to be Partnership Common Units for purposes of this Article III.
ARTICLE IV
ACTIONS PENDING CLOSING
4.1 Conduct of Business by the Partnership.  From the date of this Agreement until the earlier of the Effective Time and the termination
of this Agreement pursuant to Article IX, and except (i) as expressly contemplated or permitted by this Agreement, (ii) as may be required
by applicable Law or the terms of any Partnership Employee Benefit Plan, (iii) as set forth in the disclosure letter delivered by the
Partnership to Parent (the “Partnership Disclosure Schedule”) or (iv) with the prior written consent of Parent (which consent will not be
unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed), neither the Partnership nor Partnership GP will (and no GP Seller nor Partnership GP
will take any such action on behalf of the Partnership or Partnership GP), and will cause each of the Partnership’s Subsidiaries not to:
(a) (i) conduct its business and the business of its Subsidiaries in all material respects other than in the ordinary course, (ii) fail to use
commercially reasonable efforts to preserve intact its business organizations, goodwill and assets and maintain its rights, franchises and
existing relations with customers, suppliers, employees and business associates, or (iii) take any action that adversely affects the ability of
any Party to obtain any approvals required under the HSR Act for the transactions contemplated hereby; provided, however, that no action
or omission by the Partnership or its Subsidiaries with respect to matters specifically addressed by any provision of Sections 4.1(b)
through (r) shall be a breach of this Section 4.1(a);
(b) (i) issue, sell or otherwise permit to become outstanding, or authorize the creation of, any additional equity or any additional Rights or
(ii) enter into any agreement with respect to the foregoing;
(c) (i) split, combine or reclassify any of its equity interests or issue or authorize or propose the issuance of any other securities in respect
of, in lieu of or in substitution for its equity interests, or (ii) repurchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, or permit any of its Subsidiaries to
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire any membership, partnership or other equity interests or Rights, except upon the forfeiture of
Partnership Restricted Units in connection with the terms of the Partnership LTIP and any related award agreements or to satisfy any Tax
withholding obligations of the holder thereof or net unit settlements made in connection with the vesting of Partnership Restricted Units or
as required by the terms of its securities outstanding on the date of this Agreement by any existing Partnership Employee Benefit Plan;
(d) (i) sell, lease, transfer, farmout, exchange, dispose of, license, convey or discontinue all or any portion of its assets, business or
properties other than (A) in the ordinary course of business (including sales, transfers and dispositions of inventory, commodities and
produced Hydrocarbons, crude oil and refined products), (B) any individual sales, leases, dispositions or discontinuances for
consideration not in excess of $5,000,000, or (C) any distributions expressly permitted under Section 4.1(e), (ii) acquire, by merger or
otherwise, or lease any assets or all or any portion of the business or property of any other entity other than in the ordinary course of
business, (iii) merge, consolidate or enter into any other
A-22
TABLE OF CONTENTS
business combination transaction with any Person, or (iv) convert from a limited partnership, limited liability company or corporation, as
the case may be, to any other business entity;
(e) make or declare dividends or distributions (i) to the holders of Partnership Common Units that are special or extraordinary distributions
or that are in a cash amount in excess of $0.1875 per Partnership Common Unit per quarter or (ii) to the holders of any other units of or
interests in the Partnership, other than distributions under the Existing Partnership Agreement by reason of regular quarterly cash
distributions to the Partnership Unitholders;
(f) amend the Partnership Certificate of Limited Partnership, Existing Partnership Agreement, the certificate of formation of Partnership GP,
the Partnership GP LLC Agreement or the organizational documents of any Subsidiary of the Partnership;
(g) enter into any contract, agreement or arrangement that would be a Partnership Material Agreement;
(h) modify, amend, terminate or assign, or waive or assign any rights under any Partnership Material Agreement in a manner that is
materially adverse to Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, or that would reasonably be expected to
prevent or materially delay the consummation of the Merger or the other transactions contemplated by this Agreement;
(i) waive, release, assign, settle or compromise any material claim, action or proceeding, including any state or federal regulatory
proceeding seeking damages or injunction or other equitable relief;
(j) implement or adopt any change in its GAAP accounting principles, practices or methods, other than as may be required by GAAP;
(k) fail to use commercially reasonable efforts to maintain, with financially responsible insurance companies, insurance in such amounts
and against such risks and losses as is maintained by it at present;
(l) (i) change in any material respect any of its express or deemed elections relating to Taxes, including elections for any and all joint
ventures, partnerships, limited liability companies or other investments where it has the capacity to make such binding election, (ii) settle
or compromise any material claim, action, suit, litigation, proceeding, arbitration, investigation, audit or controversy relating to Taxes, (iii)
amend, in any material respect any Tax Return, or (iv) change in any material respect any of its methods of reporting income or deductions
for federal income tax purposes from those employed in the preparation of its federal income Tax Return for the most recent taxable year
for which a return has been filed, except as may be required by applicable Law;
(m) except with respect to Insperity Employee Benefit Plans, (i) increase in any respect the compensation of its officers or employees
whose annual base compensation exceeds $200,000 (provided that Partnership GP shall provide prompt written notice of any increase in
the compensation of its officers or employees), (ii) take any action to increase, or accelerate the payment or vesting of the amounts,
benefits or rights payable or accrued or to become payable or accrued under, any Partnership Employee Benefit Plan, (iii) grant any
severance or termination pay to any officer or director of Partnership GP or any Employee, or (iv) establish, adopt, enter into or amend any
plan, policy, program or arrangement for the benefit of any current or former directors or officers of the Partnership or any of its
Subsidiaries or any of their beneficiaries;
(n) (i) incur, assume, guarantee or otherwise become liable for any Indebtedness (directly, contingently or otherwise), other than (A)
borrowings under the Partnership’s existing revolving credit facility or any one or more refinancings of all or any portion of the
Indebtedness thereunder entered into on commercially reasonable and customary terms; provided that the aggregate amount of
Indebtedness described in this clause (A) shall not exceed $300.0 million; provided, further that the Partnership and Partnership GP shall
consult with Parent prior to paying or agreeing to pay any fees with respect to the Indebtedness described in this clause (A), and in no
event shall such fees exceed $1,000,000; or (B) trade credit in the ordinary course of business, (ii) redeem, repurchase, cancel or
otherwise acquire any Indebtedness (directly, contingently or otherwise), (iii) enter into any material lease (whether operating or capital),
(iv) create any Lien on its property or the property of its Subsidiaries in connection with any
A-23
TABLE OF CONTENTS
pre-existing Indebtedness, new Indebtedness or lease, except with respect to any existing revolving credit facility or any refinancings
thereof referred to in clause (i) immediately above, or (v) make or commit to make any capital expenditures other than such capital
expenditures as are contemplated in the Partnership’s 2015 capital budget or satisfy the Partnership’s plugging and abandonment
obligations as disclosed in the Partnership SEC Documents filed with or furnished to the SEC prior to the date of this Agreement;
(o) authorize, recommend, propose or announce an intention to adopt a plan of complete or partial dissolution or liquidation;
(p) take any action or fail to take any action that would reasonably be expected to cause the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries that is
not a corporation to be treated, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, as a corporation;
(q) enter into any Partnership Related Party Transaction; and
(r) agree or commit to do anything prohibited by clauses (a) through (q) of this Section 4.1;
provided, however, that the foregoing does not limit or restrict the ability of the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries to take otherwise
prohibited actions in response to emergency situations to the extent required in order to ensure the protection of individuals assets or
compliance with any Environmental Law; including with respect to any Release or threatened Release of Hazardous Materials; provided
that the Partnership promptly notifies Parent of the same.
4.2 Conduct of Business by Parent.  From the date of this Agreement until the earlier of the Effective Time and the termination of this
Agreement pursuant to Article IX, and except (i) as expressly contemplated or permitted by this Agreement, (ii) as may be required by
applicable Law, (iii) as set forth in the disclosure letter delivered by Parent to the Partnership and GP Sellers (the “Parent Disclosure
Schedule”), or (iv) with the prior written consent of the Partnership Board (which consent will not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned
or delayed), Parent will not and will cause each of its Subsidiaries not to:
(a) (i) conduct its business and the business of its Subsidiaries in all material respects other than in the ordinary course, (ii) fail to use
commercially reasonable efforts to preserve intact its business organizations, goodwill and assets and maintain its rights, franchises and
existing relations with customers, suppliers, employees and business associates, or (iii) take any action that adversely affects the ability of
any Party to obtain any approvals required under the HSR Act for the transactions contemplated hereby; provided, however that no action
or omission by Parent or its Subsidiaries with respect to matters specifically addressed by the provisions of Sections 4.2(b) though (l) shall
be a breach of this Section 4.2(a);
(b) (i) issue, sell or otherwise permit to become outstanding, or authorize the creation of, any additional equity or any additional Rights or
(ii) enter into any agreement with respect to the foregoing; provided, however, that Parent may issue and sell any combination of Parent
Common Units, Parent Series A Preferred Units, Parent Series B Preferred Units or Parent Series C Preferred Units pursuant to the terms
of the Equity Distribution Agreement in the ordinary course of business;
(c) (i) split, combine or reclassify any of its equity interests or issue or authorize or propose the issuance of any other securities in respect
of, in lieu of or in substitution for its equity interests, or (ii) repurchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, or permit any of its Subsidiaries to
purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire any membership, partnership or other equity interests or Rights, except for net unit settlements
made in connection with the vesting of restricted units or as required by the terms of its securities outstanding on the date of this
Agreement by any existing Parent Employee Benefit Plan;
(d) (i) sell, lease, transfer, farmout, exchange, dispose of, license, convey or discontinue all or any portion of its assets, business or
properties other than (A) in the ordinary course of business (including sales, transfers and dispositions of inventory, commodities and
produced Hydrocarbons, crude oil and refined products), (B) any individual sales, leases, dispositions or discontinuances for
consideration not in excess of $20,000,000, or (C) any distributions expressly permitted under Section 4.2(e), (ii) merge,
A-24
consolidate or enter into any other business combination transaction with any Person or (iii) convert from a limited partnership or limited
liability company, as the case may be, to any other business entity;
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(e) make or declare dividends or distributions to the holders of Parent Common Units, Parent Series A Preferred Units, Parent Series B
Preferred Units and Parent Series C Preferred or to the holders of any other units of or interests in Parent, other than distributions under
the Parent Agreement, as in effect on the date of this Agreement, by reason of regular monthly or quarterly cash distributions to Parent
Unitholders;
(f) amend Parent’s certificate of formation, Parent Agreement or any organizational document of Parent’s Subsidiaries as in effect on the
date of this Agreement;
(g) modify, amend, terminate or assign, or waive or assign any rights under any Parent Material Agreement in a manner that is materially
adverse to Parent and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, or that would, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a
Parent Material Adverse Effect, or that would reasonably be expected to prevent or materially delay the consummation of the Merger or the
other transactions contemplated by this Agreement past the Outside Date;
(h) implement or adopt any material change in its GAAP accounting principles, practices or methods, other than as may be required by
GAAP;
(i) (i) change in any material respect any of its express or deemed elections relating to Taxes, including elections for any and all joint
ventures, partnerships, limited liability companies or other investments where it has the capacity to make such binding election, (ii) settle
or compromise any material claim, action, suit, litigation, proceeding, arbitration, investigation, audit or controversy relating to Taxes, (iii)
amend in any material respect any Tax Return or (iv) change in any material respect any of its methods of reporting income or deductions
for federal income tax purposes from those employed in the preparation of its federal income Tax Return for the most recent taxable year
for which a return has been filed, except as may be required by applicable Law;
(j) authorize, recommend, propose or announce an intention to adopt a plan of complete or partial dissolution or liquidation;
(k) take any action or fail to take any action that would reasonably be expected to cause Parent or any of its Subsidiaries that is not a
corporation to be treated, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, as a corporation; and
(l) agree or commit to do anything prohibited by clauses (a) through (j) of this Section 4.2;
provided, however, that the foregoing does not limit or restrict the ability of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries to take otherwise prohibited
actions (x) to the extent that any such action is implemented to rationalize the corporate structure of Parent and its Subsidiaries and does
not result in the relevant assets being ultimately controlled, directly or indirectly, by a Person other than Parent, or (y) in response to
emergency situations to the extent required in order to ensure the protection of individuals or assets or compliance with any
Environmental Law; including with respect to any Release or threatened Release of Hazardous Materials; provided that Parent promptly
notifies the Partnership of the same.
ARTICLE V
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE
PARTNERSHIP ENTITIES
Except as set forth in (a) all forms, registration statements, reports, schedules and statements filed or furnished by the Partnership with the
SEC under the Exchange Act or the Securities Act since January 1, 2014 and prior to the date of this Agreement, and in each case
including all exhibits and schedules thereto and documents incorporated by reference therein (collectively, the “Partnership SEC
Documents”) (but excluding any disclosure contained in any such Partnership SEC Documents under the heading “Risk Factors” or
“Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” or similar heading (other than any historical factual information contained
within such headings, disclosure or statements)), or (b) the Partnership Disclosure Schedule prior to the execution of this Agreement
(provided that (i) disclosure in any section of such Partnership Disclosure Schedule is deemed to be disclosed with respect to any other
section of this Agreement to the extent that it is reasonably apparent on the face of the Partnership Disclosure Schedule that
A-25
TABLE OF CONTENTS
such disclosure is applicable to such other section notwithstanding the omission of a reference or cross reference thereto, and (ii) the
mere inclusion of an item in such Partnership Disclosure Schedule as an exception to a representation or warranty is not deemed an
admission that such item represents a material exception or material fact, event or circumstance or that such item has had, or would
reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect on the Partnership (a “Partnership Material
Adverse Effect”)), the Partnership Entities represent and warrant to Parent as follows:
5.1 Organization, General Authority and Standing.  Each Partnership Entity is a limited partnership or limited liability company validly
existing and in good standing under the Laws of the State of Delaware and has all requisite power and authority to own, lease and
operate its properties and assets and to carry on its business as presently conducted. Section 5.1 of the Partnership Disclosure Schedule
sets forth a true and complete list of the Partnership’s Subsidiaries. Each of the Partnership’s Subsidiaries (a) is a limited partnership,
corporation or limited liability company, as the case may be, validly existing and in good standing under the Laws of its jurisdiction of
organization, (b) has all requisite limited partnership, corporate or limited liability company, as applicable, power and authority to own,
lease and operate its properties and assets and to carry on its business as presently conducted and (c) is duly licensed or qualified to do
business and in good standing to do business as a foreign limited partnership, corporation or limited liability company, as the case may
be, in each jurisdiction in which the conduct or nature of its business or the ownership, leasing, holding or operating of its properties
makes such licensing or qualification necessary, except in the case of clauses (b) and (c), as would not reasonably be expected to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
5.2 Capitalization.
(a) As of the close of business on April 17, 2015, there are 28,074,433 Partnership Common Units issued and outstanding (including
363,296 Partnership Restricted Units), and all such Partnership Common Units and limited partner interests represented thereby were
duly authorized, are validly issued in accordance with the Existing Partnership Agreement and, except as expressly provided in the
Existing Partnership Agreement, are not subject to any preemptive or similar rights (and were not issued in violation of any preemptive or
similar rights). Partnership GP is the sole general partner of the Partnership, owning 22,400 general partner units and all of the IDRs,
which constitutes all of the outstanding general partner interests and IDRs in the Partnership, and such general partner interests and IDRs
were duly authorized and validly issued in accordance with the Existing Partnership Agreement.
(b) GP Sellers are the sole record and beneficial owners of, and have valid title to, the GP Membership Interests, free and clear of all Liens
except for (i) restrictions on transfer arising under applicable securities Laws and (ii) the applicable terms and conditions of the
Partnership GP LLC Agreement. The GP Membership Interests have been duly authorized and validly issued in accordance with the
Partnership GP LLC Agreement and are fully paid (to the extent required by the Partnership GP LLC Agreement) and nonassessable
(except as such nonassessability may be affected by Sections 18-607 and 18-804 of the Delaware Limited Liability Company Act). Except
as expressly provided in the Partnership GP LLC Agreement, there are no preemptive or other rights to subscribe for or to purchase, and
no restriction upon the voting or transfer of, any interest in Partnership GP. Other than this Agreement, there are no outstanding options,
warrants or similar rights to purchase or acquire from Partnership GP or the GP Sellers any equity interests in Partnership GP. Partnership
GP has no outstanding bonds, debentures, notes or other obligation the holders of which have the right to vote (or are convertible into or
exercisable for securities having the right to vote) with the holders of the GP Membership Interests. The GP Sellers have delivered a true,
correct and complete copy of the Partnership GP LLC Agreement to Parent.
(c) As of the date of this Agreement, except as set forth above in this Section 5.2, (i) there are no partnership interests, limited liability
company interests or other equity securities of the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries issued or authorized and reserved for issuance,
(ii) except as set forth in the Existing Partnership Agreement, there are no outstanding options, warrants, preemptive rights, subscriptions,
calls or other rights, convertible securities, exchangeable securities, agreements or commitments of any character obligating the
Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries to issue, transfer or
A-26
TABLE OF CONTENTS
sell any partnership or other equity interest of the Partnership or such Subsidiary or any securities convertible into or exchangeable for
such partnership interests or equity interests, or any commitment to authorize, issue or sell the same or any such equity securities, except
pursuant to this Agreement, and (iii) there are no contractual obligations of the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries to repurchase,
redeem or otherwise acquire any partnership interest or other equity interest in the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries or any such
securities or agreements listed in clause (ii) of this sentence.
(d) Neither the Partnership nor any of its Subsidiaries has outstanding bonds, debentures, notes or other Indebtedness, the holders of
which have the right to vote (or which are convertible or exchangeable into or exercisable for securities having the right to vote) with the
Partnership Unitholders on any matter.
(e) There are no voting trusts or other agreements or understandings to which the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries is a party with
respect to the voting or registration of capital stock or other equity interest of the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries.
5.3 Equity Interests in Other Entities.  Other than ownership of interests in its Subsidiaries as set forth in Section 5.1 of the Partnership
Disclosure Schedule, neither the Partnership nor Partnership GP owns beneficially, directly or indirectly, any equity securities or similar
interests of any person, or any interest in a partnership or joint venture of any kind. The Partnership or Partnership GP owns such interests
in its respective Subsidiaries free and clear of all Liens, except for Permitted Encumbrances.
5.4 Power, Authority and Approvals of Transactions.  Each Partnership Entity has the requisite limited partnership or limited liability
company power and authority to execute, deliver and perform its obligations under this Agreement and, subject to the Partnership
Unitholder Approval, to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby. Subject to the Partnership Unitholder Approval, this
Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby have been authorized by all necessary limited partnership or limited liability
company action by each Partnership Entity. This Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by each Partnership Entity and,
assuming due authorization, execution and delivery by the Other Parties thereto, constitutes each Partnership Entity’s valid and binding
obligation, enforceable against each Partnership Entity in accordance with its terms (except to the extent that its enforceability may be
limited by applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization or other similar Law affecting the enforcement of creditors’ rights generally or
by general equitable principles).
5.5 No Violations or Defaults.  Subject to required filings under federal and state securities laws and with the NASDAQ, assuming the
other consents and approvals contemplated by Section 5.6 and Article VIII are duly obtained and assuming the consents, waivers and
approvals specified in Section 7.9(a) are obtained, the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement and the consummation of
the transactions contemplated hereby by each Partnership Entity do not and will not (a) constitute a breach or violation of, or result in a
default (or an event that, with notice or lapse of time or both, would become a default) under, or result in the termination or in a right of
termination or cancellation of, or accelerate the performance required by, any note, bond, mortgage, indenture, deed of trust, license,
franchise, lease, contract, agreement, joint venture or other instrument or obligation to which any Partnership Entity or any of its respective
Subsidiaries is a party or by which any Partnership Entity or any of its Subsidiaries or properties is subject or bound except for such
breaches, violations, defaults, terminations, cancellations or accelerations that, either individually or in the aggregate, would not
reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect, (b) constitute a breach or violation of, or a default under the
Existing Partnership Agreement, the Partnership Certificate of Limited Partnership, the Partnership GP LLC Agreement or the certificate of
limited partnership of Partnership GP, (c) materially contravene or conflict with or constitute a material violation of any provision of any
Law binding upon or applicable to any Partnership Entity or any of its Subsidiaries or (d) result in the creation of any material Lien on any
of the assets of the Partnership Entities or any of their respective Subsidiaries’ assets.
5.6 Consents and Approvals.  No consents or approvals of, or filings or registrations with, any Governmental Authority are necessary in
connection with (a) the execution and delivery by each Partnership Entity of this Agreement or (b) the consummation by any Partnership
Entity of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, except for (i) the filing with the SEC of a proxy statement (the “Proxy
Statement”) relating to the matters to be submitted to the Partnership Unitholders at a meeting of such holders for the
A-27
TABLE OF CONTENTS
purpose of approving this Agreement and the Merger (including any adjournment or postponement thereof, the “Partnership Meeting”)
and other filings required under federal or state securities laws, (ii) the filing of the Certificate of Merger with the Secretary of State of the
State of Delaware, (iii) any consents, authorizations, approvals, filings or exemptions in connection with compliance with the rules of the
NASDAQ, (iv) such filings and approvals as may be required to be made or obtained under the Antitrust Laws, and (v) such other
consents, authorizations, approvals, filings or registrations the absence or unavailability of which would not, either individually or in the
aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect or prevent or materially delay the consummation of the
Transactions.
5.7 Financial Reports and the Partnership SEC Documents.
(a) Since January 1, 2014, the Partnership has filed or furnished with the SEC all forms, registration statements, reports, schedules and
statements required to be filed or furnished under the Exchange Act or the Securities Act. At the time filed (or, in the case of registration
statements, solely on the dates of effectiveness) (except to the extent amended by a subsequently filed Partnership SEC Document prior
to the date of this Agreement, in which case as of the date of such amendment), each Partnership SEC Document complied in all material
respects with the applicable requirements of the Exchange Act and the Securities Act, as the case may be and did not contain any untrue
statement of a material fact, or omit to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading.
(b) Any consolidated financial statements of the Partnership included in the Partnership SEC Documents (the “Partnership Financial
Statements”) as of their respective dates (if amended, as of the date of the last such amendment) (i) complied as to form in all material
respects with applicable accounting requirements and with the published rules and regulations of the SEC with respect thereto, (ii) were
prepared in accordance with GAAP applied on a consistent basis during the periods involved (except as may be expressly indicated in
the notes thereto or, in the case of unaudited statements, for normal year-end adjustments (that are not individually or in the aggregate
material) and the absence of footnotes, in each case, to the extent permitted by applicable SEC regulations)), and (iii) fairly present in all
material respects the consolidated financial position of the Partnership and its Subsidiaries as of the dates thereof and the consolidated
results of their operations and cash flows for the periods then ended (subject, in the case of unaudited quarterly statements, to normal
year-end adjustments that are not, individually or in the aggregate, material).
5.8 Internal Controls and Procedures.  The Partnership has established and maintains internal control over financial reporting and
disclosure controls and procedures (as such terms are defined in Rule 13a-15 and Rule 15d-15 under the Exchange Act); such disclosure
controls and procedures are designed to ensure that material information relating to the Partnership, including its Subsidiaries, required to
be disclosed by the Partnership in the reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to the
Partnership’s principal executive officer and its principal financial officer to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure; and such
disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed by the Partnership in the reports that it
files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in SEC rules
and forms. The Partnership’s principal executive officer and its principal financial officer have disclosed, based on their most recent
evaluation, to the Partnership’s auditors and the audit committee of the Partnership Board (a) all significant deficiencies in the design or
operation of internal controls that could adversely affect the Partnership’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial data
and have identified for the Partnership’s auditors any material weaknesses in internal controls and (b) any fraud, regardless of whether
material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the Partnership’s internal controls. The principal
executive officer and the principal financial officer of the Partnership have made all certifications required by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the
Exchange Act and any related rules and regulations promulgated by the SEC with respect to the Partnership SEC Documents, and the
statements contained in such certifications were complete and correct as of the dates they were made.
A-28
TABLE OF CONTENTS
5.9 Absence of Undisclosed Liabilities.  Except as disclosed in the audited financial statements (or notes thereto) included in the
Partnership’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 (the “Balance Sheet Date”), and in the financial
statements (or notes thereto) included in subsequent Partnership SEC Documents filed by the Partnership prior to the date of this
Agreement, neither the Partnership nor any of its consolidated subsidiaries had at the Balance Sheet Date or has incurred since that date,
any liabilities or obligations (whether absolute, accrued, contingent or otherwise) of any nature, except (a) liabilities, obligations or
contingencies that (i) are accrued or reserved against in the financial statements of the Partnership included in the Partnership SEC
Documents filed prior to the date of this Agreement, or reflected in the notes thereto, (ii) were incurred since the Balance Sheet Date in the
ordinary course of business and consistent with past practices, or (iii) relate to this Agreement, the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement or the proposal of Parent with respect to the Merger or (b) liabilities, obligations or contingencies that (i) would not reasonably
be expected, either individually or in the aggregate, to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect or (ii) have been discharged or paid in
full prior to the date of this Agreement.
5.10 Absence of Certain Changes or Events.
(a) Since the Balance Sheet Date, there has not been any change, event, development, circumstance, condition, occurrence or effect that
has had or would reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
(b) Since the Balance Sheet Date through the date of this Agreement, except for this Agreement and the transactions contemplated
hereby, (i) the Partnership and Partnership GP have carried on and operated their businesses in all material respects in the ordinary
course of business and (ii) none of the Partnership, Partnership GP or any Subsidiary of the Partnership or Partnership GP has
undertaken any action that would be prohibited by clauses (d), (e), (g), (h), (i), (l), (o), (p) or (to the extent related to any of the foregoing
clauses) (r) of Section 4.1 if such provisions were in effect at all times since the Balance Sheet Date.
5.11 Compliance with Applicable Law; Permits.
(a) Except with respect to Tax matters (which are provided for in Section 5.18) and environmental matters (which are provided for in
Section 5.13), each of the Partnership and Partnership GP is in compliance with all, and is not in default under or in violation of any,
applicable Law, other than any noncompliance, default or violation that would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be
expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect. Neither the Partnership nor Partnership GP has received any written
communication since the Balance Sheet Date and prior to the date of this Agreement from a Governmental Authority that alleges that the
Partnership is not in compliance with or is in default or violation of any applicable Law, except where such non-compliance, default or
violation would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
(b) Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries are in possession of all franchises, tariffs, grants, authorizations, licenses,
permits, easements, variances, exemptions, consents, certificates, approvals and orders of any Governmental Authority necessary under
applicable Law to own, lease and operate their properties and to lawfully carry on their businesses as they are being conducted as of the
date of this Agreement (collectively, the “Partnership Permits”), except where the failure to be in possession of such Partnership Permits
would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect. All Partnership Permits
are in full force and effect, except where the failure to be in full force and effect would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be
expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect. No suspension or cancellation of any of the Partnership Permits is pending or, to
the Knowledge of the Partnership, threatened, except where such suspension or cancellation would not, individually or in the aggregate,
reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
A-29
TABLE OF CONTENTS
5.12 Material Contracts.
(a) Section 5.12 of the Partnership Disclosure Schedule contains a listing of the following contracts to which Partnership GP, the
Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries is a party in effect on the date of this Agreement (each contract that is described in this Section 5.12
being a “Partnership Material Agreement”):
(i) each “material contract” (as such term is defined in Item 601(b)(10) of Regulation S-K of the SEC);
(ii) each contract that provides for the acquisition, disposition, license, use, distribution or outsourcing of assets, services, rights or
properties with a value, or requiring the payment of an annual amount by the Partnership or Partnership GP, in excess of $2,500,000;
(iii) each agreement that constitutes a commitment relating to indebtedness for borrowed money or the deferred purchase price of property
by the Partnership or Partnership GP (whether incurred, assumed, guaranteed or secured by any asset) in excess of $2,500,000, and any
contract securing the obligations of Partnership GP, the Partnership or its Subsidiaries with respect to such commitment, in each case,
other than agreements solely between or among Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries;
(iv) each contract for lease of personal property or real property involving aggregate payments in excess of $2,500,000 in any calendar
year that are not terminable within 60 days, other than contracts related to drilling rigs;
(v) each contract containing a non-compete or similar type of provision that, following the Closing, by virtue of Parent becoming Affiliated
with the Partnership and Partnership GP as a result of this transaction, would by its terms materially restrict the ability of Parent to compete
in any line of business or with any Person or in any geographic area during any period of time after the Closing;
(vi) each contract involving the pending acquisition or sale of (or option to purchase or sell) any material amount of the assets or properties
of Partnership GP, the Partnership or its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole;
(vii) each contract for futures, swap, collar, put, call, floor, cap, option, or other contract that is intended to reduce or eliminate the
fluctuations in the prices of commodities, including natural gas, natural gas liquids, crude oil and condensate or fluctuations in interest
rates that will be binding on the Partnership or Partnership GP after the Closing (each contract described in this Section 5.12(a)(vii), a
“Commodity Derivative Instrument”);
(viii) each partnership, joint venture or limited liability company agreement, other than any customary joint operating agreements, unit
agreements or participation agreements affecting the Oil and Gas Properties of the Partnership;
(ix) each contract expressly limiting or restricting the ability of Partnership GP, the Partnership or its Subsidiaries to make distributions or
declare or pay dividends in respect of their capital stock, partnership interests, membership interests or other equity interests, as the case
may be;
(x) each contract entered into in connection with a Partnership Related Party Transaction;
(xi) each contract that requires the Partnership or Partnership GP to make expenditures that would reasonably be expected to be in
excess of $2,500,000 in the aggregate during the 12-month period following the date of this Agreement;
(xii) each collective bargaining agreement to which the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries is a party or is subject; and
(xiii) each agreement under which the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries has advanced or loaned any amount of money to any of its
officers, directors, employees or consultants, in each case with a principal amount in excess of $10,000.
A-30
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(b) Except to the extent that enforceability thereof may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, fraudulent transfer, reorganization,
moratorium and similar laws relating to or affecting creditors’ rights generally and by general principles of equity; and provided that any
indemnity, contribution and exoneration provisions contained in any such Partnership Material Agreement may be limited by applicable
Law and public policy, each of the Partnership Material Agreements (i) constitutes the valid and binding obligation of the Partnership or
Partnership GP and constitutes the valid and binding obligation of the other parties thereto and (ii) is in full force and effect as of the date
of this Agreement, in each case unless the failure to be so would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a
Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
(c) There is not, to the Knowledge of the Partnership, under any Partnership Material Agreement, any default or event that, with notice or
lapse of time or both, would constitute a default on the part of any of the parties thereto, or any notice of termination, cancellation or
material modification, in each case, except such events of default, other events, notices or modifications as to which requisite waivers or
consents have been obtained or which would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material
Adverse Effect.
5.13 Environmental Matters.  Except as reflected in the Partnership Financial Statements, and except for any such matter that would not,
individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect:
(a) Each of Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries and their respective assets, real properties and operations are in
compliance with all Environmental Laws and Environmental Permits;
(b) Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries have obtained all Environmental Permits required under Environmental Laws to
operate the business as currently operated. Section 5.13(b) of the Partnership Disclosure Schedule sets forth a true and complete list of
all Environmental Permits issued to Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries;
(c) None of Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries has received any written notice from any Governmental Authority
alleging, with respect to any such entity or any of their respective assets, real properties (whether owned or leased or formerly owned or
leased) or operations, the violation of or liability under any Environmental Law (including liability as a potentially responsible party under
CERCLA or any analogous state laws) or any Environmental Permit that remains pending or unresolved;
(d) There are no actions, suits, proceedings (including civil, criminal, administrative and dispute resolution proceedings), claims, causes of
action, government investigations, orders, decrees or judgments pending or in effect, or, to the Knowledge of the Partnership, threatened
by a Governmental Authority or other third party against Partnership GP, the Partnership or its Subsidiaries that allege a violation of or
liability under any Environmental Law that remain pending or unresolved, and, to the Knowledge of the Partnership, there are no existing
facts or circumstances that would reasonably be expected to give rise to any such action, suit, proceeding, claim, cause of action,
investigation, order, decree or judgment that remain pending or unresolved;
(e) There has been no Release of any Hazardous Material by the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries in violation of Environmental Law
at, on, under or from any real properties as a result of the operations of the Partnership or its Subsidiaries that has not been remediated as
required by any Environmental Law or otherwise adequately reserved for in the Partnership Financial Statements; and
(f) This Section 5.13 constitutes the sole and exclusive representation and warranty of the Partnership Entities with respect to
Environmental Permits, Hazardous Materials and Environmental Law.
5.14 Reserve Report.  The factual, non-interpretive data relating to the Oil and Gas Properties of the Partnership on which the reserve
report prepared by each of Miller and Lents, Ltd., Netherland, Sewell and Associates, Inc. and Ryder Scott Petroleum Consultants referred
to in the Partnership’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2014 (the “Partnership Reserve Reports”)
was based was accurate in all material respects at the time such data was provided to each of Miller and Lents, Ltd., Netherland, Sewell
and Associates, Inc. and Ryder Scott Petroleum Consultants. With respect to the proved
A-31
TABLE OF CONTENTS
reserves reflected in the Partnership Reserve Reports, the Partnership Reserve Reports conform in all material respects to the guidelines
with respect thereto of the SEC. Except for changes (including changes in Hydrocarbon commodity prices) generally affecting the oil and
gas industry and normal depletion by production, there has been no change in respect of the matters addressed in the Partnership
Reserve Reports that would, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
5.15 Title to Properties.  Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries have good and indefeasible title to all real and personal
properties that are material to the business of Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries, in each case free and clear of all Liens
and defects and imperfections of title except (a) such as do not materially affect the value of such property and do not materially interfere
with the use made and proposed to be made of such property by Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries, (b) for Permitted
Encumbrances and (c) such as would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material
Adverse Effect.
5.16 Litigation.  As of the date of this Agreement, there are no civil, criminal or administrative actions, suits, litigation, claims, causes of
action, investigations, arbitrations, mediations or other proceedings (collectively, “Proceedings”) pending or, to the Knowledge of the
Partnership, threatened, against Partnership GP, the Partnership or its Subsidiaries or to which Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of
its Subsidiaries is otherwise a party or, to the Knowledge of the Partnership, a threatened party, except for Proceedings that would not,
individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect or to prevent or materially delay the
consummation of the Transactions.
5.17 Information Supplied.  Subject to the accuracy of the representations and warranties of Parent and Merger Sub set forth in Article
VI, none of the information supplied (or to be supplied) in writing by or on behalf of the Partnership specifically for inclusion in (a) the
Registration Statement will, at the time the Registration Statement, or any amendment or supplement thereto, is filed with the SEC or at
the time it becomes effective under the Securities Act, contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact
required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in light of the circumstances under which they are
made, not misleading, or (b) the Proxy Statement (which will be included as a prospectus in the Registration Statement) will, on the date
the Proxy Statement is first mailed to Partnership Unitholders and at the time of the Partnership Unitholders Meeting, contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements
therein, in light of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading. The Proxy Statement will comply as to form in all
material respects with the applicable requirements of the Exchange Act. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Partnership makes no
representation or warranty with respect to information supplied by or on behalf of Parent or Merger Sub for inclusion or incorporation by
reference in any of the foregoing documents.
5.18 Tax Matters.  Except as would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse
Effect:
(a) each of Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries has filed when due (taking into account extensions of time for filing) all
Tax Returns required to be filed by or with respect to Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries, and all such Tax Returns
are true, correct and complete;
(b) all Taxes owed by Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries (regardless of whether shown on any Tax Return) have
been duly and timely paid in full or an adequate reserve for the payment of such Taxes has been established in accordance with GAAP;
(c) there is no Proceeding now pending against Partnership GP, the Partnership GP or any of its Subsidiaries in respect of any Tax or Tax
Return, nor has any written adjustment with respect to a Tax Return or written claim for additional Tax been received by Partnership GP,
the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries that is still pending;
A-32
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(d) no written claim has been made by any Tax authority in a jurisdiction where Partnership GP, the Partnership or one of its Subsidiaries
do not currently file a Tax Return that the Partnership, Partnership GP or such Subsidiary is or may be subject to any Tax in such
jurisdiction, nor has any such assertion been threatened or proposed in writing and received by any Partnership Entity;
(e) there is no outstanding waiver or extension of any applicable statute of limitations for the assessment or collection of Taxes due from
Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries;
(f) each of Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries has complied in all respects with all applicable Law relating to the
payment and withholding of Taxes and has duly and timely withheld and paid all Taxes required to be withheld in connection with any
amounts paid or owing to any employee, creditor, independent contractor or other party;
(g) none of Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries is a party to a Tax allocation or sharing agreement, and no payments
are due or will become due by Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries pursuant to any such agreement or arrangement
or any Tax indemnification agreement;
(h) none of Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries has been a member of an affiliated group filing a consolidated
federal income Tax Return or has any liability for the Taxes of any Person (other than Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its
Subsidiaries), as a transferee or successor, by contract, or otherwise;
(i) Partnership GP, the Partnership and each of its Subsidiaries that is classified as a partnership for U.S. federal tax purposes has in
effect a valid election under Section 754 of the Code; and
(j) the Partnership is properly classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes, and not as an association or a publicly
traded partnership taxable as a corporation under Section 7704 of the Code, and has been properly treated as such since its formation;
and
(k) Partnership GP and each Subsidiary of the Partnership other than LRE Finance Corporation is currently (and has been since its
respective formation) either (i) properly classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes or (ii) properly disregarded as an
entity separate from its respective owner for U.S. federal income tax purposes pursuant to Treasury Regulation Section 301.7701-3(b).
5.19 Employee Benefits and Employment Matters.
(a) Section 5.19(a) of the Partnership Disclosure Schedule sets forth a complete and accurate list of each material Employee Benefit Plan
sponsored, maintained or contributed to by the Partnership or any of its ERISA Affiliates or for which the Partnership or any of its ERISA
Affiliates has or could have any liability, contingent or otherwise (each, a “Partnership Employee Benefit Plan”).
(b) With respect to each Partnership Employee Benefit Plan, the Partnership has heretofore made available to Parent a true and complete
copy, or summary if no plan document exists (provided, however, only to the extent such documents with respect to Insperity Employee
Benefit Plans are in the Partnership’s possession), as of the date of this Agreement, of (i) each Partnership Employee Benefit Plan, (ii)
each trust agreement or annuity contract, if any, in effect as of the date of this Agreement that relates to any Partnership Employee Benefit
Plan, (iii) the most recently prepared actuarial valuation report in connection with each Partnership Employee Benefit Plan for which an
actuarial valuation report was required to be prepared under applicable Law, (iv) the most recent insurance policy or other material
documentation relating directly or indirectly to the funding or administration of each Partnership Employee Benefit Plan, and (v) with
respect to documents that may not be found in public records, material filings and correspondence with any Governmental Authority within
the prior three (3) years.
(c) Each Partnership Employee Benefit Plan (provided, however, only to the Knowledge of the Partnership with respect to Insperity
Employee Benefit Plans) has been administered in all respects in accordance with its terms, and in compliance with the applicable
provisions of all Laws applicable to such Partnership Employee Benefit Plan, and complies with such terms and such Laws, in each case
except where the failure to be so administered or to so comply, would not, individually or in the
A-33
TABLE OF CONTENTS
aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect. There are no investigations by any Governmental
Authority, termination proceedings or other claims (except routine claims for benefits payable under the Partnership Employee Benefit
Plans) or proceedings pending or, to the Knowledge of the Partnership, threatened against or involving any Partnership Employee Benefit
Plan or asserting any rights to, or claims for benefits under, any Partnership Employee Benefit Plan that would reasonably be expected to
have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect (provided, however, in all cases only to the Knowledge of the Partnership with respect to
Insperity Employee Benefit Plans).
(d) Except as would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect, there do not now exist, nor do any
circumstances exist that would reasonably be expected to result in, any liabilities to the Partnership or any of its ERISA Affiliates under (i)
Title IV of ERISA, (ii) Section 302 of ERISA, (iii) Sections 412 and 4971 of the Code, (iv) to the Knowledge of the Partnership, a “multiple
employer welfare arrangement” (as defined in Section 3(40) of ERISA) or (v) to the Knowledge of the Partnership, a “multiple employer
plan” (as defined in Section 413(c) of the Code), in each case, that would reasonably be expected to be a liability of Parent and its
Affiliates following the Effective Time. Except as, individually or in the aggregate, would not reasonably be expected to have a Partnership
Material Adverse Effect, each Partnership Employee Benefit Plan that is intended to qualify under Section 401(a) of the Code has either
received a favorable determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service as to its qualified status or may rely upon an opinion letter for
a master/prototype plan or an advisory letter for a volume submitter plan and, to the Knowledge of the Partnership, nothing has occurred
that could adversely affect the qualified status of any such Partnership Employee Benefit Plan. Except as would not, individually or in the
aggregate, have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect, each Partnership Employee Benefit Plan conforms with or is exempt from Section
409A of the Code, and no “prohibited transaction,” within the meaning of Section 4975 of the Code or Sections 406 and 407 of ERISA,
and not otherwise exempt under Section 408 of ERISA, has occurred with respect to any Partnership Employee Benefit Plan (provided,
however, only to the Knowledge of the Partnership with respect to Insperity Employee Benefit Plans) and, to the Knowledge of the
Partnership, no fiduciary (within the meaning of Section 3(21) of ERISA) of any Partnership Employee Benefit Plan subject to Part 4 of
Title I of ERISA has committed a breach of fiduciary duty that could subject the Partnership to material liability taken as a whole. Each
Partnership Employee Benefit Plan that is not an Insperity Employee Benefit Plan can be amended, terminated or otherwise discontinued
after the Closing in accordance with its terms, without liability to Parent or the Partnership (other than ordinary administration expenses
and payment of accrued benefits).
(e) Except as set forth on Section 5.19(e) of the Partnership Disclosure Schedule, no payments (within the meaning of Section 280G of the
Code and related regulations) have or will be made under a Partnership Employee Benefit Plan in connection with the consummation of
the transactions contemplated hereby that, in the aggregate, would reasonably be expected to result in the imposition of sanctions
imposed under Sections 280G and 4999 of the Code, and there are no Liens arising from or relating to any Partnership Employee Benefit
Plan (provided, however, with respect to Liens, only to the Knowledge of the Partnership with respect to Insperity Employee Benefit
Plans).
(f) Except as set forth on Section 5.19(f) of the Partnership Disclosure Schedule, to the Knowledge of the Partnership, no Partnership
Employee Benefit Plan or any other arrangement maintained by Partnership GP, the Partnership or its Subsidiaries provides any of the
following retiree or post-employment benefits to any Person: medical, disability (other than disability benefits relating to a disability
occurring during relevant employment) or life insurance benefits, except as required by (i) the applicable requirements of Section 4980B of
the Code or any similar state law or (ii) company-paid or subsidized healthcare coverage pursuant to an employment, severance or similar
agreement, plan or arrangement. Except as would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect, each
of the Partnership and each of its ERISA Affiliates is in compliance with (A) the requirements of the applicable health care continuation
and notice provisions of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985, as amended, and the regulations (including
proposed
A-34
TABLE OF CONTENTS
regulations) thereunder and any similar state Law and (B) the applicable requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996, as amended, and the regulations (including the proposed regulations) thereunder.
(g) The Partnership and Partnership GP are and have been in compliance in all respects with all applicable Law relating to the
employment of labor, including all such applicable Law relating to wages, hours, collective bargaining, discrimination, civil rights, safety
and health and workers’ compensation, except where the failure to comply would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be
expected to have a Partnership Material Adverse Effect. There are no pending or, to the Knowledge of the Partnership, threatened
material investigations, audits, complaints or proceedings against the Partnership by or before any Governmental Authority involving any
applicant for employment, any current or former employee or any class of the foregoing that would reasonably be expected to result in a
Partnership Material Adverse Effect.
(h) None of Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries is a party to, or subject to, a collective bargaining agreement with
any labor union or representative of any Employees, and no organizational activity has occurred, or to the Knowledge of the Partnership
has been threatened, in each case within the past six years. There are no pending or, to the Knowledge of the Partnership, threatened,
labor disputes, strikes, lock-outs, work stoppages, requests for representation, pickets or work slow-downs, nor has such event or labor
difficulty occurred within the past three years.
(i) None of Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries has, or has ever had, any employees.
5.20 Intellectual Property.  Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries own or have the right to use all Intellectual Property
necessary for the operation of the businesses of Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries as presently conducted (collectively,
the “Partnership Intellectual Property”) free and clear of all Liens except for Permitted Encumbrances, except where the failure to own or
have the right to use such Intellectual Property would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership
Material Adverse Effect. To the Knowledge of the Partnership, the use of the Partnership Intellectual Property by the Partnership in the
operation of the business of the Partnership as presently conducted does not infringe upon or misappropriate any Intellectual Property of
any other Person, except for such matters that would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Partnership
Material Adverse Effect.
5.21 Related Party Transactions.  Except as disclosed in the Partnership SEC Documents, neither the Partnership nor any of its
Subsidiaries are party to any transaction or arrangement under which any (i) present or former executive officer or director of Partnership
GP, the Partnership or any Subsidiary of the Partnership, (ii) beneficial owner (within the meaning of Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act) of
5% or more of any class of the Partnership Units or (iii) Affiliate, “associate” or member of the “immediate family” (as such terms are
respectively defined in Rules 12b-2 and 16a-1 of the Exchange Act) of any of the foregoing is a party to any actual or proposed loan, lease
or other contract with or binding upon Partnership GP, the Partnership or any Subsidiary of the Partnership or owns or has any interest in
any of their respective properties or assets, in each case as would be required to be disclosed by the Partnership pursuant to Item 404 of
Regulation S-K promulgated under the Exchange Act (each of the foregoing, a “Partnership Related Party Transaction”).
5.22 Insurance.  Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries maintain, or are entitled to the benefits of, insurance in such
amounts and against such risks substantially as Partnership GP believes to be customary for the industries in which Partnership GP, the
Partnership and its Subsidiaries operate. Except as would not reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a
Partnership Material Adverse Effect, (a) all material insurance policies maintained by or on behalf of Partnership GP, the Partnership or
any of its Subsidiaries as of the date of this Agreement are in full force and effect, and all premiums due on such policies have been paid
by Partnership GP, the Partnership or its Subsidiaries and (b) Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries are in compliance with
the terms and provisions of all insurance policies maintained by or on behalf of Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries
as of the date of this
A-35
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Agreement, and none of Partnership GP, the Partnership, or its Subsidiaries are in breach or default under, or has taken any action that
would permit termination or material modification of, any material insurance policies.
5.23 Regulatory Matters.  Neither the Partnership nor Partnership GP is (a) an “investment company” or a company “controlled” by an
“investment company” within the meaning of the U.S. Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder or (b) a “holding company,” a “subsidiary company” of a “holding company,” an Affiliate of a “holding company,” a
“public utility” or a “public-utility company,” as each such term is defined in the U.S. Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005. None of
Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries owns or holds any refined petroleum product, crude oil, natural gas, liquefied
natural gas, natural gas liquid and other pipelines, lateral lines, pumps, pump stations, storage facilities, terminals, processing plants and
other related operations, assets, machinery or equipment that are subject to (a) regulation by the U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission under the Natural Gas Act of 1938, as amended, or (b) rate regulation or comprehensive nondiscriminatory access regulation
under the Laws of any state or other local jurisdiction.
5.24 Derivatives.  The Partnership SEC Documents accurately summarize, in all material respects, the outstanding Derivative positions
of Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries, including Hydrocarbon and financial Derivative positions attributable to the
production and marketing of Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries, as of the dates reflected therein.
5.25 State Takeover Statutes.  The Partnership Board has taken all action necessary to render inapplicable to this Agreement and the
transactions contemplated hereby and thereby, including the Merger, all potentially applicable state anti-takeover statutes or regulations
and any similar provisions in the Existing Partnership Agreement.
5.26 Partnership Unitholder Approval.  The approval of this Agreement by the affirmative vote or consent of the holders, as of the record
date for the Partnership Meeting, of at least a majority of the Outstanding (as defined in the Existing Partnership Agreement) Partnership
Common Units, voting as a class (the “Partnership Unitholder Approval”), is the only vote or approval of any class or series of securities
representing limited partner interests of the Partnership necessary to approve this Agreement and to approve the transactions
contemplated hereby, including the Merger.
5.27 Financial Advisors.  No Partnership Entity has incurred any liability for fees of any broker, finder or financial advisor in respect of the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement for which Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries will have any
responsibility or liability whatsoever, excluding fees to be paid to the Partnership’s financial advisors, pursuant to letter agreements, the
existence of which have been heretofore disclosed to Parent and which fees have been disclosed to Parent.
5.28 No Other Representations and Warranties.  Except for the representations and warranties set forth in this Article V, neither the
Partnership Entities nor any other Person makes or has made any express or implied representation or warranty with respect to the
Partnership Entities or with respect to any other information provided to Parent or Merger Sub in connection with the Transactions or the
other transactions contemplated hereby. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, neither the Partnership Entities nor any other
Person will have or be subject to any liability or other obligation to Parent, Merger Sub or any other Person resulting from the distribution
to Parent or Merger Sub (including their respective Representatives), or Parent’s or Merger Sub’s (or such Representatives’) use of, any
such information, including any information, documents, projections, forecasts or other material made available to Parent or Merger Sub in
certain “data rooms” or management presentations in expectation of the Transactions.
A-36
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE VI
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF PARENT AND
MERGER SUB
Except as set forth in (a) all forms, registration statements, reports, schedules and statements filed or furnished by Parent with the SEC
under the Exchange Act or the Securities Act since January 1, 2014 and on or prior to the date of this Agreement, and in each case
including all exhibits and schedules thereto and documents incorporated by reference therein (collectively, the “Parent SEC
Documents”) (but excluding any disclosure contained in any such Parent SEC Documents under the heading “Risk Factors” or
“Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” or similar heading (other than any historical factual information contained
within such headings, disclosure or statements)) or (b) the Parent Disclosure Schedule prior to the execution of this Agreement (provided
that (i) disclosure in any section of such Parent Disclosure Schedule is deemed to be disclosed with respect to any other section of this
Agreement to the extent that it is reasonably apparent on the face of the Parent Disclosure Schedule that such disclosure is applicable to
such other section notwithstanding the omission of a reference or cross reference thereto and (ii) the mere inclusion of an item in such
Parent Disclosure Schedule as an exception to a representation or warranty is not deemed an admission that such item represents a
material exception or material fact, event or circumstance or that such item has had, or would reasonably be expected to have, individually
or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect on Parent (a “Parent Material Adverse Effect ”)), Parent and Merger Sub represent and
warrant to the Partnership and GP Sellers as follows:
6.1 Organization, General Authority and Standing.  Parent is a limited liability company validly existing and in good standing under the
Laws of the State of Delaware and Merger Sub is a limited liability company validly existing and in good standing under the Laws of the
State of Delaware. Each of Parent and Merger Sub has all requisite power and authority to own, lease and operate its properties and
assets and to carry on its business as presently conducted. Section 6.1 of the Parent Disclosure Schedule sets forth a true and complete
list of Parent’s Subsidiaries. Each of Parent’s Subsidiaries (a) is a limited partnership, corporation or limited liability company, as the case
may be, validly existing and in good standing under the Laws of its jurisdiction of organization, (b) has all requisite limited partnership,
corporate or limited liability company, as applicable, power and authority to own, lease and operate its properties and assets and to carry
on its business as presently conducted and (c) is duly licensed or qualified to do business and in good standing to do business as a
foreign limited partnership, corporation or limited liability company, as the case may be, in each jurisdiction in which the conduct or nature
of its business or the ownership, leasing, holding or operating of its properties makes such licensing or qualification necessary, except in
the case of clauses (b) and (c) as would not reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse
Effect.
6.2 Capitalization.
(a) As of the close of business on April 17, 2015, there are 85,959,592 Parent Common Units issued and outstanding (including 884,711
restricted units of Parent), 420,000 Parent Class B Units issued and outstanding, 2,581,873 Parent Series A Preferred Units issued and
outstanding, 7,000,000 Parent Series B Preferred Units issued and outstanding, 4,300,000 Parent Series C Preferred Units issued and
outstanding, 411,578 Parent phantom units and no Parent unit options outstanding, and all such Parent Common Units, Parent Class B
Units, Parent Series A Preferred Units, Parent Series B Preferred Units, Parent Series C Preferred Units, phantom units and unit options
and the limited liability company interests represented thereby were duly authorized and are validly issued in accordance with the Parent
Agreement, and are not subject to any preemptive or similar rights (and were not issued in violation of any preemptive or similar rights).
(b) As of the date of this Agreement, except as set forth above in this Section 6.2, (i) there are no partnership interests, limited liability
company interests or other equity securities of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries issued or authorized and reserved for issuance, (ii) there
are no outstanding options, warrants, preemptive rights, subscriptions, calls or other rights, convertible securities, exchangeable
securities, agreements or commitments of any character obligating Parent or any of its Subsidiaries to issue, transfer or sell any
partnership or other equity interest of Parent or such Subsidiary or any securities convertible into or exchangeable for such partnership
interests or equity interests, or any commitment to authorize, issue or sell the same or any such equity securities, except pursuant to this
A-37
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Agreement, and (iii) there are no contractual obligations of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries to repurchase, redeem or otherwise acquire
any partnership interest or other equity interest in Parent or any of its Subsidiaries or any such securities or agreements listed in clause (ii)
of this sentence.
(c) Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has outstanding bonds, debentures, notes or other Indebtedness, the holders of which have
the right to vote (or which are convertible or exchangeable into or exercisable for securities having the right to vote) with the Parent
Unitholders on any matter.
(d) There are no voting trusts or other agreements or understandings to which Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is a party with respect to
the voting or registration of capital stock or other equity interest of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries.
6.3 Equity Interests in other Entities.  Other than ownership of interests in its Subsidiaries as set forth on Section 6.1 of the Parent
Disclosure Schedule, Parent does not own beneficially, directly or indirectly, any equity securities or similar interests of any person, or any
interest in a partnership or joint venture of any kind. Parent owns such interests in its Subsidiaries free and clear of all Liens, except for
Permitted Encumbrances.
6.4 Power, Authority and Approvals of Transactions.  Each of Parent and Merger Sub has the requisite limited liability company power
and authority to execute, deliver and perform its obligations under this Agreement and to consummate the transactions contemplated
hereby. This Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby have been authorized by all necessary limited liability company action
by Parent and by Merger Sub. The Parent Board has approved and declared advisable this Agreement and the transactions contemplated
hereby. This Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by Parent and Merger Sub and, assuming due authorization, execution
and delivery by the Partnership thereto, constitutes Parent’s and Merger Sub’s valid and binding obligations, enforceable against Parent
and Merger Sub in accordance with its terms (except to the extent that its enforceability may be limited by applicable bankruptcy,
insolvency, reorganization or other similar Law affecting the enforcement of creditors’ rights generally or by general equitable principles).
6.5 No Violations or Defaults.  Subject to required filings under federal and state securities laws and with the NASDAQ, assuming the
other consents and approvals contemplated by Section 5.6 and Article VIII are duly obtained and assuming the consents, waivers and
approvals specified in Section 7.9(a) are obtained, the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement and the consummation of
the transactions contemplated hereby by Parent do not and will not (a) constitute a breach or violation of, or result in a default (or an event
that, with notice or lapse of time or both, would become a default) under, or result in the termination or in a right of termination or
cancellation of, or accelerate the performance required by, any note, bond, mortgage, indenture, deed of trust, license, franchise, lease,
contract, agreement, joint venture or other instrument or obligation to which Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is a party or by which Parent
or any of its Subsidiaries or properties is subject or bound except for such breaches, violations, defaults, terminations, cancellations or
accelerations that, either individually or in the aggregate, would not reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect, (b)
constitute a breach or violation of, or a default under the Parent Agreement or Parent’s certificate of formation, (c) materially contravene or
conflict with or constitute a material violation of any provision of any Law binding upon or applicable to Parent or any of its Subsidiaries or
(d) result in the creation of any material Lien on any of the assets of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries’ assets.
6.6 Consents and Approvals.  No consents or approvals of, or filings or registrations with, any Governmental Authority are necessary in
connection with (a) the execution and delivery by Parent and Merger Sub of this Agreement or (b) the consummation by Parent or Merger
Sub of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, except for (i) the filing with the SEC of the Proxy Statement and the filing with the
SEC of the registration statement on Form S-4 by Parent in connection with the issuance of New Common Units in connection with the
Merger, which will include the Proxy Statement (as amended or supplemented from time to time, the “Registration Statement”), and other
filings under federal and state securities laws, (ii) the filing of the Certificate of Merger with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware,
(iii) any consents, authorizations, approvals, filings or exemptions in connection with compliance with the rules of the NASDAQ, (iv) such
filings and approvals as may be required to be made or obtained under the Antitrust
A-38
Laws, and (v) such other consents, authorizations, approvals, filings or registrations the absence or unavailability of which would not,
either individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect or prevent or materially delay the
TABLE OF CONTENTS
consummation of the Transactions.
6.7 Financial Reports and Parent SEC Documents.
(a) Since January 1, 2014, Parent has filed or furnished with the SEC all forms, registration statements, reports, schedules and statements
required to be filed or furnished under the Exchange Act or the Securities Act. At the time filed (or, in the case of registration statements,
solely on the dates of effectiveness) (except to the extent amended by a subsequently filed Parent SEC Document prior to the date of this
Agreement, in which case as of the date of such amendment), each Parent SEC Document complied in all material respects with the
applicable requirements of the Exchange Act and the Securities Act, as the case may be and did not contain any untrue statement of a
material fact, or omit to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading.
(b) Any consolidated financial statements of Parent included in the Parent SEC Documents (the “Parent Financial Statements”) as of
their respective dates (if amended, as of the date of the last such amendment) (i) complied as to form in all material respects with
applicable accounting requirements and with the published rules and regulations of the SEC with respect thereto, (ii) were prepared in
accordance with GAAP applied on a consistent basis during the periods involved (except as may be expressly indicated in the notes
thereto or, in the case of unaudited statements, for normal year-end adjustments (that are not individually or in the aggregate material) and
the absence of footnotes, in each case, to the extent permitted by applicable SEC regulations), and (iii) fairly present in all material
respects the consolidated financial position of Parent and its Subsidiaries as of the dates thereof and the consolidated results of their
operations and cash flows for the periods then ended (subject, in the case of unaudited quarterly statements, to normal year-end
adjustments that are not, individually or in the aggregate, material).
6.8 Internal Controls and Procedures.  Parent has established and maintains internal control over financial reporting and disclosure
controls and procedures (as such terms are defined in Rule 13a-15 and Rule 15d-15 under the Exchange Act); such disclosure controls
and procedures are designed to ensure that material information relating to Parent, including its Subsidiaries, required to be disclosed by
Parent in the reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to Parent’s principal executive
officer and its principal financial officer to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure; and such disclosure controls and
procedures are effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed by Parent in the reports that it files or submits under the
Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in SEC rules and forms. Parent’s
principal executive officer and its principal financial officer have disclosed, based on their most recent evaluation, to Parent’s auditors and
the audit committee of the Parent Board (a) all significant deficiencies in the design or operation of internal controls that could adversely
affect Parent’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial data and have identified for Parent’s auditors any material
weaknesses in internal controls and (b) any fraud, regardless of whether material, that involves management or other employees who
have a significant role in Parent’s internal controls. The principal executive officer and the principal financial officer of Parent have made
all certifications required by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the Exchange Act and any related rules and regulations promulgated by the SEC
with respect to the Parent SEC Documents, and the statements contained in such certifications were complete and correct as of the dates
they were made.
6.9 Absence of Undisclosed Liabilities.  Except as disclosed in the audited financial statements (or notes thereto) included in Parent’s
Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, and in the financial statements (or notes thereto) included in
subsequent Parent SEC Documents filed by Parent prior to the date of this Agreement, neither Parent nor any of its consolidated
subsidiaries had at the Balance Sheet Date or has incurred since that date, any liabilities or obligations (whether absolute, accrued,
contingent or otherwise) of any nature, except (a) liabilities, obligations or contingencies that (i) are accrued or reserved against in the
financial statements of Parent included in the Parent SEC Documents filed prior to the date of this Agreement, or reflected in the notes
thereto, (ii) were incurred since the Balance Sheet Date in the
A-39
ordinary course of business and consistent with past practices or (iii) relate to this Agreement, the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement or the proposal of Parent with respect to the Merger or (b) liabilities, obligations or contingencies that (i) would not reasonably
be expected, either individually or in the aggregate, to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect or (ii) have been discharged or paid in full
TABLE OF CONTENTS
prior to the date of this Agreement.
6.10 Absence of Certain Changes or Events.
(a) Since the Balance Sheet Date, there has not been any change, event, development, circumstance, condition, contribution, occurrence
or effect that has had, or would reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
(b) Since the Balance Sheet Date through the date of this Agreement, except for this Agreement and the transactions contemplated
hereby, (i) Parent and its Subsidiaries have carried on and operated their respective businesses in all material respects in the ordinary
course of business and (ii) none of Parent nor any Subsidiary of Parent has undertaken any action that would be prohibited by clauses (d),
(e), (f), (g), (j) or (to the extent related to any of the foregoing clauses) (l) of Section 4.2 if such provisions were in effect at all times since
the Balance Sheet Date.
6.11 Compliance with Applicable Law; Permits.
(a) Except with respect to Tax matters (which are provided for in Section 6.18) and environmental matters (which are provided for in
Section 6.13), each of Parent and its Subsidiaries is in compliance with all, and is not in default under or in violation of any applicable
Law, other than any noncompliance, default or violation that would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a
Parent Material Adverse Effect. Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has received any written communication since the Balance
Sheet Date and prior to the date of this Agreement from a Governmental Authority that alleges that Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is not
in compliance with or is in default or violation of any applicable Law, except where such non-compliance, default or violation would not,
individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
(b) Parent and its Subsidiaries are in possession of all franchises, tariffs, grants, authorizations, licenses, permits, easements, variances,
exemptions, consents, certificates, approvals and orders of any Governmental Authority necessary under applicable Law to own, lease
and operate their properties and to lawfully carry on their businesses as they are being conducted as of the date of this Agreement
(collectively, the “Parent Permits”), except where the failure to be in possession of such Parent Permits would not, individually or in the
aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect. All Parent Permits are in full force and effect, except where
the failure to be in full force and effect would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material
Adverse Effect. No suspension or cancellation of any of the Parent Permits is pending or, to the Knowledge of Parent, threatened, except
where such suspension or cancellation would not individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material
Adverse Effect.
6.12 Material Contracts.  (a) Section 6.12 of the Parent Disclosure Schedule contains a listing of the following contracts to which Parent
or any of its Subsidiaries is a party in effect on the date of this Agreement (each contract that is described in this Section 6.12 being a
“Parent Material Agreement”):
(i) each “material contract” (as such term is defined in Item 601(b)(10) of Regulation S-K of the SEC);
(ii) each contract that provides for the acquisition, disposition, license, use, distribution or outsourcing of assets, services, rights or
properties with a value, or requiring the payment of an annual amount by Parent, in excess of $25,000,000;
(iii) each agreement that constitutes a commitment relating to indebtedness for borrowed money or the deferred purchase price of property
by Parent (whether incurred, assumed, guaranteed or secured by any asset) in excess of $25,000,000 and any agreement securing the
obligations of Parent
A-40
TABLE OF CONTENTS
or its Subsidiaries with respect to such commitment, in each case, other than agreements solely between or among Parent and its
Subsidiaries;
(iv) each contract for lease of personal property or real property involving aggregate payments in excess of $25,000,000 in any calendar
year that are not terminable within 60 days, other than contracts related to drilling rigs;
(v) each joint development agreement, exploration agreement, participation or program agreement or similar agreement that contractually
requires Parent to make expenditures that would reasonably be expected to be in excess of $25,000,000 in the aggregate during the 12-
month period following the date of this Agreement;
(vi) each contract expressly limiting or restricting the ability of Parent or its Subsidiaries to make distributions or declare or pay dividends
in respect of their capital stock, partnership interests, membership interests or other equity interests, as the case may be;
(vii) each collective bargaining agreement to which the Partnership is a party or is subject; and
(viii) each agreement under which Parent has advanced or loaned any amount of money to any of its officers, directors, employees or
consultants, in each case with a principal amount in excess of $100,000.
(b) Except to the extent that enforceability thereof may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency, fraudulent transfer, reorganization,
moratorium and similar laws relating to or affecting creditors’ rights generally and by general principles of equity; and provided that any
indemnity, contribution and exoneration provisions contained in any such Parent Material Agreement may be limited by applicable Law
and public policy, each of the Parent Material Agreements (i) constitutes the valid and binding obligation of Parent and constitutes the
valid and binding obligation of the other parties thereto and (ii) is in full force and effect as of the date of this Agreement, in each case
unless the failure to be so would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
(c) There is not, to the Knowledge of Parent, under any Parent Material Agreement, any default or event that, with notice or lapse of time or
both, would constitute a default on the part of any of the parties thereto, or any notice of termination, cancellation or material modification,
in each case, except such events of default, other events, notices or modifications as to which requisite waivers or consents have been
obtained or which would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
6.13 Environmental Matters.  Except as reflected in the Parent Financial Statements, and except for any such matter that would not,
individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect:
(a) Each of Parent and its Subsidiaries and its assets, real properties and operations are in compliance with all Environmental Laws and
Environmental Permits;
(b) Neither Parent nor its Subsidiaries have received any written notice from any Governmental Authority alleging, with respect to any
such entity or any of their respective assets, real properties (whether owned or leased or formerly owned or leased) or operations, the
violation of or liability under any Environmental Law (including liability as a potentially responsible party under CERCLA or any
analogous state laws) or any Environmental Permit that remains pending or unresolved;
(c) There are no actions, suits, proceedings (including civil, criminal, administrative and dispute resolution proceedings), claims, causes of
action, government investigations, orders, decrees or judgments pending or in effect, or, to the Knowledge of Parent, threatened by a
Governmental Authority or other third party against Parent or its Subsidiaries that allege a violation of or liability under any Environmental
Law that remain pending or unresolved, and, to the Knowledge of Parent, there are no existing facts or circumstances that would
reasonably be expected to give rise to any such action, suit, proceeding, claim, cause of action, investigation, order, decree or judgment
that remain pending or unresolved;
A-41
(d) There has been no Release of any Hazardous Material by Parent or its Subsidiaries in violation of Environmental Law at, on, under or
from any real properties as a result of the operations of Parent or its Subsidiaries that has not been remediated as required by any
Environmental Law or otherwise adequately reserved for in the Parent Financial Statements; and
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(e) This Section 6.13 constitutes the sole and exclusive representation and warranty of Parent with respect to Environmental Permits,
Hazardous Materials and Environmental Law.
6.14 Reserve Report.  The factual, non-interpretive data relating to the Oil and Gas Properties of Parent on which the reserve report
prepared by DeGolyer and MacNaughton, referred to in Parent’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31,
2014 (the “Parent Reserve Report”) was based was accurate in all material respects at the time such data was provided to DeGolyer and
MacNaughton. With respect to the proved reserves reflected in the Parent Reserve Report, the Parent Reserve Report conforms in all
material respects to the guidelines with respect thereto of the SEC. Except for changes (including changes in Hydrocarbon commodity
prices) generally affecting the oil and gas industry and normal depletion by production, there has been no change in respect of the matters
addressed in the Parent Reserve Report that would, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material
Adverse Effect.
6.15 Title to Properties.  Parent and its Subsidiaries have good and indefeasible title to all real and personal properties that are material
to the business of Parent and its Subsidiaries, in each case free and clear of all Liens and defects and imperfections of title except (a)
such as do not materially affect the value of such property and do not materially interfere with the use made and proposed to be made of
such property by Parent and its Subsidiaries, (b) for Permitted Encumbrances and (c) such as would not, individually or in the aggregate,
reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
6.16 Litigation.  As of the date of this Agreement, there are no Proceedings pending or, to the Knowledge of Parent, threatened, against
Parent or any of its Subsidiaries or to which Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is otherwise a party or, to the Knowledge of Parent, a
threatened party, except for Proceedings that would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent
Material Adverse Effect or to prevent or materially delay the consummation of the Transactions.
6.17 Information Supplied.  Subject to the accuracy of the representations and warranties of the Partnership set forth in Article V, none of
the information supplied (or to be supplied) in writing by or on behalf of Parent specifically for inclusion in (a) the Registration Statement
will, at the time the Registration Statement, or any amendment or supplement thereto, is filed with the SEC or at the time it becomes
effective under the Securities Act, contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact required to be stated
therein or necessary in order to make the statements made therein, in light of the circumstances under which they are made, not
misleading or (b) the Proxy Statement (which will be included as a prospectus in the Registration Statement) will, on the date the Proxy
Statement is first mailed to Partnership Unitholders and at the time of the Partnership Unitholders Meeting, contain any untrue statement of
a material fact or omit to state any material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light
of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading. The Registration Statement will comply as to form in all material
respects with the applicable requirements of the Securities Act. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Parent makes no representation or
warranty with respect to information supplied by or on behalf of the Partnership for inclusion or incorporation by reference in any of the
foregoing documents.
6.18 Tax Matters.  Except as would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse
Effect:
(a) each of Parent and its Subsidiaries has filed when due (taking into account extensions of time for filing) all Tax Returns required to be
filed by or with respect to Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, and all such Tax Returns are true, correct and complete;
(b) all Taxes owed by Parent and its Subsidiaries (regardless of whether shown on any Tax Return) have been duly and timely paid in full
or an adequate reserve for the payment of such Taxes has been established in accordance with GAAP;
A-42
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(c) there is no Proceeding now pending against Parent or any of its Subsidiaries in respect of any Tax or Tax Return, nor has any written
adjustment with respect to a Tax Return or written claim for additional Tax been received by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries that is still
pending;
(d) no written claim has been made by any Tax authority in a jurisdiction where Parent or any of its Subsidiaries does not currently file a
Tax Return that Parent or any such Subsidiary is or may be subject to any Tax in such jurisdiction, nor has any such assertion been
threatened or proposed in writing and received by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries;
(e) there is no outstanding waiver or extension of any applicable statute of limitations for the assessment or collection of Taxes due from
Parent or any of its Subsidiaries;
(f) each of Parent and its Subsidiaries has complied in all respects with all applicable Law relating to the payment and withholding of
Taxes and has duly and timely withheld and paid all Taxes required to be withheld in connection with any amounts paid or owing to any
employee, creditor, independent contractor or other party;
(g) none of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is a party to a Tax allocation or sharing agreement, and no payments are due or will become
due by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries pursuant to any such agreement or arrangement or any Tax indemnification agreement;
(h) none of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries has been a member of an affiliated group filing a consolidated federal income Tax Return or
has any liability for the Taxes of any Person (other than Parent or any of its Subsidiaries), as a transferee or successor, by contract, or
otherwise;
(i) Parent and each of its Subsidiaries that is classified as a partnership for U.S. federal tax purposes has in effect a valid election under
Section 754 of the Code;
(j) Parent is properly classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes, and not as an association or a publicly traded
partnership taxable as a corporation under Section 7704 of the Code, and has been properly treated as such since its formation; and
(k) each Subsidiary of Parent is currently (and has been since its respective formation) either (i) properly classified as a partnership for
U.S. federal income tax purposes or (ii) properly disregarded as an entity separate from its respective owner for U.S. federal income tax
purposes pursuant to Treasury Regulation Section 301.7701-3(b).
6.19 Employee Benefits.
(a) Section 6.19(a) of the Parent Disclosure Schedule sets forth a complete and accurate list of each material Employee Benefit Plan
sponsored, maintained or contributed to by Parent or any of its ERISA Affiliates during the six-year period preceding the Closing Date, or
for which Parent or any of its ERISA Affiliates has or could have any liability, contingent or otherwise (each, a “Parent Employee Benefit
Plan”).
(b) With respect to each Parent Employee Benefit Plan, Parent has heretofore made available to the Partnership a true and complete
copy, or summary if no plan document exists, as of the date of this Agreement, of (i) each material Parent Employee Benefit Plan, (ii) each
trust agreement or annuity contract, if any, in effect as of the date of this Agreement that relates to any Parent Employee Benefit Plan, (iii)
the most recently prepared actuarial valuation report in connection with each Parent Employee Benefit Plan for which an actuarial
valuation report was required to be prepared under applicable Law, (iv) the most recent insurance policy or other material documentation
relating directly or indirectly to the funding or administration of each Parent Employee Benefit Plan, and (v) with respect to documents that
may not be found in public records, material filings and correspondence with any Governmental Authority within the prior three (3) years.
(c) Each Parent Employee Benefit Plan has been administered in all respects in accordance with its terms, and in compliance with the
applicable provisions of all Laws applicable to such Parent Employee Benefit Plan, and complies with such terms and such Laws, in each
case except where the failure to be so administered or to so comply, would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected
to
A-43
TABLE OF CONTENTS
have a Parent Material Adverse Effect. There are no investigations by any Governmental Authority, termination proceedings or other
claims (except routine claims for benefits payable under the Parent Employee Benefit Plans) or proceedings pending or, to the
Knowledge of Parent, threatened against or involving any Parent Employee Benefit Plan or asserting any rights to, or claims for benefits
under, any Parent Employee Benefit Plan that would reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
(d) Except as would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Parent Material Adverse Effect, there do not now exist, nor do any
circumstances exist that would result in, any liabilities to Parent or any of its ERISA Affiliates under (i) Title IV of ERISA, (ii) Section 302 of
ERISA, (iii) Sections 412 and 4971 of the Code, (iv) to the Knowledge of Parent, a “multiple employer welfare arrangement” (as defined in
Section 3(40) of ERISA), or (v) to the Knowledge of Parent, a “multiple employer plan” (as defined in Section 413(c) of the Code). Except
as, individually or in the aggregate, would not reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect, each Parent Employee
Benefit Plan that is intended to qualify under Section 401(a) of the Code has either received a favorable determination letter from the
Internal Revenue Service as to its qualified status or may rely upon an opinion letter for a master/prototype plan or an advisory letter for a
volume submitter plan and, to the Knowledge of Parent, nothing has occurred that could adversely affect the qualified status of any such
Parent Employee Benefit Plan. Except as would not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Parent Material Adverse Effect, each Parent
Employee Benefit Plan conforms with or is exempt from Section 409A of the Code, and no “prohibited transaction,” within the meaning of
Section 4975 of the Code or Sections 406 and 407 of ERISA, and not otherwise exempt under Section 408 of ERISA, has occurred with
respect to any Parent Employee Benefit Plan and, to the Knowledge of Parent, no fiduciary (within the meaning of Section 3(21) of
ERISA) of any Parent Employee Benefit Plan subject to Part 4 of Title I of ERISA has committed a breach of fiduciary duty that could
subject the Partnership to material liability taken as a whole. Each Parent Employee Benefit Plan can be amended, terminated or
otherwise discontinued after the Closing in accordance with its terms, without liability to Parent or the Partnership (other than ordinary
administration expenses and payment of accrued benefits).
(e) Except as set forth on Section 6.19(e) of the Parent Disclosure Schedule, no payments (within the meaning of Section 280G of the
Code and related regulations) have or will be made under a Parent Employee Benefit Plan in connection with the consummation of the
transactions contemplated hereby that, in the aggregate, would reasonably be expected to result in the imposition of sanctions imposed
under Sections 280G and 4999 of the Code, and there are no Liens arising from or relating to any Parent Employee Benefit Plan.
(f) Except as set forth on Section 6.19(f) of the Parent Disclosure Schedule, to the Knowledge of Parent, no Parent Employee Benefit Plan
or any other arrangement maintained by Parent or its Affiliates provides any of the following retiree or post-employment benefits to any
Person: medical, disability (other than disability benefits relating to a disability occurring during relevant employment) or life insurance
benefits, except as required by (i) the applicable requirements of Section 4980B of the Code or any similar state law or (ii) company-paid
or subsidized healthcare coverage pursuant to an employment, severance or similar agreement, plan or arrangement. Except as would
not, individually or in the aggregate, have a Parent Material Adverse Effect, each of Parent and each of its ERISA Affiliates is in
compliance with (A) the requirements of the applicable health care continuation and notice provisions of the Consolidated Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985, as amended, and the regulations (including proposed regulations) thereunder and any similar state
Law and (B) the applicable requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, as amended, and the
regulations (including the proposed regulations) thereunder.
(g) Parent is, and has been, in compliance in all respects with all applicable Law relating to the employment of labor, including all such
applicable Law relating to wages, hours, collective bargaining, discrimination, civil rights, safety and health and workers’ compensation,
except where the failure to comply would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse
Effect.
A-44
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(h) None of Parent or any of its Affiliates is a party to, or subject to, a collective bargaining agreement with any labor union or
representative of any individuals employed by Parent or any of its Affiliates, and no organizational activity has occurred, or to the
Knowledge of Parent has been threatened, in each case within the past six years. There are no pending or, to the Knowledge of Parent,
threatened, labor disputes, strikes, lock-outs, work stoppages, requests for representation, pickets or work slow-downs, nor has such
event or labor difficult occurred within the past three years.
6.20 Intellectual Property.  Parent and its Subsidiaries own or have the right to use all Intellectual Property necessary for the operation of
the businesses of Parent and its Subsidiaries as presently conducted (collectively, the “Parent Intellectual Property”) free and clear of all
Liens except for Permitted Encumbrances, except where the failure to own or have the right to use such Intellectual Property would not,
individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect. To the Knowledge of Parent, the use of
the Parent Intellectual Property by Parent and its Subsidiaries in the operation of Parent’s business as presently conducted does not
infringe upon or misappropriate any Intellectual Property of any other Person, except for such matters that would not, individually or in the
aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
6.21 Related Party Transactions.  Except as disclosed in the Parent SEC Documents, neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries are
party to any transaction or arrangement under which any (a) present or former executive officer or director of Parent or any Subsidiary of
Parent, (b) beneficial owner (within the meaning of Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act) of 5% or more of any class of equity of Parent or (c)
Affiliate, “associate” or member of the “immediate family” (as such terms are respectively defined in Rules 12b-2 and 16a-1 of the
Exchange Act) of any of the foregoing is a party to any actual or proposed loan, lease or other contract with or binding upon Parent or any
Subsidiary of Parent or owns or has any interest in any of their respective properties or assets, in each case as would be required to be
disclosed by Parent pursuant to Item 404 of Regulation S-K promulgated under the Exchange Act.
6.22 Insurance.  Parent and its Subsidiaries maintain, or are entitled to the benefits of, insurance in such amounts and against such risks
substantially as Parent believes to be customary for the industries in which it and its Subsidiaries operate. Except as would not
reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect, (a) all material insurance policies
maintained by or on behalf of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries as of the date of this Agreement are in full force and effect, and all
premiums due on such policies have been paid by Parent or its Subsidiaries and (b) Parent and its Subsidiaries are in compliance with
the terms and provisions of all insurance policies maintained by or on behalf of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries as of the date of this
Agreement, and neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries is in breach or default under, or has taken any action that would permit
termination or material modification of, any material insurance policies.
6.23 Derivatives.  The Parent SEC Documents accurately summarize, in all material respects, the outstanding Derivative positions of
Parent and its Subsidiaries, including Hydrocarbon and financial Derivative positions attributable to the production and marketing of
Parent and its Subsidiaries, as of the dates reflected therein.
6.24 Availability of Funds.  Parent and Merger Sub will have available at the Closing all of the funds required for the consummation of
the transactions contemplated by this Agreement.
6.25 Financial Advisors.  Parent has not incurred any liability for fees of any broker, finder or financial advisor in respect of the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement for which the Partnership or Parent will have any responsibility or liability whatsoever,
excluding fees to be paid to Parent’s financial advisors, pursuant to letter agreements, the existence of which have been heretofore
disclosed to the Partnership and which fees have been disclosed to the Partnership.
6.26 Operations of Merger Sub.  Merger Sub was formed solely for the purpose of engaging in the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement and has engaged in no business other than in connection with entering into this Agreement and engaging in the transactions
contemplated hereby.
A-45
TABLE OF CONTENTS
6.27 Regulatory Matters.  Parent is not (a) an “investment company” or a company “controlled” by an “investment company” within the
meaning of the U.S. Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder or (b) a
“holding company,” a “subsidiary company” of a “holding company,” an Affiliate of a “holding company,” a “public utility” or a “public-utility
company,” as each such term is defined in the U.S. Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005.
6.28 No Other Representations and Warranties.  Except for the representations and warranties set forth in this Article VI, neither Parent
nor any other Person makes or has made any express or implied representation or warranty with respect to Parent or with respect to any
other information provided to the Partnership in connection with the Transactions or the other transactions contemplated hereby. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, neither Parent nor any other Person will have or be subject to any liability or other obligation to the
Partnership or any other Person resulting from the distribution to the Partnership (including its respective Representatives), or the
Partnership’s (or such Representatives’) use of, any such information, including any information, documents, projections, forecasts or
other material made available to the Partnership in certain “data rooms” or management presentations in expectation of the Transactions.
ARTICLE VII
COVENANTS
The Partnership Entities hereby covenant to and agree with the Parent Entities, and Parent and Merger Sub hereby covenant to and
agree with the Partnership Entities, that:
7.1 Consummation of the Transactions.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement (including Section 7.1(d)), each of the Parent Entities, on the one hand, and
each of the Partnership Entities, on the other hand, will cooperate with the other and use (and will cause their respective Subsidiaries to
use) its reasonable best efforts to (i) take, or cause to be taken, all actions, and do, or cause to be done, all things, necessary, proper or
advisable to cause the conditions to the Closing to be satisfied as promptly as practicable (and in any event no later than the Outside
Date) and to consummate and make effective, in the most expeditious manner practicable, the Transactions, including preparing and filing
promptly and fully all documentation to effect all necessary filings, notifications, notices, petitions, statements, registrations, submissions
of information, applications and other documents (including any required or recommended filings under applicable Antitrust Laws), (ii)
obtain promptly (and in any event no later than the Outside Date) all approvals, consents, clearances, expirations or terminations of
waiting periods, registrations, permits (including Environmental Permits), authorizations and other confirmations from any Governmental
Authority or third party necessary, proper or advisable to consummate the Transactions, (iii) defend any lawsuits or other legal
proceedings, whether judicial or administrative, challenging this Agreement or the consummation of the Transactions and (iv) obtain all
necessary consents, approvals or waivers from third parties. For purposes of this Agreement, “Antitrust Laws” means the Sherman Act,
as amended, the Clayton Act, as amended, the HSR Act, the Federal Trade Commission Act, as amended, and all other applicable Laws
issued by a Governmental Authority that are designed or intended to prohibit, restrict or regulate actions having the purpose or effect of
monopolization or restraint of trade or lessening of competition.
(b) In furtherance and not in limitation of the foregoing, each Party hereto agrees to cooperate with each other to determine if the
transactions contemplated hereby require a filing and observation of the waiting period under the HSR Act and, if required, to make an
appropriate filing of a Notification and Report Form pursuant to the HSR Act with respect to the transactions contemplated hereby as
promptly as practicable and in any event within 15 Business Days after the date of this Agreement and to supply as promptly as
practicable any additional information and documentary material that may be requested by any Governmental Authority pursuant to the
HSR Act or any other Antitrust Law and use its reasonable best efforts to take, or cause to be taken (including by their respective
Subsidiaries), all other actions consistent with this Section 7.1 necessary to cause the expiration or termination of the applicable waiting
A-46
TABLE OF CONTENTS
periods under the HSR Act as soon as practicable (and in any event no later than the Outside Date). Parent shall bear and pay the fees
payable in connection with any filings required to be made under the HSR Act.
(c) Each of the Parties hereto will use its reasonable best efforts to (i) cooperate in all respects with each other in connection with any
filing or submission with a Governmental Authority in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby and in connection with any
investigation or other inquiry by or before a Governmental Authority relating to the Transactions, including any proceeding initiated by a
private Person, (ii) promptly inform the Other Parties of (and supply to the Other Parties) any communication received by such Party from,
or given by such Party to, the Federal Trade Commission, the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice, or any other Governmental
Authority and any material communication received or given in connection with any proceeding by a private Person, in each case
regarding the Transactions (iii) permit the Other Parties to review in advance and incorporate their reasonable comments in any
communication to be given by it to any Governmental Authority with respect to obtaining any clearances required under any Antitrust Law
in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby and (iv) consult with the Other Parties in advance of any meeting or
teleconference with any Governmental Authority or, in connection with any proceeding by a private Person, with any other Person, and, to
the extent not prohibited by the Governmental Authority or other Person, give the Other Parties the opportunity to attend and participate in
such meetings and teleconferences. Subject to Section 7.4(b), the Parties will take reasonable best efforts to share information protected
from disclosure under the attorney-client privilege, work product doctrine, joint defense privilege or any other privilege pursuant to this
Section 7.1 in a manner so as to preserve the applicable privilege. Any Party may share information with any Other Party on an “outside
counsel only” basis. Nothing in this Section 7.1 shall obligate the Parties to share any information regarding the value of the transaction
or, absent the entry of a mutually acceptable joint defense agreement, information covered by the attorney client privilege, work product
doctrine or other similar privilege.
(d) Parent agrees to take, or cause to be taken (including by its Subsidiaries), any and all steps and to make, or cause to be made
(including by its Subsidiaries), any and all undertakings necessary to resolve any objections that a Governmental Authority or any other
Person may assert under any Antitrust Law with respect to the transactions contemplated hereby, and to avoid or eliminate each and
every impediment under any Antitrust Law that may be asserted by any Governmental Authority with respect to the Transactions, in each
case, so as to enable the Closing to occur as promptly as practicable and in any event no later than the Outside Date (including any
extension thereof provided for in this Agreement or agreed to in writing by the Parties); provided, however, that notwithstanding anything
to the contrary in this Agreement, nothing in this Section 7.1 shall require, or be construed to require, any Party to sell or otherwise
dispose of, hold separate (through the establishment of a trust or otherwise), divest itself of or limit the ownership or operations of all or
any portion of their respective businesses, assets or operations.
(e) In furtherance and not in limitation of the covenants of the Parties contained in this Section 7.1, if any administrative or judicial action or
proceeding, including any proceeding by a private Person, is instituted (or threatened to be instituted) challenging the Transactions as
violative of any Antitrust Law, each of Parent and the Partnership will use reasonable best efforts to contest and resist any such action or
proceeding and to have vacated, lifted, reversed or overturned any decree, judgment, injunction or other order, whether temporary,
preliminary or permanent, that is in effect and that prohibits, prevents or restricts consummation of the Transactions.
7.2 Registration Statement; Proxy Statement.
(a) As soon as practicable following the date of this Agreement, the Partnership will prepare and file with the SEC the Proxy Statement
and the Partnership and Parent will jointly prepare and Parent will file with the SEC the Registration Statement, in which the Proxy
Statement will be included as a prospectus. Each of the Partnership and Parent will use its reasonable best efforts to have the
Registration Statement declared effective under the Securities Act as promptly as practicable after such filing and keep the Registration
Statement effective for so long as necessary to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby. Parent also agrees to use
commercially reasonable efforts to obtain any necessary state securities
A-47
TABLE OF CONTENTS
law or “Blue Sky” permits and approvals required to carry out the transactions contemplated by this Agreement. The Partnership will use
its commercially reasonable efforts to cause the Proxy Statement to be mailed to the Partnership Unitholders as promptly as practicable
after the Registration Statement is declared effective under the Securities Act. No filing of, or amendment or supplement to, the
Registration Statement will be made by Parent, and no filing of, or amendment or supplement to, the Proxy Statement will be made by the
Partnership without providing the Other Parties a reasonable opportunity to review and comment thereon. If at any time prior to the
Effective Time any information relating to the Partnership or Parent, or any of their respective Affiliates, directors or officers, is discovered
by the Partnership or Parent that should be set forth in an amendment or supplement to either the Registration Statement or the Proxy
Statement, so that either such document would not include any misstatement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact necessary
to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading, the Party that discovers such
information will promptly notify the Other Parties hereto and an appropriate amendment or supplement describing such information will be
promptly filed with the SEC and, to the extent required by Law, disseminated to the Partnership Unitholders. The Parties will notify each
other promptly of the receipt of any comments from the SEC or the staff of the SEC and of any request by the SEC or the staff of the SEC
for amendments or supplements to the Proxy Statement or the Registration Statement or for additional information and will supply each
other with copies of (i) all correspondence between it or any of its Representatives, on the one hand, and the SEC or the staff of the SEC,
on the other hand, with respect to the Proxy Statement, the Registration Statement or the transactions contemplated hereby and (ii) all
orders of the SEC relating to the Registration Statement.
(b) The Partnership will, as soon as reasonably practicable following the date of this Agreement, establish a record date for, and, subject
to Section 7.3, as soon as reasonably practicable following the Registration Statement being declared effective by the SEC, duly call, give
notice of, convene and hold, the Partnership Meeting. If reasonably practicable, the Partnership Meeting shall be held within 45 days after
the mailing of the Proxy Statement. Subject to Section 7.3, the Partnership GP will, through the Partnership Board, (i) determine that the
Merger is in the best interests of the Partnership and the Partnership Unitholders and (ii) recommend that the Partnership Unitholders
approve this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby, including the Merger (the “Partnership Board Recommendation”).
The Proxy Statement shall (subject to Section 7.3) include the Partnership Board Recommendation. Unless this Agreement is terminated
in accordance with Article IX, the Partnership’s obligations to call, give notice of and hold the Partnership Meeting in accordance with this
Section 7.2(b) shall not be limited or otherwise affected by the making, commencement, disclosure, announcement or submission of any
Superior Proposal or Alternative Proposal, or by any Partnership Change in Recommendation. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the Partnership agrees that: (i) unless this Agreement is validly terminated in accordance with Article IX (including, if
applicable, upon payment of the Termination Fee), the Partnership shall not submit any Superior Proposal to a vote of the Partnership
Unitholders; and (ii) the Partnership shall not (without Parent’s prior written consent) adjourn, postpone or, subject to termination of this
Agreement in accordance with Article IX, cancel (or propose, publicly or otherwise, or resolve to adjourn, postpone or cancel) the
Partnership Meeting. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, the Partnership may postpone or adjourn the Partnership
Meeting (A) in the absence of proxies sufficient to obtain the Partnership Unitholder Approval, to solicit additional proxies for the purpose
of obtaining Partnership Unitholder Approval, (B) in the absence of a quorum or (C) to allow reasonable additional time for the filing or
mailing of any supplemental or amended disclosure that the Partnership has determined after consultation with outside legal counsel is
necessary for such supplemental or amended disclosure to be disseminated and reviewed by the Partnership Unitholders prior to
Partnership Meeting. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, if there occurs a Partnership Change in
Recommendation and this Agreement is not terminated in accordance with Article IX, the Partnership shall remain required to call, hold
and convene the Partnership Meeting unless this Agreement has been terminated in accordance with its terms.
A-48
TABLE OF CONTENTS
7.3 Alternative Proposals; Change in Recommendation.
(a) The Partnership will, and will cause its Subsidiaries and its and their respective directors, officers, and employees to, and will use its
reasonable best efforts to cause their respective other Representatives to, immediately cease and cause to be terminated any discussions
or negotiations with any Person conducted heretofore with respect to an Alternative Proposal. Except as permitted by this Section 7.3, the
Partnership will not, and will cause its Subsidiaries and its and their respective directors, officers and employees not to, and will use
reasonable best efforts to cause their respective other Representatives not to, directly or indirectly, (i) initiate, solicit, knowingly encourage
or knowingly facilitate any inquiry, proposal or offer that would reasonably be expected to lead to the submission of any Alternative
Proposal, or (ii) enter into or participate in any discussions or negotiations regarding, or furnish to any Person any non-public information
with respect to, or that would reasonably be expected to lead to, any Alternative Proposal. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in this Agreement, if at any time following the date of this Agreement and prior to obtaining the Partnership Unitholder Approval,
(1) the Partnership has received a written Alternative Proposal that was not solicited after the date of this Agreement and that the
Partnership Board believes is bona fide, and that did not result from a material breach of this Section 7.3 and (2) the Partnership Board,
after consultation with its financial advisors and outside legal counsel, determines in good faith that such Alternative Proposal constitutes
or would reasonably be likely to lead to or result in a Superior Proposal, then the Partnership may, subject to clauses (x), (y) and (z)
below, (A) furnish information, including non-public information, with respect to the Partnership and its Subsidiaries to the Person making
such Alternative Proposal and (B) participate in discussions or negotiations regarding such Alternative Proposal; provided that (x)
substantially concurrently with furnishing any such non-public information to, or entering into discussions or negotiations with, such
Person, the Partnership gives Parent written notice of the identity of such Person and the Partnership’s intention to furnish non-public
information to, or enter into discussions or negotiations with, such Person, (y) the Partnership receives from such Person an executed
confidentiality agreement between the Partnership and such Person with confidentiality provisions that are not less restrictive to such
Person than the provisions of the Confidentiality Agreement are to Parent and (z) the Partnership will provide to Parent any non-public
information about the Partnership and its Subsidiaries that was not previously provided or made available to Parent prior to or
substantially concurrently with providing or making available such non-public information to such other Person.
(b) In addition to the obligations of the Partnership set forth in Section 7.3(a), the Partnership will promptly (and in no event later than 24
hours after receipt) (i) advise Parent in writing of any Alternative Proposal (and any changes thereto) and the material terms and
conditions of any such Alternative Proposal, including the identity of such Person making such Alternative Proposal, and (ii) provide
Parent with copies of all written proposals or draft agreements received by the Partnership or any Representative of the Partnership
setting forth the terms and conditions of, or otherwise relating to, such Alternative Proposal. The Partnership will keep Parent reasonably
informed of material developments with respect to any such Alternative Proposal, offers, inquiries or requests (and the Partnership shall
promptly (and in no event later than 24 hours after receipt) provide Parent with copies of any additional written proposals received by the
Partnership or that the Partnership has delivered to any third party making an Alternative Proposal relating to such Alternative Proposal)
and of the status of any such discussions or negotiations. The Partnership Entities agree that neither Partnership Entity nor any of the
Subsidiaries of the Partnership will enter into any agreement with any person subsequent to the date of this Agreement that prohibits the
Partnership from providing any information to Parent in accordance with this Section 7.3.
(c) Except as otherwise provided in this Section 7.3, the Partnership Board shall not: (i) (A) withdraw, modify or qualify in any manner
adverse to Parent the Partnership Board Recommendation, (B) fail to include the Partnership Board Recommendation in the Proxy
Statement or (C) publicly approve or recommend, or publicly propose to approve or recommend, any Alternative Proposal (any action
described in this Section 7.3(c)(i) being referred to as a “Partnership Change in Recommendation”); (ii) approve, adopt or recommend,
or publicly propose to approve, adopt or recommend, or allow the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries to execute or enter into, any letter
of intent, memorandum of understanding, agreement in principle, merger agreement, acquisition agreement,
A-49
option agreement, joint venture agreement, partnership agreement, or other similar contract or any tender or exchange offer providing for,
with respect to, or in connection with, any Alternative Proposal; (iii) fail to announce publicly within ten Business Days after a tender offer
or exchange offer relating to the Partnership Units shall have been commenced that the Partnership Board recommends rejection of such
TABLE OF CONTENTS
tender offer or exchange offer and reaffirming the Partnership Board Recommendation; or (iv) resolve, agree or publicly propose to, or
permit the Partnership or any Representative of the Partnership to agree or publicly propose to take any of the actions referred to in this
Section 7.3(c). For the avoidance of doubt, a public statement that describes the Partnership’s receipt of an Alternative Proposal and the
operation of this Agreement with respect thereto shall not be deemed a Partnership Change in Recommendation.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if (i) the Partnership receives a written Alternative Proposal (and such proposal is not withdrawn) that
the Partnership Board believes is bona fide, (ii) such Acquisition Proposal did not result from a breach of this Section 7.3 and (iii) the
Partnership Board determines, after consultation with its financial advisors and outside legal counsel, that such Alternative Proposal
constitutes a Superior Proposal, then the Partnership Board may at any time prior to obtaining the Partnership Unitholder Approval,
terminate this Agreement and pay Parent a Termination Fee or effect a Partnership Change in Recommendation; provided, however, that
the Partnership Board may not take such action pursuant to the foregoing unless:
(i) the Partnership has provided prior written notice to Parent specifying in reasonable detail the reasons for such action (including a
description of the material terms of such Superior Proposal and delivering to Parent a copy of any current draft of any proposed definitive
agreement providing for the Alternative Proposal for such Superior Proposal in the form to be entered into and any other relevant
proposed transaction agreements) at least two Business Days in advance of its intention to take such action with respect to a Partnership
Change in Recommendation, unless at the time such notice is otherwise required to be given there are less than two Business Days prior
to the Partnership Meeting, in which case the Partnership will provide as much notice as is reasonably practicable (the period inclusive of
all such days, the “Notice Period”) (it being understood and agreed that any material amendment to the terms of a Superior Proposal shall
require a new notice pursuant to this Section 7.3(d)(i) and a new Notice Period); and
(ii) during the Notice Period, the Partnership has negotiated with Parent in good faith (to the extent Parent desires to negotiate) regarding
any revisions to or adjustments in the terms and conditions of this Agreement proposed by Parent.
(e) Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, the Partnership Board is permitted, at any time prior to obtaining the
Partnership Unitholder Approval, other than in connection with an Alternative Proposal, to make a Partnership Change in
Recommendation in response to an Intervening Event, but only if (i) prior to taking any such action, the Partnership Board determines in
good faith, after consultation with and considering the advice of the Partnership’s outside legal counsel, that failure to take such action
would be inconsistent with its duties under applicable Delaware law, the Existing Partnership Agreement or the Partnership GP LLC
Agreement, (ii) the Partnership has given at least three Business Days’ advance written notice to Parent that the Partnership Board
intends to take such action (which notice shall specify in reasonable detail the reasons for such action) and (iii) during such period the
Partnership has negotiated with Parent in good faith (to the extent Parent desires to negotiate) regarding any revisions to or adjustments
in the terms and conditions of this Agreement proposed by Parent. If after compliance with the foregoing clauses (i) – (iii) the Partnership
Board determines in good faith, after consultation with its financial advisors and outside legal counsel, that the failure to make a
Partnership Change in Recommendation would be inconsistent with its duties under applicable Delaware law, the Existing Partnership
Agreement or the Partnership GP LLC Agreement, then the Partnership Board may, at any time prior to obtaining the Partnership
Unitholder Approval, effect a Partnership Change in Recommendation. An “Intervening Event” means a material event, circumstance,
state of facts, occurrence, development or change that did not exist or was not known to the Partnership Board on the date of this
Agreement (or if known, the consequences of which were not known or reasonably foreseeable by the Partnership Board as of the date of
this Agreement), which event, circumstance, state
A-50
TABLE OF CONTENTS
of facts, occurrence, development or change, or any material consequences thereof, becomes known to the Partnership Board prior to the
receipt of the Partnership Unitholder Approval; provided, however, that (A) in no event shall the receipt, existence, potential for or terms of
an Alternative Proposal or any matter relating thereto or consequence thereof constitute an Intervening Event and (B) if the Intervening
Event relates to a change, event, development, circumstance, condition, occurrence or effect involving the Partnership, then none of the
following changes, events, developments, circumstances, conditions, occurrences or effects shall constitute an Intervening Event: (1)
changes in the general economic, financial, credit or securities markets, including prevailing interest rates or currency rates, or regulatory
or political conditions and changes in oil, natural gas, condensate or natural gas liquids prices or prices of other commodities, including
changes in price differentials; (2) changes in general economic conditions in the (v) oil and gas exploration and production industry, (w)
natural gas gathering, compressing, treating, processing and transportation industry generally, (x) the natural gas liquids fractionating and
transportation industry generally, (y) the crude oil and condensate logistics and marketing industry generally, and (z) the natural gas
marketing and trading industry generally; (3) the announcement or pendency of this Agreement (including, for the avoidance of doubt,
performance of obligations under this Agreement); and (4) changes in any Laws or regulations applicable to the Partnership or the
industries in which the Partnership or Parent operate or applicable accounting regulations or the interpretations thereof.
(f) Nothing contained in this Agreement will prevent the Partnership or the Partnership Board from taking and disclosing to the Partnership
Unitholders a position contemplated by Rule 14d-9 and Rule 14e-2(a) promulgated under the Exchange Act (or any similar
communication to the Partnership Unitholders) or from making any legally required disclosure to Partnership Unitholders. Any “stop-look-
and-listen” communication by the Partnership or the Partnership Board to the Partnership Unitholders pursuant to Rule 14d-9(f)
promulgated under the Exchange Act (or any similar communication to the Partnership Unitholders) will not be considered a failure to
make, or a withdrawal, modification or change in any manner adverse to Parent of, all or a portion of the Partnership Board
Recommendation.
(g) The Partnership agrees that it will not release or permit the release of a Person from, or amend, waive or permit the amendment or
waiver of any provisions of, any “standstill” or similar agreement or provision to which the Partnership is or becomes a party or under
which the Partnership has any rights, and will use its commercially reasonable efforts to enforce such agreement or provision at the
request of Parent.
(h) The Partnership acknowledges and agrees that any action inconsistent with any provision set forth in this Section 7.3 that is taken by a
Representative of the Partnership that, if taken by the Partnership would have been a material breach of this Section 7.3, shall be deemed
to constitute a breach of such provision by the Partnership.
(i) For purposes of this Agreement:
(i) “Alternative Proposal” means any proposal or offer from any Person or “group” (as defined in Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act) other
than Parent and its Subsidiaries, relating to any (A) direct or indirect acquisition (whether in a single transaction or a series of related
transactions) of assets of the Partnership equal to 20% or more of the consolidated assets of the Partnership or to which 20% or more of
the Partnership’s revenues or earnings are attributable, (B) direct or indirect acquisition (whether in a single transaction or a series of
related transactions) of beneficial ownership (within the meaning of Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act) of 20% or more of the
Partnership’s equity securities, (C) tender offer or exchange offer that if consummated would result in any Person or “group” (as defined in
Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act) beneficially owning 20% or more of the Partnership’s equity securities or (D) merger, consolidation,
share exchange, business combination, recapitalization, liquidation, dissolution or similar transaction involving the Partnership that is
structured to permit such Person or group to acquire beneficial ownership of at least 20% of the Partnership’s consolidated assets or
equity interests; in each case, other than the transactions contemplated hereby.
A-51
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(ii) “Superior Proposal” means a written offer that was not solicited after the date of this Agreement and that was obtained after the date of
this Agreement, (A) to acquire, directly or indirectly, (1) more than 50% of the outstanding equity securities of the Partnership or (2) more
than 50% of the assets of the Partnership and its Subsidiaries, or (B) related to a merger, consolidation, share exchange, business
combination, recapitalization, liquidation, dissolution or similar transactions involving the Partnership, in each case made by a third party,
which did not result from a material breach of Section 7.3, is on terms and conditions that the Partnership Board determines in good faith,
after consultation with its financial advisors and outside legal counsel, to be more favorable to the Partnership Unitholders than the
Merger, taking into account at the time of determination (a) relevant financial considerations, (b) the identity of the person making such
offer, (c) the anticipated timing, conditions and prospects for completion of the transactions contemplated by such offer, (d) the other terms
and conditions of such offer and the implications thereof on the Partnership, including relevant legal, regulatory and other aspects of such
offer and (e) any changes to the terms of this Agreement that as of that time had been committed to by Parent in writing.
7.4 Access to Information; Confidentiality.
(a) Upon reasonable notice, each Party shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to afford to the Other Parties and their respective
Representatives reasonable access during normal business hours (and, with respect to books and records, the right to copy) to all of its
and its Subsidiaries’ properties, commitments, books, contracts, records and correspondence (in each case, whether in physical or
electronic form), officers, employees, accountants, counsel, financial advisors and other Representatives. Each Party shall furnish
promptly to the Other Parties (i) a copy of each report, schedule and other document filed or submitted by it pursuant to the requirements of
federal or state securities Laws and a copy of any communication (including “comment letters”) received by such Party from the SEC
concerning compliance with securities Laws and (ii) all other information concerning its and its Subsidiaries’ business, properties and
personnel as the Other Parties may reasonably request (including information necessary to prepare the Proxy Statement and the
Registration Statement). Without limiting the foregoing, the Partnership shall deliver or cause to be delivered to Parent (1) on a monthly
basis reports specifying the capital expenditures, operating expenses, production and completed and in-progress activities of the
Partnership and its Subsidiaries, together with a comparison to the relevant items in the Partnership’s 2015 budget, and (2) weekly
operating reports, in each case, to the extent as prepared by the Partnership in the ordinary course of business consistent with past
practice. Except for disclosures permitted by the terms of the Confidentiality Agreement, each Party and its Representatives shall hold
information received from the Other Parties pursuant to this Section 7.4 in confidence in accordance with the terms of the Confidentiality
Agreement.
(b) This Section 7.4 shall not require any Party to permit any access, or to disclose any information, that in the reasonable, good faith
judgment (after consultation with counsel, which may be in-house counsel) of such Party would reasonably be expected to result in (i) any
violation of any contract or Law to which such Party or its Subsidiaries is a party or is subject or cause any privilege (including attorney-
client privilege) that such Party or any of its Subsidiaries would be entitled to assert to be undermined with respect to such information and
such undermining of such privilege could in such Party’s good faith judgment (after consultation with counsel, which may be in-house
counsel) adversely affect in any material respect such Party’s position in any pending or, what such Party believes in good faith (after
consultation with counsel, which may be in-house counsel) could be, future litigation or (ii) if such Party or any of its Subsidiaries, on the
one hand, and the Other Parties or any of its Subsidiaries, on the other hand, are adverse parties in a litigation, such information being
reasonably pertinent thereto; provided that, in the case of clause (i), the Parties hereto shall cooperate in seeking to find a way to allow
disclosure of such information (including by entering into a joint-defense or similar agreement) to the extent doing so (1) would not (in the
good faith belief of the Party being requested to disclose the information (after consultation with counsel, which may be in-house counsel))
reasonably be likely to result in the violation of any such contract or Law or reasonably be likely to cause such privilege to be undermined
with respect to such information or (2) could reasonably (in the good faith belief of the party being requested to disclose the information
(after consultation with counsel, which may be in-house
A-52
TABLE OF CONTENTS
counsel)) be managed through the use of customary “clean-room” arrangements pursuant to which non-employee Representatives of the
Other Parties shall be provided access to such information; provided, further, that the Party being requested to disclose the information
shall (x) notify the Other Parties that such disclosures are reasonably likely to violate its or its Subsidiaries’ obligations under any such
contract or Law or are reasonably likely to cause such privilege to be undermined, (y) communicate to the Other Parties in reasonable
detail the facts giving rise to such notification and the subject matter of such information (to the extent it is able to do so in accordance with
the first proviso in this Section 7.4(b)) and (z) in the case where such disclosures are reasonably likely to violate its or its Subsidiaries’
obligations under any contract, use reasonable commercial efforts to seek consent from the applicable third party to any such contract with
respect to the disclosures prohibited thereby (to the extent not otherwise expressly prohibited by the terms of such contract).
(c) Prior to and after the Closing, GP Sellers and their Affiliates shall provide Parent access to the personnel, books, work papers and
records of GP Sellers and their Affiliates relating to Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries to the extent reasonably
necessary to enable Parent to prepare financial statements of Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries in such form and
covering such periods as may be required by any applicable securities Laws to be filed with the SEC. Furthermore, GP Sellers and their
Affiliates shall use their commercially reasonable efforts to cause the independent public accountants of Partnership GP, the Partnership
and its Subsidiaries to provide any consent necessary to the filing of such financial statements with the SEC and to provide such
customary representation letters as are necessary in connection therewith. All of the financial statements, reports, opinions and related
activities to be prepared, provided, delivered, made available or undertaken pursuant to this Section 7.4(c) shall be prepared, provided,
delivered, made available and undertaken at the sole cost and expense of Parent.
(d) For a period of three years following the Closing, GP Sellers and their Affiliates shall retain all books, records, information and
documents in possession of GP Sellers and their Affiliates that are necessary to prepare and audit financial statements with respect to the
assets and liabilities of, or otherwise relating to, Partnership GP, the Partnership and its Subsidiaries, except to the extent originals or
copies thereof are transferred to Parent in connection with Closing.
7.5 Public Statements.  The initial press release with respect to the execution of this Agreement shall be a joint press release to be
reasonably agreed upon by Parent and the Partnership. Parent and the Partnership will not, and each of the foregoing will cause its
Representatives not to, issue any public announcements or make other public disclosures regarding this Agreement or the transactions
contemplated hereby, without the prior written approval of the Parties; provided, however, that a Party or its Representatives may issue a
public announcement or other public disclosures required by Law or the rules of any stock exchange upon which such Party’s or its
Parent entity’s capital stock is traded, provided such Party uses reasonable best efforts to afford the Other Parties an opportunity to first
review the content of the proposed disclosure and provide reasonable comment regarding same; provided, however, that this Section 7.5
shall not be deemed to restrict in any manner the Partnership’s ability to communicate with its employees and that the Partnership shall
not be required by this Section 7.5 to consult with any Other Party with respect to a public announcement in connection with the receipt
and existence of an Alternative Proposal and matters related thereto or a Partnership Change in Recommendation, subject to the
obligations set forth in Section 7.3.
7.6 Confidentiality.  The obligations of Parent and the Partnership under the Confidentiality Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect and all information provided to any Party hereto or its Representatives pursuant to or in connection with this Agreement is deemed
to be “Confidential Information” as defined in the Confidentiality Agreement; provided, however, that nothing in the Confidentiality
Agreement shall be deemed to restrict the performance by the Partnership or Parent of their respective obligations under this Agreement,
and in the case of any conflict between the terms of this Agreement and the terms of the Confidentiality Agreement the terms of this
Agreement shall control.
A-53
TABLE OF CONTENTS
7.7 Takeover Laws.  Neither the Partnership nor Parent will take any action that would cause the transactions contemplated by this
Agreement to be subject to requirements imposed by any Takeover Laws, and each of them will take all reasonable steps within its
control to exempt (or ensure the continued exemption of) the transactions contemplated by this Agreement from the Takeover Laws of any
state that purport to apply to this Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby.
7.8 New Common Units Listed.  Parent will use its commercially reasonable efforts to list, prior to the Closing, on the NASDAQ Global
Select Market, upon official notice of issuance, the New Common Units.
7.9 Third-Party Approvals.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement, Parent and the Partnership and their respective Subsidiaries will cooperate and
use their respective commercially reasonable efforts to prepare all documentation, to effect all filings, to obtain all permits, consents,
approvals and authorizations of all Governmental Authorities and third parties necessary to consummate the transactions contemplated by
this Agreement and to comply with the terms and conditions of such permits, consents, approvals and authorizations and to cause the
Transactions to be consummated as expeditiously as practicable. Each of Parent and the Partnership has the right to review in advance,
and to the extent practicable each will consult with the other, in each case subject to applicable Laws relating to the exchange of
information, with respect to, all material written information submitted to any third party or any Governmental Authorities in connection with
the transactions contemplated by this Agreement. In exercising the foregoing right, each of the Parties hereto agrees to act reasonably
and promptly. Each Party hereto agrees that it will consult with the Other Parties with respect to the obtaining of all material permits,
consents, approvals and authorizations of all third parties and Governmental Authorities necessary or advisable to consummate the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement, and each Party will keep the Other Parties apprised of the status of material matters relating
to completion of the transactions contemplated hereby.
(b) Each of Parent and the Partnership agrees, upon request, to furnish the Other Parties with all information concerning itself, its
Subsidiaries, directors, officers and unitholders and such other matters as may reasonably be necessary or advisable in connection with
the Proxy Statement, the Registration Statement or any filing, notice or application made by or on behalf of such Other Parties or any of
such Other Party’s Subsidiaries to any Governmental Authority in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby.
(c) This Section 7.9 shall not apply to (i) approval under Antitrust Laws or (ii) approval of the SEC of the Registration Statement and Proxy
Statement.
7.10 Indemnification; Directors’ and Officers’ Insurance.
(a) Without limiting any additional rights that any director, officer, trustee, employee, agent, or fiduciary may have under any employment
or indemnification agreement or under the Existing Partnership Agreement, this Agreement or, if applicable, similar organizational
documents or agreements of any of the Partnership’s Subsidiaries, from and after the Effective Time, Parent and the Surviving Entity,
jointly and severally, will: (i) indemnify and hold harmless each person who is now, or has been or becomes at any time prior to the
Effective Time, an officer, director or employee of Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries and also with respect to any
such Person, in such Person’s capacity as a director, officer, employee, member, trustee or fiduciary of another corporation, foundation,
partnership, joint venture, trust, pension or other employee benefit plan or enterprise (regardless of whether such other entity or enterprise
is affiliated with the Partnership) serving at the request of or on behalf of Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries and
together with such Person’s heirs, executors or administrators (collectively, the “Indemnified Parties”) to the fullest extent authorized or
permitted by applicable Law in connection with any Claim or Action and any losses, claims, damages, liabilities, costs, Indemnification
Expenses, judgments, fines, penalties and amounts paid in settlement (including all interest, assessments and other charges paid or
payable in connection with or in respect of any thereof) resulting therefrom; and (ii) promptly pay on behalf of or, within 15 days after any
request for advancement, advance to each of the Indemnified Parties, any Indemnification Expenses incurred in
A-54
TABLE OF CONTENTS
defending, serving as a witness with respect to or otherwise participating with respect to any Claim or Action in advance of the final
disposition of such Claim or Action, including payment on behalf of or advancement to the Indemnified Party of any Indemnification
Expenses incurred by such Indemnified Party in connection with enforcing any rights with respect to such indemnification or
advancement, in each case without the requirement of any bond or other security. The indemnification and advancement obligations of
Parent and the Surviving Entity pursuant to this Section 7.10(a) extend to acts or omissions occurring at or before the Effective Time and
any Claim or Action relating thereto (including with respect to any acts or omissions occurring in connection with the approval of this
Agreement and the consummation of the Merger and the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, including the consideration and
approval thereof and the process undertaken in connection therewith and any Claim or Action relating thereto), and all rights to
indemnification and advancement conferred hereunder continue as to any Indemnified Party who has ceased to be a director or officer of
Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries after the date of this Agreement and inure to the benefit of such person’s heirs,
executors and personal and legal representatives. As used in this Section 7.10: (x) the term “Claim” means any threatened, asserted,
pending or completed action or proceeding, whether instituted by any Party hereto, any Governmental Authority or any other person, that
any Indemnified Party in good faith believes might lead to the institution of any action or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative,
investigative or other, including any arbitration or other alternative dispute resolution mechanism (“Action”), arising out of or pertaining to
matters that relate to such Indemnified Party’s duties or service as a director, officer, employee, member, trustee or other fiduciary of
Partnership GP, the Partnership or of any of its Subsidiaries or as a trustee of (or in a similar capacity with) any compensation and benefit
plan of any thereof; (y) the term “Indemnification Expenses” means documented out of pocket attorneys’ fees and expenses and all other
reasonable and documented out of pocket costs, expenses and obligations (including experts’ fees, travel expenses, court costs,
retainers, transcript fees, duplicating, printing and binding costs, as well as telecommunications, postage and courier charges) paid or
incurred in connection with investigating, defending, being a witness in or participating in (including on appeal), or preparing to
investigate, defend, be a witness in or participate in, any Claim for which indemnification is sought pursuant to this Section 7.10(a),
including any Action relating to a claim for indemnification or advancement brought by an Indemnified Party; and (z) the phrase “to the
fullest extent authorized or permitted by applicable Law” includes, but is not limited to (1) to the fullest extent authorized or permitted by
any provision of the DRULPA and the DLLCA that authorizes or permits additional indemnification by agreement or otherwise, or the
corresponding provision of any amendment to or replacement of the DRULPA and the DLLCA and (2) to the fullest extent authorized or
permitted by any amendments to or replacements of the DRULPA and the DLLCA adopted after the date of this Agreement that increase
the extent to which an entity may indemnify its directors, officers, trustees, employees, agents, or fiduciaries or persons serving in any
capacity in which any Indemnified Party serves, provided that any amendment, alteration or repeal of the DRULPA or the DLLCA that
adversely affects any right of any Indemnified Party will be prospective only and does not limit or eliminate any such right with respect to
any Claim or Action involving any occurrence or alleged occurrence of any action or omission to act that took place prior to such
amendment or repeal. Neither Parent nor the Surviving Entity will settle, compromise or consent to the entry of any judgment in any actual
or threatened Claim or Action in respect of which indemnification has been or could be sought by such Indemnified Party hereunder
unless such settlement, compromise or judgment includes an unconditional release of such Indemnified Party from all liability arising out
of such Claim or Action without admission or finding of wrongdoing, or such Indemnified Party otherwise consents thereto.
(b) Without limiting the foregoing, Parent and Merger Sub agree that all rights to indemnification, advancement of expenses and
exculpation from liabilities for acts or omissions occurring at or prior to the Effective Time now existing in favor of the Indemnitees as
provided in the Existing Partnership Agreement (or, as applicable, the charter, bylaws, partnership agreement, limited liability company
agreement, or other organizational documents of any of Partnership GP or the Partnership’s Subsidiaries) and indemnification
agreements of Partnership GP, the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries will be assumed by the Surviving Entity and Parent in the
Merger, without further action, at the Effective Time and will survive the Merger and continue in full force and effect in accordance with
their terms.
A-55
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(c) For a period of six years from the Effective Time, the Existing Partnership Agreement and the organizational documents of the
Partnership’s Subsidiaries will contain provisions no less favorable with respect to indemnification, advancement of expenses,
exculpation and limitations on liability of directors and officers than are set forth in the Existing Partnership Agreement, which provisions
will not be amended, repealed or otherwise modified for a period of six years from the Effective Time in any manner that would affect
adversely the rights thereunder of individuals who, at or prior to the Effective Time, were Indemnified Parties, unless such modification is
required by Law and then only to the minimum extent required by Law; provided, however, that any such modification shall be prospective
only and shall not limit or eliminate any such right with respect to any Claim or Action involving any occurrence or alleged occurrence of
any action or omission to act that took place prior to modification; and provided further that all rights to indemnification in respect of any
Action pending or asserted or any Claim made within such period continue until the disposition of such Action or resolution of such Claim.
(d) For a period of six years from the Effective Time, Parent will maintain in effect the current directors’ and officers’ liability and fiduciary
liability insurance policies covering the Indemnified Parties (but may substitute therefor other policies of at least the same coverage and
amounts containing terms and conditions that are no less advantageous to the Indemnified Parties so long as that substitution does not
result in gaps or lapses in coverage) with respect to matters occurring on or before the Effective Time, but Parent is not required to pay
annual premiums in excess of 300% of the last annual premiums paid therefor prior to the date of this Agreement (the “Maximum
Amount”) and will purchase the maximum amount of coverage that can be obtained for that amount if the coverage described in this
Section 7.10(d) would cost in excess of that amount. If Parent elects, then Parent may, on or prior to the Effective Time, purchase a “tail
policy” with respect to acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have occurred prior to the Effective Time that were committed or alleged to
have been committed by such Indemnified Parties in their capacity as such; provided that in no event shall the cost of such policy, if
purchased by the Partnership, exceed six times the Maximum Amount and, if such a “tail policy” is purchased, neither Parent nor the
Surviving Entity shall have any further obligations under this Section 7.10(d).
(e) If Parent, the Surviving Entity or any of their respective successors or assigns (i) consolidates with or merges with or into any other
person and is not the continuing or surviving corporation, partnership or other entity of such consolidation or merger, or (ii) transfers or
conveys all or substantially all of its properties and assets to any person, then, and in each such case, proper provision will be made so
that the successors and assigns of Parent or the Surviving Entity assume the obligations set forth in this Section 7.10.
(f) Parent will cause the Surviving Entity to perform all of the obligations of the Surviving Entity under this Section 7.10.
(g) This Section 7.10 survives the consummation of the Transactions and is intended to be for the benefit of, and to be enforceable by, the
Indemnified Parties and the Indemnitees and their respective heirs and personal representatives, and will be binding on Parent, the
Surviving Entity and their respective successors and assigns.
7.11 Notification of Certain Matters.  The Partnership shall give prompt notice to Parent, and Parent shall give prompt notice to the
Partnership, to the extent in each case it obtains Knowledge thereof, of (a) any notice or other communication received by such Party from
any Governmental Authority in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby or from any Person alleging that the consent of such
Person is or may be required in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby, if the subject matter of such communication or the
failure of such Party to obtain such consent is reasonably likely to be material to the Partnership or Parent, (b) any actions, suits, claims,
investigations or proceedings commenced or threatened against, relating to or involving or otherwise affecting such Party or any of its
Subsidiaries and that relate to the Transactions and (c) any material failure of such Party to comply with or satisfy any covenant or
agreement to be complied with or satisfied by it hereby that would result in the failure to be satisfied of any of the conditions to the Closing
in Article VIII; provided that, in the case of clause (c), the failure to comply with this Section 7.11 shall not result in the failure to be satisfied
of any of the conditions to the Closing in Article VIII, or give rise
A-56
TABLE OF CONTENTS
to any right to terminate this Agreement under Article IX, if the underlying fact, circumstance, event or failure would not in and of itself give
rise to such failure or right.
7.12 Section 16 Matters.  Prior to the Effective Time, Parent and the Partnership will take all such steps as may be required (to the extent
permitted under applicable Law) to cause any dispositions of Partnership Common Units (including derivative securities with respect to
Partnership Common Units) resulting from the transactions contemplated by this Agreement by each individual who is subject to the
reporting requirements of Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act with respect to the Partnership, or will become subject to such reporting
requirements with respect to Parent, to be exempt under Rule 16b-3 promulgated under the Exchange Act.
7.13 Distributions.  Each of the Partnership and Parent will consult with the Other Party regarding the declaration and payment of
distributions in respect of Partnership Common Units, the Parent Common Units, Parent Class B Units, and Parent Preferred Units
occurring after the date of this Agreement, and the record and payment dates relating thereto, to ensure that no Partnership Unitholder
receives two distributions, or fails to receive one distribution, for any single calendar month or quarter, as applicable, with respect to either
(a) the Partnership Common Units or (b) the Parent Common Units any such Partnership Unitholder will receive in exchange for
Partnership Common Units pursuant to the Merger.
7.14 Transaction Litigation.  The Partnership shall give Parent the opportunity to participate in the defense or settlement of any security
holder litigation against the Partnership, Partnership GP or its respective directors relating to the Merger and the other transactions
contemplated by this Agreement, and no such settlement shall be agreed to without the prior written consent of Parent, which consent
shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed. The Partnership GP and the Partnership shall cooperate, the Partnership
shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to cooperate, and each of the Partnership GP and the Partnership shall use reasonable commercial
efforts to cause their respective Representatives to cooperate, in the defense against such litigation.
7.15 Financing Cooperation.  Prior to the Effective Time, the Partnership Entities shall, and shall cause their respective Subsidiaries and
their respective Representatives to, at Parent’s sole cost and expense, provide all cooperation that is reasonably necessary, proper or
advisable in connection with any financing by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries in connection with the Transactions as may be reasonably
requested by Parent or its Representatives. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Partnership Entities shall, and shall cause
their respective Subsidiaries and use commercially reasonable efforts to cause their respective Representatives to, (i) furnish, as promptly
as practicable, the report of the Partnership’s auditor on the most recently available audited consolidated financial statements of the
Partnership and its Subsidiaries and use its commercially reasonable efforts to obtain the consent of such auditor to the use of such report
in accordance with normal custom and practice, and use commercially reasonable efforts to cause such auditor to provide customary
comfort letters (providing “negative assurance” comfort) and drafts thereof to the underwriters, administrative agent, lenders, initial
purchasers or placement agents, as applicable, in connection with such financing by Parent; (ii) use commercially reasonable efforts to
furnish, as promptly as practicable, financial statements and other financial data of the Partnership as would be required by Regulation S-
X and Regulation S-K promulgated under the Securities Act for a registered public offering to consummate any offering(s) of securities
contemplated by such financing; (iii) provide reasonable and customary assistance in the preparation of one or more confidential
information memoranda, prospectuses, offering memoranda, private placement memoranda and other marketing and syndication
materials (including the provision of authorization letters and a representation with respect to the presence or absence of material non-
public information) reasonably requested by Parent, including by making available, at reasonable times and on reasonable advance
notice, employees and advisors of the Partnership Entities; (iv) in a reasonable number of meetings, lender presentations, due diligence
sessions, drafting sessions and road shows, in each case, upon reasonable advance notice and at mutually agreed times; (v) assisting
Parent in connection with the preparation and registration of (but not executing) any pledge and security documents, currency or interest
hedging arrangements, other definitive financing documents, or documents as may be reasonably requested by Parent or the Financing
Sources or otherwise reasonably facilitating the pledging of collateral in connection with the financing of the Transactions (provided that
such documents will not take effect until the Effective Time); (vi) using commercially reasonable efforts to ensure that any syndication
efforts benefit from existing lending and investment banking relationships; and (vii) providing all customary documentation and other
information about
A-57
TABLE OF CONTENTS
the Partnership, the Partnership GP and their respective Subsidiaries requested by Parent or the Financing Sources in connection with
the financing of the Transactions and required under applicable “know your customer” sanctions and anti-money-laundering rules and
regulations; provided that (x) none of the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries shall be required to pay any commitment or other fee or
incur any other liability or obligation in connection with such financing or to take any action that would be prohibited by any applicable
Law or cause a default of, or breach under, or otherwise violate any Partnership Material Agreement, in each case except for any
payment, incurrence or action that is conditioned upon, and shall not take effect until, the Effective Time, (y) no obligations of the
Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries under any certificate, opinion, contract, indenture or other document or instrument delivered pursuant
to this Section 7.15 shall be effective until the Effective Time, and none of the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries shall be required to
take any action pursuant to this Section 7.15 under any certificate, opinion, contract, indenture or other document or instrument that is not
contingent upon the Closing or that would be effective prior to the Effective Time and (z) none of the Partnership or its senior officers shall
be required to engage in any action that would interfere unreasonably with the business of the Partnership and its Subsidiaries. Parent
shall indemnify and hold harmless the Partnership and its Subsidiaries, Partnership GP and their respective Representatives from and
against any and all losses or damages suffered or incurred by them in connection with the arrangement of any financing by Parent or any
of its Subsidiaries in connection with the Transactions and any information utilized in connection therewith except (A) with respect to
information supplied by the Partnership, its Subsidiaries and Representatives specifically for inclusion or incorporation by reference
therein and/or (B) to the extent such losses and damages arise from the willful misconduct of the Partnership’s or any of its Subsidiaries’
Representatives.
ARTICLE VIII
CONDITIONS TO CONSUMMATION OF THE TRANSACTIONS
8.1 Mutual Closing Conditions.  The obligations of each of the Parties to consummate the Transactions are conditioned upon the
satisfaction at or prior to the Closing (or waiver by both the Partnership and Parent) of each of the following:
(a) The Partnership Unitholder Approval has been obtained at the Partnership Meeting or an adjournment thereof.
(b) All applicable waiting periods under the HSR Act have expired or been terminated.
(c) No Law, order, judgment or injunction (whether preliminary or permanent) issued, enacted, promulgated, entered or enforced by a court
of competent jurisdiction or other Governmental Authority restraining, prohibiting or rendering illegal the consummation of the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement (brought by a third party) is in effect.
(d) The Registration Statement has become effective under the Securities Act and no stop order suspending the effectiveness of the
Registration Statement has been issued and no proceedings for that purpose have been initiated or threatened by the SEC.
(e) The New Common Units deliverable to the holders of Partnership Common Units (including Partnership Restricted Units) and GP
Sellers as contemplated by this Agreement have been approved for listing on the NASDAQ Global Select Market, subject to official notice
of issuance.
8.2 Additional GP Seller and Partnership Conditions to Closing.  The obligation of GP Sellers and the Partnership to consummate the
Transactions is further conditioned upon satisfaction (or waiver by GP Sellers or the Partnership) at or prior to the Closing of each of the
following:
(a) The representations and warranties of Parent contained in (i) this Agreement (other than in Section 6.2(a) and Section 6.10(a)) are true
and correct as of the date of this Agreement and as of the Closing Date, as if made as of such time (except to the extent expressly made
as of an earlier date, in which case as of such date), except where the failure of such representations and warranties to be so true and
correct (without giving effect to any limitation as to “materiality” or “Parent Material Adverse Effect” set forth in any individual such
representation or warranty) would not reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect,
(ii) Section 6.2(a) are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement and as of the Closing Date, as if made as of such time (except to
A-58
TABLE OF CONTENTS
the extent expressly made as of an earlier date, in which case as of such date), except for any de minimis inaccuracies, and (iii) Section
6.10(a) are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement and as of the Closing Date, as if made as of such time.
(b) Each and all of the agreements and covenants of the Parent Entities to be performed and complied with pursuant to this Agreement on
or prior to the Effective Time have been duly performed and complied with in all material respects.
(c) The Partnership has received a certificate signed by the Chief Executive Officer of Parent, dated as of the Closing Date, to the effect
set forth in Section 8.2(a) and Section 8.2(b).
(d) The Partnership has received opinions of Andrews Kurth LLP dated as of the Closing Date, and based on facts, representations,
assumptions and exclusions set forth or referred to in such opinion, to the effect that for U.S. federal income tax purposes:
(i) except to the extent any cash received in lieu of fractional Parent Common Units pursuant to Section 2.1(e) or Section 3.3(d) is treated
as proceeds from a Disguised Sale or is otherwise taxable, the Partnership will not recognize any income or gain as a result of the Merger
(other than any gain resulting from any actual or constructive distribution of cash, including as a result of any decrease in partnership
liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code);
(ii) except to the extent any cash received in lieu of fractional Parent Common Units pursuant to Section 2.1(e) or Section 3.3(d) is treated
as proceeds from a Disguised Sale or is otherwise taxable, holders of Partnership Common Units will not recognize any income or gain
as a result of the Merger (other than any gain resulting from any actual or constructive distribution of cash, including as a result of any
decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code); provided that such opinion shall not extend to any holder who
acquired Common Units from the Partnership in exchange for property other than cash; and
(iii) at least 90% of the gross income of the Partnership for the most recent four complete calendar quarters ending before the Closing Date
for which the necessary financial information is available is from sources treated as “qualifying income” within the meaning of Section
7704(d) of the Code.
In rendering such opinions, such counsel shall be entitled to receive and rely upon representations, warranties and covenants of officers
of the Parent Entities and the Partnership and any of their respective Affiliates as to such matters as such counsel may reasonably
request.
(e) The Partnership, Partnership GP, Management, LRR A, LRR B and LRR C have received a counterpart of the Termination and
Continuing Obligations Agreement, duly executed by Parent.
8.3 Additional Parent Conditions to Closing.  The obligation of Parent to consummate the Transactions is further conditioned upon
satisfaction (or waiver by Parent) at or prior to the Closing of each of the following:
(a) The representations and warranties of the Partnership Entities contained in (i) this Agreement (other than in Section 5.2(a) and Section
5.10(a)) are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement and as of the Closing Date, as if made as of such time (except to the extent
expressly made as of an earlier date, in which case as of such date), except where the failure of such representations and warranties to be
so true and correct (without giving effect to any limitation as to “materiality” or “Partnership Material Adverse Effect” set forth in any
individual such representation or warranty) would not reasonably be expected to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Partnership
Material Adverse Effect, (ii) Section 5.2(a) are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement and as of the Closing Date, as if made as
of such time (except to the extent expressly made as of an earlier date, in which case as of such date), except for any de minimis
inaccuracies, and (iii) Section 5.10(a) are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement and as of the Closing Date, as if made as of
such time.
A-59
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(b) Each and all of the agreements and covenants of the Partnership Entities to be performed and complied with pursuant to this
Agreement on or prior to the Effective Time have been duly performed and complied with in all material respects.
(c) Parent has received a certificate signed by the Chief Executive Officer of the Partnership GP, dated the Closing Date, to the effect set
forth in Section 8.3(a) and Section 8.3(b).
(d) Parent has received an opinion from Paul Hastings LLP dated as of the Closing Date, and based on facts, representations,
assumptions and exclusions set forth or referred to in such opinion, to the effect that for U.S. federal income tax purposes,
(i) no Parent Entity will recognize any income or gain as a result of the Transactions (other than any gain resulting from any decrease in
partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code);
(ii) no gain or loss will be recognized by holders of Parent Common Units as a result of the Transactions (other than any gain resulting
from any decrease in partnership liabilities pursuant to Section 752 of the Code); and
(iii) at least 90% of the combined gross income of each of Parent and the Partnership for the most recent four complete calendar quarters
ending before the Closing Date for which the necessary financial information is available is from sources treated as “qualifying income”
within the meaning of Section 7704(d) of the Code.
In rendering such opinion, such counsel shall be entitled to receive and rely upon representations, warranties and covenants of officers of
the Parent Entities and the Partnership and any of their respective Affiliates as to such matters as such counsel may reasonably request.
(e) Parent has received the written resignation of each member of the Partnership Board and each officer of Partnership GP, dated to be
effective as of the Effective Time.
(f) Parent has received an assignment and assumption agreement in a form to be mutually agreed by GP Sellers and Parent, evidencing
the assignment, transfer and delivery to Parent of all of the GP Membership Interests, duly executed by each GP Seller (the “GP
Assignment”).
(g) Parent has received a counterpart of the Termination and Continuing Obligations Agreement, duly executed by the Partnership,
Partnership GP, Management, LRR A, LRR B and LRR C, LRR GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, and LRE Operating, LLC,
a Delaware limited liability company.
ARTICLE IX
TERMINATION
9.1 Termination of Agreement.  This Agreement may be terminated prior to the Closing as follows:
(a) by the mutual written consent of the Partnership and Parent;
(b) by the Partnership or Parent if there is in effect a final nonappealable order of a Governmental Authority of competent jurisdiction
restraining, enjoining or otherwise prohibiting the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby; provided that the right to
terminate this Agreement under this Section 9.1(b) is not available to the Partnership, on the one hand, or Parent, on the other hand, if
such order was primarily due to the failure of any Partnership Entity, on the one hand, or any of Parent or Merger Sub, on the other hand,
to perform any of its obligations under this Agreement;
(c) by Parent if (i) any Partnership Entity has breached or failed to perform any of its representations, warranties, covenants or agreements
set forth in this Agreement, or (ii) any representation or warranty of any Partnership Entity becomes untrue, and, with respect to either
clause (i) or (ii) above, which breach, failure to perform or untruth if it was continuing as of the Closing Date would result in the failure of
the conditions set forth in Sections 8.3(a) or (b) to be satisfied and such breach, failure to perform or untruth is incapable of being cured (or
becoming true) or, if capable of being cured (or
A-60
TABLE OF CONTENTS
becoming true), is not cured (or does not become true) by the earlier of (x) the Outside Date or (y) within 30 days following receipt by the
Partnership of notice of such breach, failure or untruth from Parent;
(d) by the Partnership if (i) Parent has breached or failed to perform any of its representations, warranties, covenants or agreements set
forth in this Agreement, or (ii) any representation or warranty of Parent becomes untrue, and, with respect to either clause (i) or (ii) above,
which breach, failure to perform or untruth if it was continuing as of the Closing Date would result in the failure of the conditions set forth in
Sections 8.2(a) or (b) to be satisfied and such breach, failure to perform or untruth is incapable of being cured (or becoming true) or, if
capable of being cured (or becoming true), is not cured (or does not become true) by the earlier of (x) the Outside Date or (y) within 30
days following receipt by Parent of notice of such breach, failure or untruth from the Partnership;
(e) by the Partnership or Parent if the Closing does not occur on or before December 31, 2015 (the “Outside Date”); provided that such
failure of the Closing to occur is not due to the failure of such Party to perform and comply in all material respects with the covenants and
agreements to be performed or complied with by such Party prior to the Closing;
(f) by the Partnership or Parent if, after the final adjournment of the Partnership Meeting at which a vote of the Partnership Unitholders has
been taken in accordance with this Agreement, the Partnership Unitholder Approval has not been obtained;
(g) by Parent prior to final adjournment of the Partnership Meeting, if a Partnership Change in Recommendation has occurred; or
(h) by the Partnership, if this Agreement is terminated to enter into a definitive agreement relating to a Superior Proposal in accordance
with Section 7.3, provided that the Partnership has complied with Section 9.4(d).
9.2 Procedure Upon Termination.  In the event of termination of this Agreement by Parent or the Partnership, or both, pursuant to
Section 9.1, written notice thereof will forthwith be given to the Other Party or Parties, and this Agreement will terminate without further
action by Parent or the Partnership.
9.3 Effect of Termination.  In the event that this Agreement is validly terminated as provided in Section 9.1, then each of the Parties will
be relieved of its duties and obligations arising under this Agreement after the date of such termination and such termination will be
without liability to Parent or the Partnership; provided, that the agreements and obligations of the Parties set forth in Section 7.6, this
Section 9.3, Section 9.4 and Article X hereof will survive any such termination and are enforceable hereunder; provided further, that
nothing in this Section 9.3 relieves any of Parent or the Partnership of any liability for fraud or any Willful Breach of any covenant or
agreement contained herein occurring prior to termination, or as provided in the Confidentiality Agreement, in which case the aggrieved
Party shall be entitled to all rights and remedies available at law or in equity (including, in the case of Parent, liability for damages based
on the consideration that would have otherwise been payable to the holders of Partnership Units). “Willful Breach” means an intentional
and willful material breach, or an intentional and willful material failure to perform, in each case that is the consequence of an act or
omission by a Party with the Knowledge that the taking of, or failure to take, such act would, or would reasonably be expected to, cause a
material breach of this Agreement.
9.4 Fees and Expenses.
(a) In the event that (i) an Alternative Proposal is publicly submitted, publicly proposed or publicly disclosed prior to, and not withdrawn at
the time of, the date of the Partnership Meeting (or, if the Partnership Meeting has not occurred, prior to the termination of this Agreement
pursuant to Section 9.1(e)), (ii) this Agreement is terminated by the Partnership or Parent pursuant to Section 9.1(c), Section 9.1(e) or
Section 9.1(f), and (iii) the Partnership enters into a definitive agreement with respect to, or consummates, an Alternative Proposal within
12 months after the date this Agreement is terminated, then the Partnership will pay to Parent the Termination Fee, upon the earlier of the
public announcement that the Partnership has entered into such definitive agreement or the consummation of any
A-61
TABLE OF CONTENTS
such transaction. For purposes of this Section 9.4(a), the term “Alternative Proposal” has the meaning assigned to such term in Section
7.3(i)(i), except that the references to “20% or more” are deemed to be references to “50% or more.”
(b) In the event this Agreement is terminated (i) by Parent pursuant to Section 9.1(c) or (ii) by the Partnership pursuant to Section 9.1(d), in
each of cases (i) and (ii), the non-terminating party will pay the terminating party, within two Business Days after the date of termination,
the terminating Party’s Expenses.
(c) In the event this Agreement is terminated by Parent pursuant to Section 9.1(g), then the Partnership will pay to Parent, within two
Business Days after the date of termination, the Termination Fee.
(d) In the event this Agreement is terminated by the Partnership pursuant to Section 9.1(h), then the Partnership will immediately prior to or
simultaneously with such termination pay to Parent the Termination Fee.
(e) Any payment of the Termination Fee or Expenses will be made in cash by wire transfer of same day funds to an account designated in
writing by the recipient of such payment.
(f) Each of the Parties acknowledges that the provisions of this Section 9.4 are an integral part of the transactions contemplated hereby
and that, without these agreements, the Other Party or Other Parties would not enter into this Agreement. The Parties agree that in the
event that the Partnership pays the Termination Fee to Parent, the Partnership has no further liability to Parent of any kind in respect of
this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby.
(g) As used herein, “Termination Fee” means a cash amount equal to $7,288,000.00.
(h) As used herein, “Expenses” means the reasonable and documented out of pocket attorneys’ fees and all other costs and expenses
incurred and paid by or on behalf of the Partnership or Parent, as applicable, to any third party in connection with the review, evaluation,
negotiation, documentation and performance of the Merger and the other transactions contemplated by this Agreement; provided that in no
event shall the Expenses exceed $1,215,000.00.
(i) In no event shall Parent be entitled to more than one payment of the Termination Fee in connection with this Agreement pursuant to
which the Termination Fee is payable, and if the Termination Fee is payable at such time as Parent has already received payment or
concurrently receives payment from the Partnership in respect of Parent’s Expenses, the Termination Fee shall be reduced by the amount
of such Expenses actually received by Parent.
(j) Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, including in this Section 9.4(j), each Party shall pay its own expenses incident to
preparing for, entering into and carrying out this Agreement and the consummation of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement;
provided, that Parent and the Partnership shall each bear and pay one half of (i) the fees payable in connection with the filings required to
be made under the HSR Act and (ii) the expenses incurred in connection with the filing, printing and mailing of the Registration Statement
and Proxy Statement.
ARTICLE X
MISCELLANEOUS
10.1 Amendment or Supplement.  At any time prior to the Effective Time, this Agreement may be amended or supplemented in any and
all respects, whether before or after receipt of the Partnership Unitholder Approval, by written agreement of the Parties hereto, by action
taken or authorized by their respective boards of directors; provided, however, that following receipt of the Partnership Unitholder
Approval, there will be no amendment or change to the provisions of this Agreement that by Law would require further approval by the
Partnership Unitholders without such approval. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in addition to any other approvals required by the
Partnership’s or Partnership GP’s constituent documents or under this Agreement, any waivers by the Partnership or Partnership GP of, or
any amendment, supplement, modification or change of any of the provisions of this Agreement other than the provisions in Article IV
(except those relating to issuances of equity) must be approved by the Conflicts Committee prior to such action by the Partnership
A-62
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Board or Partnership GP. Further, unless otherwise expressly set forth in this Agreement, whenever a determination, decision, approval or
consent of the Partnership, the Partnership Board or Partnership GP is required pursuant to this Agreement, such determination, decision,
approval or consent must be authorized by the Conflicts Committee.
10.2 Counterparts.  This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts, each of which is an original, and all of which, when
taken together, constitute one Agreement. Delivery of an executed signature page of this Agreement by facsimile or other customary
means of electronic transmission (e.g., “pdf”) will be effective as delivery of a manually executed counterpart hereof.
10.3 Governing Law.  This Agreement is governed by and construed and enforced in accordance with the Laws of the State of Delaware,
without giving effect to any conflicts of law principles that would result in the application of any Law other than the Law of the State of
Delaware.
10.4 Notices.  All notices and other communications hereunder will be in writing and deemed given if delivered personally or by facsimile
transmission, or mailed by a nationally recognized overnight courier or registered or certified mail (return receipt requested), postage
prepaid, to the Parties at the following addresses (or at such other address for a Party as specified by like notice, provided, that notices of
a change of address will be effective only upon receipt thereof):
(a)
(b)
A-63
(c)
If to Parent or Merger Sub, to:
 
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC
5847 San Felipe, Suite 3000
Houston, Texas 77057
Attention: Scott W. Smith, President and Chief Executive Officer
Facsimile: (832) 327-2260
 
With copies to (which does not constitute notice):
 
Paul Hastings LLP
600 Travis Street, 58th Floor
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: James E. Vallee and Douglas V. Getten
Facsimile: (713) 353-3100
If to the Partnership or Partnership GP, to:
 
LRE GP, LLC
Heritage Plaza
1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: Eric Mullins
Facsimile: (713) 292-9560
 
With copies to (which does not constitute notice):
 
Andrews Kurth LLP
600 Travis, Suite 4200
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: Jon W. Daly and Henry Havre
Facsimile: (713) 238-7492
TABLE OF CONTENTS
If to the GP Sellers, to:
 
Heritage Plaza
1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: Eric Mullins
Facsimile: (713) 292-9560
 
With copies to (which does not constitute notice):
 
274 Riverside Avenue
Westport, CT 06880
Attention: Kris Agarwal
Facsimile: (203) 293-2760
Notices will be deemed to have been received (a) on the date of receipt if (i) delivered by hand or overnight courier service or (ii) upon
receipt of an appropriate electronic answerback or confirmation when so delivered by fax (to such number specified above or another
number or numbers as such Person may subsequently designate by notice given hereunder) or (b) on the date five Business Days after
dispatch by certified or registered mail.
10.5 Assignment.  Neither this Agreement nor any of the rights, interests or obligations hereunder shall be assigned, in whole or in part,
by operation of Law or otherwise, by any of the Parties without the prior written consent of the Other Parties, except that (a) Merger Sub
may assign, in its sole discretion, any of or all its rights, interests and obligations under this Agreement to any wholly owned Subsidiary of
Parent and (b) Parent may assign any of its rights (but not delegate any of its obligations) under this Agreement to one or more wholly
owned Subsidiaries of Parent, but no such assignment shall relieve Parent or Merger Sub of any of its obligations hereunder. Any
purported assignment not permitted under this Section 10.5 shall be null and void.
10.6 Entire Understanding; No Third-Party Beneficiaries.  This Agreement, together with the Registration Rights Agreement, the
Voting Agreement and the Confidentiality Agreement, constitutes the entire agreement and understanding of the Parties with respect to
the matters therein and supersedes all prior agreements and understandings on such matters. The provisions of this Agreement are
binding upon and inure to the benefit of the Parties hereto and their respective successors and assigns, and no provision of this
Agreement is intended to confer any rights, benefits, remedies, obligations or liabilities hereunder upon any Person other than the Parties
hereto and their respective successors, except (a) as provided in Section 7.10 (which will be to the benefit of the Persons referred to in
such Section), (b) following the Effective Time, the rights of holders of Partnership Common Units to receive the Merger Consideration and
(c) as provided in Section 10.13 (which will be to the benefit of and enforceable by the Financing Sources).
10.7 Severability.  Any provision of this Agreement that is invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any jurisdiction will, as to that jurisdiction, be
ineffective only to the extent of such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability, without affecting in any way the remaining provisions of this
Agreement in such jurisdiction or rendering that or any other provision of this Agreement invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any other
jurisdiction.
10.8 Jurisdiction.
(a) Each of the Parties irrevocably agrees that any legal action or proceeding with respect to this Agreement and the rights and obligations
arising hereunder shall be brought and determined exclusively in the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware or, if such Court does not
have subject matter jurisdiction, the Superior Court of the State of Delaware or, if jurisdiction is vested exclusively in the Federal courts of
the United States, the Federal courts of the United States sitting in the State of Delaware, and any appellate court from any such state or
Federal court, and hereby irrevocably and unconditionally agree that all claims with respect to any such claim shall be heard and
determined in
A-64
TABLE OF CONTENTS
such Delaware court or in such Federal court, as applicable. The Parties agree that a final judgment in any such claim is conclusive and
may be enforced in any other jurisdiction by suit on the judgment or in any other manner provided by law.
(b) Each of the Parties hereto irrevocably and unconditionally waives, to the fullest extent it may legally and effectively do so, any
objection that it may now or hereafter have to the laying of venue of any suit, action or proceeding arising out of or relating to this
Agreement or any related matter in any Delaware state or Federal court located in the State of Delaware and the defense of an
inconvenient forum to the maintenance of such claim in any such court.
(c) Each of the Parties agrees that it will not, and it will not permit any of its controlled Affiliates to, bring or support any action, cause of
action, claim, cross-claim or third-party claim of any kind or description, whether in law or in equity, whether in contract or in tort or
otherwise, against any Financing Source or any Finance Related Party, in any way relating to this Agreement or any of the transactions
contemplated by this Agreement, including any dispute arising out of or relating in any way to the financing or the performance thereof, in
any forum other than the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York or, if such court does not have subject matter jurisdiction,
in any state court located in the Borough of Manhattan (and the Parties hereto agree to submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of, and venue
in, such court in connection therewith), and that the provisions of Section 10.9 relating to waiver of jury trial shall apply to such action,
cause of action, claim, cross-claim or third-party claim.
10.9 Waiver of Jury Trial.  TO THE EXTENT NOT PROHIBITED BY APPLICABLE LAW THAT CANNOT BE WAIVED, EACH PARTY
HEREBY IRREVOCABLY WAIVES AND COVENANTS THAT IT WILL NOT ASSERT (WHETHER AS PLAINTIFF, DEFENDANT OR
OTHERWISE) ANY RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY IN ANY FORUM IN RESPECT OF ANY ISSUE, CLAIM, DEMAND, ACTION OR
CAUSE OF ACTION ARISING IN WHOLE OR IN PART UNDER, RELATED TO, BASED ON, OR IN CONNECTION WITH, THIS
AGREEMENT OR THE SUBJECT MATTER HEREOF, WHETHER NOW EXISTING OR HEREAFTER ARISING AND WHETHER
SOUNDING IN TORT OR CONTRACT OR OTHERWISE. ANY PARTY MAY FILE AN ORIGINAL COUNTERPART OR A COPY OF
THIS SECTION 10.9 WITH ANY COURT AS WRITTEN EVIDENCE OF THE CONSENT OF EACH SUCH PARTY TO THE WAIVER
OF ITS RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY.
10.10 No Recourse.  This Agreement may only be enforced against, and any claims or causes of action that may be based upon, arise
out of or relate to this Agreement, or the negotiation, execution or performance of this Agreement may only be made against the entities
that are expressly identified as Parties hereto and no past, present or future Affiliate, director, officer, employee, incorporator, member,
manager, partner, stockholder, agent, attorney or representative of any Party hereto has any liability for any obligations or liabilities of the
Parties or for any claim based on, in respect of, or by reason of, the transactions contemplated hereby.
10.11 Specific Performance.  The Parties agree that irreparable damage would occur and that the Parties would not have any adequate
remedy at law in the event that any of the provisions of this Agreement were not performed in accordance with their specific terms or were
otherwise breached and it is accordingly agreed that the Parties shall be entitled to an injunction or injunctions to prevent breaches of this
Agreement and to enforce specifically the terms and provisions of this Agreement, in each case, in accordance with this Section 10.11 in
the Delaware Court of Chancery or any state or federal court sitting in the State of Delaware, this being in addition to any other remedy to
which they are entitled at law or in equity. Each Party agrees that it will not oppose the granting of an injunction, specific performance and
other equitable relief as provided herein on the basis that (a) each Party has an adequate remedy at law or (b) an award of specific
performance is not an appropriate remedy for any reason at law or equity. Each Party further agrees that no Party shall be required to
obtain, furnish or post any bond or similar instrument in connection with or as a condition to obtaining any remedy referred to in this
Section 10.11, and each Party irrevocably waives any right it may have to require the obtaining, furnishing or posting of any such bond or
similar instrument.
A-65
TABLE OF CONTENTS
10.12 Survival.  Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, none of the representations, warranties, agreements and covenants
contained in this Agreement will survive the Closing or the termination of this Agreement if this Agreement is terminated prior to the
Closing; provided, however, that if the Closing occurs, the agreements of the Parties in Sections 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 7.10, 7.14 and Article X will
survive the Closing, and if this Agreement is terminated prior to the Closing, the agreements of the Parties in Sections 7.6 , 9.2, 9.3 and
9.4, and this Article X will survive such termination. The Confidentiality Agreement shall (a) survive termination of this Agreement in
accordance with its terms and (b) terminate as of the Effective Time.
10.13 No Recourse to Financing Sources.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the Partnership Entities agree, on behalf of
themselves and each of their former, current or future officers, directors, managers, employees, members, partners, Partnership
Unitholders, agents and other representatives and controlled Affiliates (the “Partnership Parties”) that Parent’s and Merger Sub’s
financial institutions and their respective Affiliates (collectively “Financing Sources”), and each of their respective former, current or future
general or limited partners, stockholders, managers, members, agents, representatives and Affiliates, and each of their successors and
assigns (collectively, “Finance Related Parties”) shall not be subject to any liability or claims to the Partnership Parties in connection with
the financing of or in any way relating to this Agreement or any of the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby, whether at law, in
equity, in contract, in tort or otherwise. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, (a) no amendment or modification to
Section 10.6(c), Section 10.8(c) or this Section 10.13 (or amendment or modification with respect to any related definitions as they affect
Section 10.6(c), Section 10.8(c) or this Section 10.13) shall be effective without the prior written consent of each Financing Source (on
behalf of themselves and the applicable Finance Related Parties) and (b) each Financing Source and Finance Related Party shall be an
express third party beneficiary of, and shall have the right to enforce, the second paragraph of Section 10.6(c), Section 10.8(c) or this
Section 10.13 and any other claims or actions against any of the Financing Sources in any way relating to this Agreement or any of the
transactions contemplated by this Agreement, including any dispute arising out of or relating in any way to the financing or the
performance thereof. Each of the Parties hereto agrees that Section 10.3 notwithstanding, this Section 10.13 shall be interpreted and any
action relating to this provision shall be governed by the laws of the State of New York.
A-66
[Signature pages follow]
TABLE OF CONTENTS
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be executed in counterparts by their duly authorized officers,
all as of the day and year first written above.
PARENT:
VANGUARD NATURAL RESOURCES, LLC
MERGER SUB:
LIGHTHOUSE MERGER SUB, LLC
/s/ Scott W. Smith
Name: Scott W. Smith
Title:   President & CEO
/s/ Richard Robert
Name: Richard Robert
Title:   Authorized Person
By:
By:
A-67
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be executed in counterparts by their duly authorized officers,
TABLE OF CONTENTS
all as of the day and year first written above.
MANAGEMENT:
LIME ROCK MANAGEMENT LP
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
A-68
By:
By:
By:
By:
Lime Rock Management GP, LLC,
its general partner
/s/ John T. Reynolds
Name: John T. Reynolds
Title:   Manager
Lime Rock Resources GP, L.P.,
its general partner
LRR GP, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Eric Mullins
Name: Eric Mullins
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
Lime Rock Resources GP, L.P.,
its general partner
LRR GP, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Eric Mullins
Name: Eric Mullins
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
Lime Rock Resources GP, L.P.,
its general partner
LRR GP, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Eric Mullins
Name: Eric Mullins
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
Lime Rock Resources II-A GP, LLC,
its general partner
Lime Rock Resources GP II, L.P.,
its sole member
LRR GP II, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Eric Mullins
Name: Eric Mullins
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
Lime Rock Resources II-C GP, LLC,
its general partner
Lime Rock Resources GP II, L.P.,
its sole member
LRR GP II, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Eric Mullins
Name: Eric Mullins
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
FUND ENTITIES:
LIME ROCK RESOURCES A, L.P.
LIME ROCK RESOURCES B, L.P.
LIME ROCK RESOURCES C, L.P.
LIME ROCK RESOURCES II-A, L.P.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIME ROCK RESOURCES II-C, L.P.
PARTNERSHIP:
LRR ENERGY, L.P.
PARTNERSHIP GP:
LRE GP, LLC
LRE GP, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Eric Mullins
Name: Eric Mullins
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
/s/ Eric Mullins
Name: Eric Mullins
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
By:
By:
By:
A-69
TABLE OF CONTENTS
AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AND SUPPORT
AGREEMENT
This AMENDED AND RESTATED VOTING AND SUPPORT AGREEMENT (this “Agreement”) is made and entered into as of May 21,
2015, by and among Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Parent”), each of Lime Rock Resources
A, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership, Lime Rock Resources B, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership, and Lime Rock Resources C, L.P.
a Delaware limited partnership (collectively, the “Unitholders” and each, a “Unitholder”), LRR Energy, L.P., a Delaware limited
partnership (the “ Partnership”), LRE GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and the general partner of the Partnership (the
“Partnership GP”), and, solely for purposes of Section 3.2, Lime Rock Management LP, a Delaware limited partnership (“Management”),
Lime Rock Resources II-A, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (“LRR II-A”), and Lime Rock Resources II-C, L.P., a Delaware limited
partnership (“LRR II-C,” and, together with Management and LRR II-A, the “Non-Fund I GP Sellers”). The parties to this Agreement are
sometimes referred to herein collectively as the “parties,” and individually as a “party.” Capitalized terms used herein without definition
shall have the respective meanings specified in the Merger Agreement (as defined below).
WHEREAS, the parties to this Agreement entered into that certain Voting and Support Agreement, dated as of April 20, 2015 (the
“Original Voting Agreement”), in connection with that certain Purchase Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of April 20, 2015 (the
“Merger Agreement”), by and among Parent, Lighthouse Merger Sub, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and wholly owned
subsidiary of Parent (“Merger Sub”), the Unitholders, the Non-Fund I GP Sellers, the Partnership and the Partnership GP, pursuant to
which, among other things, (i) Parent will purchase all of the outstanding membership interests in the Partnership GP and (ii) Merger Sub
will be merged with and into the Partnership, with the Partnership surviving as a wholly owned, directly and indirectly, Subsidiary of
Parent, all upon the terms of, and subject to the conditions set forth in, the Merger Agreement (the “Merger”);
WHEREAS, the Unitholders, collectively, own certain common units of the Partnership (the “Common Units”, together with any other
partnership interests in the Partnership or Rights with respect thereto acquired (whether beneficially or of record) by the Unitholders after
the date hereof and prior to the earlier of the Closing or the termination of all of the Unitholders’ obligations under this Agreement,
including any partnership interests in the Partnership or Rights acquired by means of purchase, dividend or distribution, or issued upon
the exercise of any options or warrants or the conversion of any convertible securities or otherwise, being collectively referred to herein as
the “Securities”);
WHEREAS, the approval of the Merger and the Merger Agreement by the affirmative vote or consent of the holders, as of the record date
for the Partnership Meeting, of at least a majority of the Outstanding (as defined in the Existing Partnership Agreement) Partnership
Common Units, voting as a class, is a condition to the consummation of the Merger; and
WHEREAS, as a condition to the willingness of the Parent Entities to enter into the Merger Agreement and as an inducement and in
consideration therefor, the Unitholders, the Partnership and the Partnership GP entered into the Original Voting Agreement, and the
parties to this Agreement desire to amend and restate the Original Voting Agreement in its entirety in accordance with the terms and
conditions of this Agreement.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, the mutual covenants and agreements set forth herein, and other good and
valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged, intending to be legally bound, the parties hereto
agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
VOTING;
GRANT AND APPOINTMENT OF PROXY
Section 1.1 Voting.  From and after the date hereof until the earlier of (x) the consummation of the Merger or (y) the termination of the
Merger Agreement pursuant to and in compliance with the terms therein (such earlier date, the “Expiration Date”), each Unitholder
irrevocably and unconditionally hereby agrees that at any meeting (whether annual or special and each adjourned or postponed meeting)
of the Partnership Unitholders, however called, or in connection with any written consent of the Partnership Unitholders, each Unitholder
(in such capacity and not in any other capacity) will (i) appear at such meeting or otherwise cause all of the Securities owned by such
Unitholder (whether beneficially or of record) to be counted as present
B-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
thereat for purposes of calculating a quorum and (ii) vote or cause to be voted (including by proxy or written consent, if applicable) all of
the Securities owned by such Unitholder (whether beneficially or of record):
(a) with respect to each meeting at which a vote of the Unitholders on the Merger is requested (a “Merger Proposal”), in favor of such
Merger Proposal (and, in the event that such Merger Proposal is presented as more than one proposal, in favor of each proposal that is
part of such Merger Proposal), and in favor of any other matter presented or proposed as to approval of the Merger or any part or aspect
thereof or any other transactions or matters contemplated by the Merger Agreement;
(b) against any Alternative Proposal, without regard to the terms of such Alternative Proposal, or any other transaction, proposal,
agreement or action made in opposition to adoption of the Merger Agreement or in competition or inconsistent with the Merger and the
other transactions or matters contemplated by the Merger Agreement;
(c) against any other action, agreement or transaction, that is intended, that could reasonably be expected, or the effect of which could
reasonably be expected, to materially impede, interfere with, delay, postpone, discourage or adversely affect the Merger or any of the
other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement or the performance by such Unitholder of its obligations under this Agreement,
including: (i) any extraordinary corporate transaction, such as a merger, consolidation or other business combination involving the
Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries; (ii) a sale, lease or transfer of a material amount of assets of the Partnership or any of its
Subsidiaries (other than the Merger or any other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement) or a reorganization, recapitalization
or liquidation of the Partnership or any of its Subsidiaries; (iii) an election of new members to the board of directors of the Partnership GP,
other than nominees to the board of directors of the Partnership GP who are serving as directors of the Partnership GP on the date of this
Agreement or as otherwise provided in the Merger Agreement; (iv) any material change in the present capitalization or distribution policy
of the Partnership or any amendment or other change to the Partnership Certificate of Limited Partnership, the Existing Partnership
Agreement or other organizational documents of the Partnership or its Subsidiaries, except if approved in writing by Parent or as
otherwise expressly provided in the Merger Agreement; or (v) any other material change in the Partnership’s organizational structure or
business, except if approved in writing by Parent or as otherwise expressly provided in the Merger Agreement;
(d) against any action, proposal, transaction or agreement that would reasonably be expected to result in a breach in any respect of any
covenant, representation or warranty or any other obligation or agreement of the Partnership Entities contained in the Merger Agreement,
or of any Unitholder contained in this Agreement; and
(e) in favor of any other matter necessary or desirable to the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement,
including the Merger (clauses (a) through (e) of this Section 1.1, the “Required Votes”).
Section 1.2 Grant of Irrevocable Proxy; Appointment of Proxy.
(a) From and after the date hereof until the Expiration Date, each Unitholder hereby irrevocably and unconditionally grants to, and
appoints, Parent and any designee thereof as such Unitholder’s proxy and attorney-in-fact (with full power of substitution), for and in the
name, place and stead of such Unitholder, to vote or cause to be voted (including by proxy or written consent, if applicable) its Securities
in accordance with the Required Votes.
(b) Each Unitholder hereby represents that any proxies heretofore given in respect of the Securities, if any, are revocable, and hereby
revokes such proxies.
(c) Each Unitholder hereby affirms that the irrevocable proxy set forth in this Section 1.2 is given in connection with the execution of the
Merger Agreement, and that such irrevocable proxy is given to secure the performance of the duties of such Unitholder under this
Agreement. Each Unitholder hereby further affirms that the irrevocable proxy set forth in this Section 1.2 is coupled with an interest and,
except upon the occurrence of the Expiration Date, is intended to be irrevocable. Each Unitholder agrees,
B-2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
until the Expiration Date, to vote its Securities in accordance with Section 1.1(a) through Section 1.1(e) above as instructed by Parent in
writing. The parties agree that the foregoing is a voting agreement.
Section 1.3 Restrictions on Transfers.  Each Unitholder hereby agrees that, from the date hereof until the Expiration Date, it shall not,
directly or indirectly, except in connection with the consummation of the Merger, (a) sell, transfer, assign, tender in any tender or exchange
offer, pledge, encumber, hypothecate or similarly dispose of (by merger, by testamentary disposition, by operation of law or otherwise),
either voluntarily or involuntarily, or enter into any contract, option or other arrangement or understanding with respect to the sale, transfer,
assignment, pledge, Lien, hypothecation or other disposition of (by merger, by testamentary disposition, by operation of Law or otherwise),
any Securities, (b) deposit any Securities into a voting trust or enter into a voting agreement or arrangement or grant any proxy, consent or
power of attorney with respect thereto other than, and that is inconsistent with, this Agreement, or (c) agree (regardless of whether in
writing) to take any of the actions referred to in the foregoing clause (a) or (b); provided, however, that, prior to the Expiration Date, each
Unitholder may sell an amount of Securities up to fifteen percent (15%) of the Securities which such Unitholder holds on the date of this
Agreement.
Section 1.4 Partnership Change in Recommendation.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, if at any time
following the date hereof and prior to the Expiration Date there occurs a Partnership Change in Recommendation pursuant to Section
7.3(c) of the Merger Agreement, then the obligations of the Unitholders set forth in Section 1.1 and the irrevocable proxy and power of
attorney in Section 1.2 shall be of no force and effect. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 1.4, the restrictions set forth
in Section 1.3 shall continue to apply with respect to the Securities until the Expiration Date.
ARTICLE II
NO SOLICITATION
Section 2.1 Restricted Activities.  Prior to the Expiration Date, no Unitholder shall, and each Unitholder shall cause its Affiliates and
Representatives not to, directly or indirectly, (a) initiate, solicit, knowingly encourage or knowingly facilitate any inquiry, proposal or offer
that would reasonably be expected to lead to an Alternative Proposal, (b) enter into or participate in any discussions or negotiations
regarding, or furnish to any Person any non-public information with respect to, or that could reasonably be expected to lead to, any
Alternative Proposal, (c) take any action to release or permit the release of any Person from, or amend, waive or permit the amendment or
waiver of any provision of, any “standstill” or similar agreement or provision to which the Partnership is or becomes a party or under which
the Partnership has any rights, or (d) resolve or agree to do any of the foregoing (the activities specified in clauses (a) through (d) being
hereinafter referred to as the “Restricted Activities”). For the purposes of this Agreement, “Representatives” means, with respect to any
Person, the officers, directors, employees, agents, advisors and other representatives of such Person (in each case, acting in their
capacity as such to such Person).
Section 2.2 Notification.  Each Unitholder shall, and shall cause its Representatives to, immediately cease and cause to be terminated
any discussions or negotiations with any Person conducted heretofore with respect to an Alternative Proposal. From and after the date
hereof until the Expiration Date, each Unitholder will promptly (and in no event later than 24 hours after receipt) (a) advise Parent in
writing of any Alternative Proposal (and any changes thereto) it receives in its capacity as a Partnership Unitholder and the material terms
and conditions of any such Alternative Proposal, including the identity of such Person making such Alternative Proposal, and (b) provide
Parent with copies of all written proposals or draft agreements received by such Unitholder in its capacity as a Partnership Unitholder
setting forth the terms and conditions of, or otherwise relating to, such Alternative Proposal. Each Unitholder will keep Parent reasonably
informed of all material developments with respect to the status and terms of any such Alternative Proposal, offers, inquiries or requests
(and such Unitholder shall promptly provide Parent with copies of any additional written proposals received by such Unitholder in its
capacity as a Partnership Unitholder or that such Unitholder has delivered to any third party making an Alternative Proposal relating to
such Alternative Proposal) and of the status of any such discussions or negotiations. Each Unitholder agrees not to enter into any
agreement with any Person subsequent to the date of this Agreement and prior to the Expiration Date that prohibits such Unitholder from
providing any information to Parent in accordance with this Section 2.2. This Section 2.2 shall not apply to any Alternative Proposal
received by the Partnership.
B-3
Section 2.3 Capacity.  Each Unitholder is signing this Agreement solely in its capacity as a Partnership Unitholder, and nothing
contained herein shall in any way limit or affect any actions taken by any Representative of such Unitholder in his or her capacity as a
director, officer or employee of the Partnership GP, and no action taken in any such capacity as a director, officer or employee shall be
TABLE OF CONTENTS
deemed to constitute a breach of this Agreement.
Section 2.4 Non-Solicitation.
(a) During the period beginning on the Effective Time and ending on the second anniversary of the Closing Date (the “Restricted
Period”), the Unitholders shall not, and shall cause their respective controlled Affiliates not to, without the prior written consent of Parent,
anywhere in North America, directly or indirectly, hire, engage, or solicit for employment (or engagement as a consultant) any Person
employed by or on behalf of Parent or its Subsidiaries, or encourage or induce or attempt to encourage or induce any such Person to
leave such employment or engagement; provided, however, that the foregoing provision shall not prevent the Unitholders or any of their
controlled Affiliates from employing any such Person who (i) contacts any of the Unitholders or any of their controlled Affiliates at his or her
own initiative without any prior solicitation or contact by or encouragement from the Unitholders or any of their controlled Affiliates, (ii)
responds to a mass media solicitation or advertisement that is not directed at such Person or (iii) has not been employed by Parent or any
of its Affiliates for a period of three months, other than as a result of an action of the Unitholders or any controlled Affiliate of any of the
Unitholders that otherwise would be prohibited hereby. For the avoidance of doubt, Lime Rock Partners III, L.P., Lime Rock Partners IV,
L.P., Lime Rock Partners V, L.P., Lime Rock Partners VI, L.P., Lime Rock Partners VII, L.P. (collectively, “Lime Rock Partners”), Lime
Rock Management LP and any portfolio companies of Lime Rock Partners are not controlled Affiliates of the Unitholders.
(b) During the Restricted Period, Parent shall not, and shall cause its controlled Affiliates not to, without the prior written consent of the
applicable Unitholder, anywhere in North America, directly or indirectly, hire, engage, or solicit for employment (or engagement as a
consultant) any Person employed by or on behalf of the Unitholders or their Affiliates as of immediately following the Closing, or
encourage or induce or attempt to encourage or induce any such Person to leave such employment or engagement; provided, however,
that the foregoing provision shall not prevent Parent or any of its Affiliates from employing any such Person who (i) contacts Parent or any
of its Affiliates at his or her own initiative without any prior solicitation or contact by or encouragement from Parent or any of its Affiliates,
(ii) responds to a mass media solicitation or advertisement that is not directed at such Person or (iii) has not been employed by the
Unitholders or any of their Affiliates for a period of three months, other than as a result of an action of Parent or any of its Affiliates that
otherwise would be prohibited hereby.
(c) The parties hereto acknowledge and agree that Parent and its Affiliates, successors and assigns, in the case of Section 2.4(a), and the
Unitholders and each of their Affiliates, successors, and assigns, in the case of Section 2.4(b), would suffer irreparable harm from a
breach of Section 2.4(a) or Section 2.4(b), respectively, by any Unitholder or Parent or their respective controlled Affiliates, as applicable,
and that money damages would not be an adequate remedy for any such breach. Therefore, in the event of a breach or threatened breach
of this Section 2.4, (i) Parent and each of its Affiliates or their respective successors and assigns, in the case of a breach of Section 2.4(a),
and (ii) the Unitholders and each of their Affiliates or their respective successors and assigns, in the case of a breach of Section 2.4(b), in
each case of the foregoing clauses (i) and (ii), in addition to other rights and remedies available at Law or in equity, shall be entitled to
specific performance, injunctive, and other equitable relief in order to enforce or prevent any breach of the provisions of this Section 2.4.
The restrictive covenants set forth in this Section 2.4 shall be construed as agreements independent of any other provision in this
Agreement, and the existence of any claim or cause of action against a party, whether predicated upon this Agreement, the Merger
Agreement or otherwise, shall not constitute a defense to the enforcement of the covenants contained in this Section 2.4.
B-4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(d) If the final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction declares any term or provision of this Section 2.4 to be invalid or unenforceable,
the parties hereto agree that the court making the determination of invalidity or unenforceability shall have the power to reduce the scope,
duration, or area of the term or provision, to delete specific words or phrases, or to replace any invalid or unenforceable term or provision
with a term or provision that is valid and enforceable and that comes closest to expressing the intention of the invalid or unenforceable
term or provision, and this Agreement shall be enforceable as so modified to cover the maximum duration, scope or area permitted by
Law. In addition, in the event of a breach of this Section 2.4 by any party, the Restricted Period shall be tolled with respect to such breach
until such breach has been duly cured. Each party agrees that the restrictions contained in this Section 2.4 are reasonable and necessary
to protect all parties’ legitimate business interests.
ARTICLE III
REPRESENTATIONS, WARRANTIES AND COVENANTS
OF THE UNITHOLDERS
Section 3.1 Representations and Warranties.  Each Unitholder represents and warrants to Parent as follows: (a) such Unitholder has
full legal right and capacity to execute and deliver this Agreement, to perform such Unitholder’s obligations hereunder and to consummate
the transactions contemplated hereby; (b) this Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by such Unitholder and the execution,
delivery and performance of this Agreement by such Unitholder and the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby have
been duly authorized by all necessary action on the part of such Unitholder and no other actions or proceedings on the part of such
Unitholder are necessary to authorize this Agreement or to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby; (c) this Agreement
constitutes the valid and binding agreement of such Unitholder, enforceable against such Unitholder in accordance with its terms; (d) the
execution and delivery of this Agreement by such Unitholder does not, and the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby
and the compliance with the provisions hereof will not, conflict with or violate any Laws or agreements binding upon such Unitholder or
the Securities owned by such Unitholder, nor require any authorization, consent or approval of, or filing with, any Governmental Entity,
except for filings with the SEC by such Unitholder; (e) such Unitholder owns, beneficially and of record, or controls the Securities set forth
opposite such Unitholder’s name on Exhibit A attached hereto; and (f) such Unitholder owns, beneficially and of record, or controls all of
its Securities free and clear of any proxy, voting restriction, adverse claim or other Lien (other than Permitted Encumbrances or any
restrictions created by this Agreement) and has sole voting power with respect to the Securities and sole power of disposition with respect
to all of the Securities, with no restrictions on such Unitholder’s rights of voting or disposition pertaining thereto, except for such transfer
restrictions of general applicability as may be provided under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the “blue sky” laws of the
various states of the United States, and no person other than such Unitholder has any right to direct or approve the voting or disposition of
any of the Securities.
Section 3.2 Volume Limitation.
(a) Other than in strict compliance with Section 3.2(b), none of the Unitholders or the Non-Fund I GP Sellers (collectively, the “Restricted
Unitholders” and each, a “Restricted Unitholder”) shall, during the period commencing on the Closing Date and continuing for 90 days
after the Closing Date (the “Limitation Period”), (i) offer, pledge, sell, contract to sell, sell any option or contract to purchase, purchase any
option or contract to sell, grant any option, right or warrant to purchase, or otherwise transfer or dispose of, directly or indirectly, any
common units of Parent (“Parent Common Units”) or any securities convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for Parent Common
Units (including without limitation, Parent Common Units or such other securities which may be deemed to be beneficially owned by such
Restricted Unitholder in accordance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and securities which may be issued upon exercise of an
option or warrant) (collectively, the “Restricted Securities”) or publicly disclose the intention to make any offer, sale, pledge or
disposition, (ii) enter into any swap or other agreement that transfers, in whole or in part, any of the economic consequences of ownership
of the Parent Common Units or such other securities, whether any such transaction described in clause (i) or (ii) above is to be settled by
delivery of Parent Common Units or such other securities, in cash or otherwise, (iii) make any demand for or exercise any right with
respect to the registration of any of the Restricted Securities except in accordance with the Registration Rights
B-5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Agreement, or (iv) sell or dispose of any of the Restricted Securities in an underwritten offering other than pursuant to Section 2.02 or
Section 2.03(b) of the Registration Rights Agreement.
(b) On each trading day during the Limitation Period, the Restricted Unitholders may offer, pledge, sell, contract to sell, sell any option or
contract to purchase, purchase any option or contract to sell, grant any option, right or warrant to purchase, or otherwise transfer or
dispose of, directly or indirectly, an aggregate number of Restricted Securities not to exceed the Daily Volume Limitation. For purposes of
this Section 3.2, the “Daily Volume Limitation” shall mean an amount of securities, on a daily basis, equal to ten percent (10%) of the
average daily trading volume (the “ ADTV”) of Parent Common Units during the four weeks immediately prior to the first day of the
calendar month in which the Restricted Securities are offered, pledged, sold, contracted to be sold, or otherwise transferred or disposed of
pursuant to this Section 3.2(b). For the avoidance of doubt, Parent shall provide the Restricted Unitholders with the Daily Volume
Limitation calculation on the first business day of each month based on the ADTV information provided to it by the NASDAQ Global Select
Market.
(c) In furtherance of the foregoing, Parent and any duly appointed transfer agent for the registration or transfer of the Restricted Securities
described herein are hereby authorized to decline to make any transfer of Restricted Securities if such transfer would constitute a violation
or breach of this Section 3.2.
Section 3.3 Certain Related Party Agreements.  Effective as of the Closing, each applicable Unitholder shall, or shall cause its
applicable Affiliates to, terminate the contracts evidencing the Partnership Related Party Transactions set forth on Exhibit B attached
hereto, in each case without any further obligation or liability of the Partnership or its Subsidiaries of any kind or nature, and the
Unitholders shall deliver to Parent in connection with the Closing evidence reasonably satisfactory to Parent of such termination.
Section 3.4 Certain Other Agreements.  Each Unitholder hereby:
(a) irrevocably waives, and agrees not to exercise, any rights of appraisal or rights of dissent from the Merger that such Unitholder may
have with respect to the Securities;
(b) agrees to promptly notify Parent and the Partnership of the number of any new Securities acquired by such Unitholder after the date
hereof and prior to the Expiration Date; and, for the avoidance of doubt, any such Securities shall be subject to the terms of this Agreement
as though owned by such Unitholder on the date hereof;
(c) agrees to permit the Parent and the Partnership to publish and disclose in the Proxy Statement such Unitholder’s identity and
ownership of the Securities and the nature of the such Unitholder’s commitments, arrangements and understandings under this
Agreement; and
(d) shall and does authorize the Partnership or its counsel to notify the Partnership’s transfer agent that there is a stop transfer order with
respect to all of the Securities (and that this Agreement places limits on the voting and transfer of such Securities); provided, however, that
Partnership or its counsel further notifies the Partnership’s transfer agent to lift and vacate the stop transfer order with respect to the
Securities following the Expiration Date.
ARTICLE IV
TERMINATION
This Agreement shall terminate and be of no further force or effect upon the Expiration Date. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, (a)
the obligations contained in Section 3.2 shall survive the occurrence of the Expiration Date only if the Merger is consummated, and (b) the
obligations contained in this Article IV and Article V shall survive any termination of this Agreement. Nothing in this Article IV shall relieve
or otherwise limit any party of liability for willful breach of this Agreement.
ARTICLE V
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 5.1 Expenses.  Each party shall bear their respective expenses, costs and fees (including attorneys’, auditors’ and financing
fees, if any) in connection with the preparation, execution and delivery of this Agreement and compliance herewith, whether or not the
Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement are effected.
B-6
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 5.2 Notices.  All notices and other communications hereunder will be in writing and deemed given if delivered personally or by
facsimile transmission, or mailed by a nationally recognized overnight courier or registered or certified mail (return receipt requested),
postage prepaid, to the parties hereto at the following addresses (or at such other address for a party as specified by like notice; provided,
however, that notices of a change of address will be effective only upon receipt thereof):
If to Parent, to:
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC
5847 San Felipe, Suite 3000
Houston, Texas 77057
Attn: Scott W. Smith, President and Chief Executive Officer
Facsimile: (832) 327-2260
With a copy to (which does not constitute notice):
Paul Hastings LLP
600 Travis Street, 58th Floor
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: James E. Vallee/Douglas V. Getten
Facsimile: (713) 353-3100
If to any Unitholder or any GP Seller, to:
Heritage Plaza
1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: Eric Mullins
Facsimile: (713) 292-9560
With a copy to (which does not constitute notice):
274 Riverside Avenue
Westport, CT 06880
Attention: Kris Agarwal
Facsimile: (203) 293-2760
If to the Partnership or the Partnership GP, to:
Heritage Plaza
1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: Eric Mullins
Facsimile: (713) 292-9560
With a copy to (which does not constitute notice):
Andrews Kurth LLP
600 Travis, Suite 4200
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: Jon W. Daly/Henry Havre
Facsimile: (713) 238-7492
Section 5.3 Amendments; Waivers.
(a) Any provision of this Agreement may be amended or waived if, and only if, such amendment or waiver is in writing and signed (i) in the
case of an amendment, by Parent, each Unitholder, the Partnership and the Partnership GP and (ii) in the case of a waiver, by the party
(or parties) against whom the waiver is to be effective. No failure or delay by any party in exercising any right, power or privilege
hereunder shall operate as a waiver thereof, nor shall any single or partial exercise thereof preclude any other or further exercise thereof
or the exercise of any other right, power or privilege.
B-7
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(b) Parent agrees not to amend the Eagle Rock Voting and Support Agreement without the consent of the Unitholders. For purposes of
this Section 5.3, “Eagle Rock Voting and Support Agreement” means that certain Voting and Support Agreement, dated May 21, 2015,
by and among Parent, Montierra Minerals & Production, L.P., Montierra Management LLC, Natural Gas Partners VII, L.P., Natural Gas
Partners VIII, L.P., NGP Income Management L.L.C., Eagle Rock Holdings NGP 7, LLC, Eagle Rock Holdings NGP 8, LLC, ERH NGP 7
SPV, LLC, ERH NGP 8 SPV, LLC, NGP Income Co-Investment Opportunities Fund II, L.P., NGP Energy Capital Management, L.L.C.,
and, solely for purposes of Section 1.2 and Articles IV and V, Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P. and Eagle Rock Energy GP, L.P.
Section 5.4 Assignment.  No party to this Agreement may assign any of its rights or obligations under this Agreement, including by sale
of stock, operation of law in connection with a merger or sale of substantially all the assets, without the prior written consent of the other
parties hereto; provided, however, that Parent may assign its rights and obligations under this Agreement without the consent of any other
party to an Affiliate of Parent as of the date hereof, so long as Parent remains liable for its obligations hereunder.
Section 5.5 No Partnership, Agency, or Joint Venture.  This Agreement is intended to create, and creates, a contractual relationship
and is not intended to create, and does not create, any agency, partnership, joint venture or any like relationship between the parties
hereto.
Section 5.6 Entire Agreement.  This Agreement together with the Merger Agreement, the Registration Rights Agreement and the
Confidentiality Agreement constitute the entire agreement and understanding of the parties hereto with respect to the matters therein and
supersede all prior agreements and understandings on such matters.
Section 5.7 No Third-Party Beneficiaries.  Subject to Section 5.4, the provisions of this Agreement are binding upon, inure to the benefit
of the parties hereto and their respective successors and assigns, and no provision of this Agreement is intended to confer any rights,
benefits, remedies, obligations or liabilities hereunder upon any Person other than the parties hereto and their respective successors.
Section 5.8 Jurisdiction; Specific Performance; Waiver of Jury Trial.
(a) The parties hereto submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware or, if such Court does not have
subject matter jurisdiction, to the Superior Court of the State of Delaware or, if jurisdiction is vested exclusively in the Federal courts of the
United States, the Federal courts of the United States sitting in the State of Delaware, and any appellate court from any such state or
Federal court, and hereby irrevocably and unconditionally agree that all claims with respect to any such claim shall be heard and
determined in such Delaware court or in such Federal court, as applicable. The parties hereto agree that a final judgment in any such
claim is conclusive and may be enforced in any other jurisdiction by suit on the judgment or in any other manner provided by law. Each of
the parties hereto irrevocably and unconditionally waives, to the fullest extent it may legally and effectively do so, any objection which it
may now or hereafter have to the laying of venue of any suit, action or proceeding arising out of or relating to this Agreement or any related
matter in any Delaware state or Federal court located in the State of Delaware and the defense of an inconvenient forum to the
maintenance of such claim in any such court.
(b) The parties hereto agree that irreparable damage would occur and that the parties hereto would not have any adequate remedy at law
in the event that any of the provisions of this Agreement were not performed in accordance with their specific terms or were otherwise
breached and it is accordingly agreed that, to the fullest extent permitted by Law, the parties hereto shall be entitled to an injunction or
injunctions to prevent breaches of this Agreement and to enforce specifically the terms and provisions of this Agreement, in each case, in
accordance with this Section 5.8 in the Delaware Court of Chancery or any state or federal court sitting in the State of Delaware, this being
in addition to any other remedy to which they are entitled at law or in equity. To the fullest extent permitted by Law, each of the parties
hereto agrees that it will not oppose the granting of an injunction, specific performance and other equitable relief as provided herein on the
basis that (x) any party hereto has an adequate remedy at law or (y) an award of specific performance is not an appropriate remedy for any
reason at law or equity. Each party hereto further agrees that no other party hereto shall be required to obtain, furnish or post any
B-8
TABLE OF CONTENTS
bond or similar instrument in connection with or as a condition to obtaining any remedy referred to in this Section 5.8(b), and each party
hereto irrevocably waives any right it may have to require the obtaining, furnishing or posting of any such bond or similar instrument.
(c) TO THE EXTENT NOT PROHIBITED BY APPLICABLE LAW THAT CANNOT BE WAIVED, EACH PARTY HERETO HEREBY
IRREVOCABLY WAIVES AND COVENANTS THAT IT WILL NOT ASSERT (WHETHER AS PLAINTIFF, DEFENDANT OR
OTHERWISE) ANY RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY IN ANY FORUM IN RESPECT OF ANY ISSUE, CLAIM, DEMAND, ACTION OR
CAUSE OF ACTION ARISING IN WHOLE OR IN PART UNDER, RELATED TO, BASED ON, OR IN CONNECTION WITH, THIS
AGREEMENT OR THE SUBJECT MATTER HEREOF, WHETHER NOW EXISTING OR HEREAFTER ARISING AND WHETHER
SOUNDING IN TORT OR CONTRACT OR OTHERWISE. ANY PARTY HERETO MAY FILE AN ORIGINAL COUNTERPART OR A
COPY OF THIS SECTION 5.8(c) WITH ANY COURT AS WRITTEN EVIDENCE OF THE CONSENT OF EACH SUCH PARTY TO THE
WAIVER OF ITS RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY.
Section 5.9 Governing Law.  This Agreement is governed by and construed and enforced in accordance with the Laws of the State of
Delaware, without giving effect to any conflicts of law principles that would result in the applicable of any Law other than the Law of the
State of Delaware.
Section 5.10 Interpretation.  Unless expressly provided for elsewhere in this Agreement, this Agreement will be interpreted in
accordance with the following provisions: (a) the words “this Agreement,” “herein,” “hereby,” “hereunder,” “hereof,” and other equivalent
words refer to this Agreement as an entirety and not solely to the particular portion, article, section, subsection or other subdivision of this
Agreement in which any such word is used; (b) examples are not to be construed to limit, expressly or by implication, the matter they
illustrate; (c) the word “including” and its derivatives means “including without limitation” and is a term of illustration and not of limitation;
(d) all definitions set forth herein are deemed applicable whether the words defined are used herein in the singular or in the plural and
correlative forms of defined terms have corresponding meanings; (e) the word “or” is not exclusive, and has the inclusive meaning
represented by the phrase “and/or”; (f) a defined term has its defined meaning throughout this Agreement and each exhibit and schedule
to this Agreement, regardless of whether it appears before or after the place where it is defined; (g) all references to prices, values or
monetary amounts refer to United States dollars; (h) wherever used herein, any pronoun or pronouns will be deemed to include both the
singular and plural and to cover all genders; (i) this Agreement has been jointly prepared by the parties hereto, and this Agreement will not
be construed against any Person as the principal draftsperson hereof or thereof and no consideration may be given to any fact or
presumption that any party had a greater or lesser hand in drafting this Agreement; (j) the captions of the articles, sections or subsections
appearing in this Agreement are inserted only as a matter of convenience and in no way define, limit, construe or describe the scope or
extent of such section, or in any way affect this Agreement; (k) any references herein to a particular Section, Article or Exhibit means a
Section or Article of, or an Exhibit to, this Agreement unless otherwise expressly stated herein; the Exhibit attached hereto is incorporated
herein by reference and will be considered part of this Agreement; (l) unless otherwise specified herein, all accounting terms used herein
will be interpreted, and all determinations with respect to accounting matters hereunder will be made, in accordance with GAAP, applied
on a consistent basis; (m) all references to days mean calendar days unless otherwise provided; and (n) all references to time mean
Houston, Texas time.
Section 5.11 Counterparts.  This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts, each of which is an original, and all of
which, when taken together, constitute one Agreement. Delivery of an executed signature page of this Agreement by facsimile or other
customary means of electronic transmission (e.g., “pdf”) will be effective as delivery of a manually executed counterpart hereof.
Section 5.12 Severability.  Any provision of this Agreement which is invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any jurisdiction will, as to that
jurisdiction, be ineffective only to the extent of such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability, without affecting in any way the remaining
provisions hereof in such jurisdiction or rendering that or any other provision of this Agreement invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any
B-9
other jurisdiction.
[Signature Pages Follow]
TABLE OF CONTENTS
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have duly executed and delivered this Agreement as of the date and year first written above.
PARENT:
VANGUARD NATURAL RESOURCES, LLC
/s/ Scott W. Smith
Name: Scott W. Smith
Title:   President and Chief Executive Officer
By:
B-10
TABLE OF CONTENTS
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have duly executed and delivered this Agreement as of the date and year first written above.
PARTNERSHIP:
LRR ENERGY, L.P.
PARTNERSHIP GP:
LRE GP, LLC
UNITHOLDERS:
LIME ROCK RESOURCES A, L.P.
LIME ROCK RESOURCES B, L.P.
LIME ROCK RESOURCES C, L.P.
LRE GP, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Charles W. Adcock
Name: Charles W. Adcock
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
/s/ Charles W. Adcock
Name: Charles W. Adcock
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
Lime Rock Resources GP, L.P.,
its general partner
LRR GP, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Charles W. Adcock
Name: Charles W. Adcock
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
Lime Rock Resources GP, L.P.,
its general partner
LRR GP, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Charles W. Adcock
Name: Charles W. Adcock
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
Lime Rock Resources GP, L.P.,
its general partner
LRR GP, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Charles W. Adcock
Name: Charles W. Adcock
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
TABLE OF CONTENTS
NON-FUND I GP SELLERS (solely for the purposes of Section 3.2):
LIME ROCK MANAGEMENT LP
Lime Rock Management GP, LLC,
its general partner
/s/ John T. Reynolds
Name: John T. Reynolds
Title:   Manager
Lime Rock Resources II-A GP, LLC,
its general partner
Lime Rock Resources GP II, L.P.,
its sole member
LRR GP II, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Charles W. Adcock
LIME ROCK RESOURCES II-A, L.P.
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
B-11
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
Name: Charles W. Adcock
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
Lime Rock Resources II-C GP, LLC,
its general partner
Lime Rock Resources GP II, L.P.,
its sole member
LRR GP II, LLC, its general partner
/s/ Charles W. Adcock
Name: Charles W. Adcock
Title:   Co-Chief Executive Officer
By:
By:
By:
By:
By:
B-12
LIME ROCK RESOURCES II-C, L.P.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
April 20, 2015
Board of Directors of LRE GP, LLC
1111 Bagby St.
Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
Gentlemen:
You have requested our opinion as to the fairness, from a financial point of view, to the holders (in their capacity as such, the “LRE
Common Unitholders”) of outstanding common units representing limited partner interests (“LRE Common Units”) in LRR Energy, L.P.,
a Delaware limited partnership (the “Partnership”), of the Merger Consideration (as defined below) to be received in the Merger (as
defined below) by such LRE Common Unitholders pursuant to the Purchase Agreement and Plan of Merger, to be dated as of April 20,
2015 (the “Agreement ”), by and among Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Vanguard”),
Lighthouse Merger Sub, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and wholly owned indirect subsidiary of Vanguard (“Merger Sub”),
Lime Rock Management LP, a Delaware limited partnership (“LR Management”), Lime Rock Resources A, L.P., a Delaware limited
partnership (“LRR A”), Lime Rock Resources B, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (“LRR B”), Lime Rock Resources C, L.P., a
Delaware limited partnership (“LRR C”), Lime Rock Resources II-A, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (“LRR II-A”), Lime Rock
Resources II-C, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (collectively with LR Management, LRR A, LRR B, LRR C and LRR II-A, the “GP
Sellers”), the Partnership and LRE GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and the general partner of the Partnership (“LRE GP”
and, collectively with Vanguard, Merger Sub, the GP Sellers and the Partnership, the “Parties”). The Agreement provides, among other
things, that (i) Merger Sub will be merged with and into the Partnership (the “Merger”), pursuant to which the Partnership will be the
surviving entity, and each issued and outstanding LRE Common Unit (other than LRE Common Units held by the Partnership, Vanguard
or, in either case, any of their respective wholly owned subsidiaries) will be converted into the right to receive 0.550 common units
representing limited liability company interests in Vanguard (“Vanguard Common Units”) (the “Merger Consideration”) and (ii) the GP
Sellers will sell to Vanguard all of the equity interests in LRE GP (the “GP Sale”) in exchange for an aggregate of 12,320 Vanguard
Common Units (the “GP Sale Consideration”). The transactions contemplated by the Agreement are referred to herein as the
“Transactions.” The terms and conditions of the Transactions are set forth in more detail in the Agreement, and references to the
Transactions set forth herein are qualified in their entirety by the terms of the Agreement.
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC (including its affiliates, “TPH”), as part of its investment banking business, is continually
engaged in performing financial analyses with respect to businesses and their securities in connection with mergers and acquisitions,
negotiated underwritings, competitive biddings, secondary distributions of listed and unlisted securities, private placements and other
transactions, as well as for estate, corporate and other purposes. TPH also engages in securities trading and brokerage, private equity
and investment management activities, equity research and other financial services, and in the ordinary course of these activities, TPH
may from time to time acquire, hold or sell, for its own accounts and for the accounts of its customers, (i) equity, debt and other securities
(or related derivative securities) and financial instruments (including bank loans and other obligations) of the Partnership, any of the other
companies that may be involved in the Transactions, including the Parties, and any of their respective affiliates, and (ii) any currency or
commodity that may be involved in the Transactions and the other matters contemplated by the Agreement. In addition, TPH and certain of
its employees, including members of the team performing services in connection with the Transactions, as well as certain private equity
and investment management funds
Heritage Plaza | 1111 Bagby, Suite 5100 | Houston, Texas 77002 | www.TudorPickeringHolt.com
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Securities, Inc. | Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC | Members FINRA/SIPC
C-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
associated or affiliated with TPH in which they may have financial interests, may from time to time acquire, hold or make direct or indirect
investments in or otherwise finance a wide variety of companies, including the Partnership, any of the other companies that may be
involved in the Transactions, including the Parties, other prospective counterparties and their respective affiliates. We have acted as
financial advisor to the Partnership in connection with, and have participated in certain of the negotiations leading to, the Merger. We
expect to receive fees for our services in connection with our engagement by the Partnership, a portion of which is payable upon
rendering this opinion and a portion of which is contingent upon the consummation of the Merger, and the Partnership has agreed to
reimburse our expenses and indemnify us against certain liabilities arising out of our engagement. We have previously performed various
investment banking and financial services for the Conflicts Committee of the Board of Directors of LRE GP and for portfolio companies of
certain affiliates of LRE GP for which we have received or may receive compensation. In the past two years, these services included
advising LR Management and its portfolio companies in various transactions, including PDC Mountaineer in a sale transaction with a third
party. We were also previously engaged by Vanguard in 2014 with respect to a potential acquisition of assets from a third party, for which
we received compensation. We may in the future provide investment banking or other financial services to the Parties or any of the other
companies involved in the Transactions or their respective unitholders, members, affiliates or portfolio companies. In connection with such
investment banking or other financial services, we may receive compensation.
In connection with this opinion, we have reviewed, among other things: (i) a draft of the Agreement dated April 20, 2015, circulated the
morning thereof; (ii) Annual Reports on Form 10-K for each of the Partnership and Vanguard for each of the years in the three years ended
December 31, 2014; (iii) certain Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for each of the Partnership and Vanguard; (iv) certain other
communications from the Partnership and Vanguard to their respective equity holders; (v) estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas
liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of December 31, 2014, attributable to the Partnership’s net interests in certain
properties, leasehold and royalty interests, prepared by Miller and Lents, Ltd., Netherland, Sewell & Associates and Ryder Scott
Company, and estimated oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of March 31, 2015, attributable to
the Partnership’s net interests in such properties, prepared by the management of LRE GP; (vi) estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas
liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of December 31, 2014, attributable to Vanguard’s net interests in certain properties,
prepared by the management of Vanguard and audited by DeGolyer and MacNaughton, and estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas
liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of March 31, 2015, attributable to Vanguard’s net interests in such properties,
prepared by the management of Vanguard; (vii) certain publicly available research analyst reports for the Partnership and Vanguard; and
(viii) certain internal financial, production and pricing information and forecasts for the Partnership and Vanguard prepared by the
managements of LRE GP and Vanguard, respectively, as approved for our use by the management of LRE GP (the “Forecasts”),
including certain cost savings synergies projected by the management of LRE GP to result from the Transactions, as approved for our use
by the management of LRE GP (the “Synergies”). We have also (a) held discussions with members of the senior managements of LRE
GP and Vanguard regarding their assessment of the strategic rationale for, and the potential benefits of, the Transactions and the past and
current business operations, financial condition and future prospects of the Partnership and Vanguard, as applicable, (b) reviewed the
reported price and trading activity for the LRE Common Units and the Vanguard Common Units, (c) compared certain financial and stock
market information for the Partnership and Vanguard with similar financial and stock market information for certain other companies, the
securities of which are publicly traded, (d) reviewed the financial terms of certain recent business combinations in the upstream energy
sector specifically and in the energy industry generally and (e) performed such other studies and analyses, and considered such other
factors, as we considered appropriate.
For purposes of our opinion, we have assumed and relied upon, without assuming any responsibility for independent verification, the
accuracy and completeness of all of the financial, accounting, legal, tax and other information provided to, discussed with or reviewed by
or for us, or publicly available. In that regard, we have assumed with your consent that the Forecasts and Synergies have been
reasonably prepared on a basis reflecting the best currently available estimates and judgments of the management of LRE GP and
Vanguard, and that such Forecasts and Synergies will be realized in the amounts and time periods contemplated thereby.
Heritage Plaza | 1111 Bagby, Suite 5100 | Houston, Texas 77002 | www.TudorPickeringHolt.com
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Securities, Inc. | Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC | Members FINRA/SIPC
C-2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
We have also assumed that all governmental, regulatory or other consents or approvals necessary for the consummation of the
Transactions will be obtained without any material adverse effect on the Partnership, Vanguard, Merger Sub, the other Parties, the
unitholders of the Partnership or the unitholders of Vanguard or the expected benefits of the Transactions in any way meaningful to our
analysis. In addition, we have not made an independent evaluation or appraisal of the assets and liabilities (including any contingent,
derivative or off-balance-sheet assets and liabilities) of the Partnership or any of its subsidiaries or Vanguard or any of its subsidiaries,
and we have not been furnished with any such evaluation or appraisal. We do not express any opinion as to any tax or other
consequences that might result from the Transactions, nor does our opinion address any legal, regulatory or accounting matters. We have
also assumed that the final form of the Agreement conforms to the last draft reviewed by us in all respects material to our analysis and that
the Transactions will be consummated on the terms set forth in the Agreement without the waiver or modification of any term or condition
the effect of which would be in any way meaningful to our analysis.
Our opinion does not address the underlying business decision of the Partnership or Vanguard to engage in the Merger or any of the other
Transactions or the relative merits of the Merger or any of the other Transactions as compared to any other alternative transactions that
may be available to the Partnership or Vanguard. This opinion addresses only the fairness, from a financial point of view, as of the date
hereof, of the Merger Consideration to be received in the Merger by the LRE Common Unitholders pursuant to the Agreement. We do not
express any view on, and our opinion does not address, any other term or aspect of the Agreement or the Transactions, including, without
limitation: (a) the GP Sale, (b) the GP Sale Consideration, (c) the fairness of the Merger to, or any consideration paid or received in
connection therewith by, the holders of any other class of securities, creditors or other constituencies of the Partnership or Vanguard,
whether relative to the Merger Consideration pursuant to the Agreement, the GP Sale Consideration or otherwise; (d) the allocation of any
consideration to be paid by Vanguard or its affiliates in the Transactions; (e) the fairness of the amount or nature of any compensation to
be paid or payable to any of the officers, directors or employees of LRE GP, Vanguard or any other party, or any class of such persons, in
connection with the Transactions, whether relative to the Merger Consideration to be paid to the LRE Common Unitholders pursuant to
the Agreement or otherwise; (f) any equity issuances after the date hereof by Vanguard or (g) any voting or other agreement, arrangement
or understanding to be entered into in connection with or contemplated by the Transactions, any related transactions or otherwise. We are
not expressing any opinion as to the price at which Vanguard Common Units or LRE Common Units will trade at any time or as to the
impact of the Transactions on the solvency or viability of the Partnership or Vanguard or the ability of each of the Partnership or Vanguard
to pay its obligations when they come due. Our opinion is necessarily based on economic, monetary, market and other conditions as in
effect on, and the information made available to us as of, the date hereof. We assume no obligation to update, revise or reaffirm our
opinion and expressly disclaim any responsibility to do so based on circumstances, developments or events occurring after the date
hereof. Our advisory services and the opinion expressed herein are provided for the information and assistance of the Board of Directors
of LRE GP in connection with its consideration of the Merger, and such opinion does not constitute a recommendation with respect to the
Transactions, including as to how any holder of interests in the Partnership or Vanguard or any Party to the Transactions should vote with
respect to the Merger, the GP Sale, any of the Transactions or any other matter. This opinion has been reviewed and approved by TPH’s
fairness opinion committee.
Based upon and subject to the foregoing, it is our opinion that, as of the date hereof, the Merger Consideration to be received in the
Merger by the LRE Common Unitholders pursuant to the Agreement is fair, from a financial point of view, to the LRE Common
Unitholders.
Very truly yours,
TUDOR, PICKERING, HOLT & CO. ADVISORS, LLC
/s/ Chad Michael
Chad Michael
Managing Director
Heritage Plaza | 1111 Bagby, Suite 5100 | Houston, Texas 77002 | www.TudorPickeringHolt.com
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Securities, Inc. | Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC | Members FINRA/SIPC
By:
C-3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
May 21, 2015
Board of Directors of LRE GP, LLC
1111 Bagby St.
Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
Gentlemen:
In connection with your consideration of a request from Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company
(“Vanguard”), for your consent to permit Vanguard to enter into and perform the Agreement and consummate the Merger (each as defined
below), you have requested our opinion as to the fairness, from a financial point of view, to New Vanguard (as defined below) of the
Merger Consideration (as defined below) to be paid by New Vanguard pursuant to the Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Agreement”)
to be entered into among Vanguard, Talon Merger Sub, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of
Vanguard (“Merger Sub”), Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (the “Partnership”), and Eagle Rock Energy
GP, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership and the general partner of the Partnership (“Partnership GP” and, together with Vanguard,
Merger Sub and the Partnership, the “Parties”). The Agreement provides for, among other things, the merger of Merger Sub with and into
the Partnership (the “Merger”), pursuant to which the Partnership will be the surviving entity, and each issued and outstanding common
unit representing a limited partner interest in the Partnership (each, a “Partnership Common Unit”) (other than any common units held by
the Partnership, Vanguard or, in either case, any of their respective wholly owned subsidiaries) will be converted into the right to receive
0.185 common units representing limited liability company interests in Vanguard (“Vanguard Common Units”) (the “Merger
Consideration”). The transactions contemplated by the Agreement are referred to herein as the “Transactions.”
Prior to entering into the Agreement, Vanguard entered into a Purchase Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of April 20, 2015 (the
“Prior Agreement”), by and among Vanguard, LRR Energy, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (“LRE”), LRE GP, LLC, a Delaware
limited liability company and the general partner of LRE (“LRE GP”), and the other entities party thereto (together with Vanguard, LRE and
LRE GP, the “Prior Agreement Parties”), which provides for a series of transactions upon consummation of which each of LRE and LRE
GP will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Vanguard. We refer to Vanguard, giving pro forma effect to the consummation of the
transactions contemplated by the Prior Agreement, as “New Vanguard.” The transactions contemplated by the Prior Agreement are
referred to herein as the “Prior Agreement Transactions.” The terms and conditions of the Transactions and the Prior Agreement
Transactions are set forth in more detail in the Agreement and the Prior Agreement, respectively, and references to the Transactions and
the Prior Agreement Transactions set forth herein are qualified in their entirety by the terms of the Agreement and the Prior Agreement,
respectively.
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC (including its affiliates, “TPH”), as part of its investment banking business, is continually
engaged in performing financial analyses with respect to businesses and their securities in connection with mergers and acquisitions,
negotiated underwritings, competitive biddings, secondary distributions of listed and unlisted securities, private placements and other
transactions, as well as for estate, corporate and other purposes. TPH also engages in securities trading and brokerage, private equity
and investment management activities, equity research and other financial services, and in the ordinary course of these activities, TPH
may from time to time acquire, hold or sell, for its own accounts and for the accounts of its customers, (i) equity, debt and other securities
(or related derivative securities) and financial instruments (including bank loans and other obligations) of any of the companies that may
be involved in the Transactions or the Prior Agreement Transactions, including the Parties and the Prior Agreement Parties, and any of
their respective affiliates, and (ii) any currency or commodity that may be involved in the Transactions or the Prior
Heritage Plaza | 1111 Bagby, Suite 5100 | Houston, Texas 77002 | www.TudorPickeringHolt.com
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Securities, Inc. | Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC | Members FINRA/SIPC
D-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Agreement Transactions and the other matters contemplated by the Agreement and the Prior Agreement, respectively. In addition, TPH
and certain of its employees, including members of the team performing services in connection with the Transactions, as well as certain
private equity and investment management funds associated or affiliated with TPH in which they may have financial interests, may from
time to time acquire, hold or make direct or indirect investments in or otherwise finance a wide variety of companies, including Vanguard,
any of the other companies that may be involved in the Transactions and the Prior Agreement Transactions, including the Parties and the
Prior Agreement Parties, and any of their respective affiliates. We have acted as financial advisor to LRE in connection with its
consideration of a request from Vanguard for consent to permit Vanguard to enter into and perform the Agreement and consummate the
Merger. We expect to receive fees for our services in connection with our engagement by LRE, which are payable upon rendering this
opinion, and LRE has agreed to reimburse our expenses and indemnify us against certain liabilities arising out of our engagement. We
have previously performed various investment banking and financial services for the Board of Directors and Conflicts Committee of LRE
GP and for portfolio companies of certain affiliates of LRE GP for which we have received or may receive compensation. In the past two
years, these services included advising LRE in connection with the Prior Agreement Transactions and advising an affiliate of LRE and its
portfolio companies in various transactions, including PDC Mountaineer in a sale transaction with a third party. We were also previously
engaged by Vanguard in 2014 with respect to a potential acquisition of assets from a third party, for which we received compensation. In
addition, we have previously performed various investment banking and financial services, and are currently providing certain of such
services, for affiliates of NGP Energy Capital Management, a private equity firm that indirectly owns a significant minority equity interest in
the Partnership (“NGP”), for which we have received or may receive compensation. In the past two years, these services included (i)
acting as a financial advisor to certain NGP portfolio companies in connection with sales of upstream and midstream assets; (ii) acting as
a financial advisor to a public company in which NGP had an interest in connection with an acquisition of upstream assets; (iii) acting as
an underwriter for an NGP portfolio company in connection with its initial public offering; and (iv) acting as a financial advisor to an NGP
portfolio company in connection with its investigation of strategic alternatives. We were also previously engaged by the Partnership with
respect to an acquisition, for which we received compensation. We may in the future provide investment banking or other financial
services to the Parties or any of the other companies involved in the Transactions, the Prior Agreement Parties or their respective
unitholders, members, affiliates or portfolio companies. In connection with such investment banking or other financial services, we may
receive compensation.
In connection with this opinion, we have reviewed, among other things: (i) a draft of the Agreement dated May 21, 2015 and the form of
consent of the Board of Directors of LRE GP with respect thereto, in each case circulated the morning thereof; (ii) the Prior Agreement; (iii)
Annual Reports on Form 10-K for each of the Partnership, Vanguard and LRE for each of the years in the three years ended December
31, 2014; (iv) certain Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for each of the Partnership, Vanguard and LRE; (v) certain other communications
from the Partnership, Vanguard and LRE to their respective equity holders; (vi) estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves
and projected future net revenues as of December 31, 2014, attributable to the Partnership’s net interests in certain properties, prepared
by Cawley, Gillespie & Associates, Inc., and estimated oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of
March 31, 2015, attributable to the Partnership’s net interests in such properties, prepared by the management of the Partnership GP; (vii)
estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of December 31, 2014, attributable to
Vanguard’s net interests in certain properties, prepared by the management of Vanguard and audited by DeGolyer and MacNaughton,
and estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of March 31, 2015, attributable to
Vanguard’s net interests in such properties, prepared by the management of Vanguard; (viii) estimated proved oil, gas, and natural gas
liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of December 31, 2014, attributable to LRE’s net interests in certain properties,
leasehold and royalty interests, prepared by Miller and Lents, Ltd., Netherland, Sewell & Associates and Ryder Scott Company, and
estimated oil, gas, and natural gas liquids reserves and projected future net revenues as of March 31, 2015, attributable to LRE’s net
interests in such properties, prepared by the management of LRE GP; (ix) certain publicly available research analyst reports for the
Partnership, Vanguard and LRE; and (x) certain internal financial, production and pricing information and forecasts for the Partnership and
New Vanguard prepared by the managements of the Partnership and
Heritage Plaza | 1111 Bagby, Suite 5100 | Houston, Texas 77002 | www.TudorPickeringHolt.com
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Securities, Inc. | Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC | Members FINRA/SIPC
D-2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Vanguard, respectively, as approved for our use by the management of LRE GP (the “Forecasts”), including certain cost savings
synergies projected by the management of Vanguard to result from the Transactions and the Prior Agreement Transactions, as approved
for our use by the management of LRE GP (the “Synergies”). We have also (a) held discussions with members of the senior
managements of Vanguard and LRE regarding their assessment of the strategic rationale for, and the potential benefits of, the
Transactions and the requested consent and with members of the senior managements of the Partnership and Vanguard regarding the
past and current business operations, financial condition and future prospects of the Partnership and Vanguard, as applicable, (b)
reviewed the reported price and trading activity for the Partnership Common Units and the Vanguard Common Units, (c) compared certain
financial and stock market information for the Partnership and Vanguard with similar financial and stock market information for certain
other companies, the securities of which are publicly traded, (d) reviewed the financial terms of certain recent business combinations in
the upstream energy sector specifically and in the energy industry generally and (e) performed such other studies and analyses, and
considered such other factors, as we considered appropriate.
For purposes of our opinion, we have assumed and relied upon, without assuming any responsibility for independent verification, the
accuracy and completeness of all of the financial, accounting, legal, tax and other information provided to, discussed with or reviewed by
or for us, or publicly available. In that regard, we have assumed with your consent that the Forecasts and Synergies have been
reasonably prepared on a basis reflecting the best currently available estimates and judgments of Vanguard and the Partnership, and that
such Forecasts and Synergies will be realized in the amounts and time periods contemplated thereby. We have also assumed that all
governmental, regulatory or other consents or approvals necessary for the consummation of the Transactions and the Prior Agreement
Transactions will be obtained without any material adverse effect on the Partnership, Vanguard, Merger Sub, LRE, LRE GP, the
unitholders of the Partnership, Vanguard or LRE or the expected benefits of the Transactions and the Prior Agreement Transactions in
any way meaningful to our analysis. In addition, we have not made an independent evaluation or appraisal of the assets and liabilities
(including any contingent, derivative or off-balance-sheet assets and liabilities) of the Partnership, Vanguard, LRE or any of their
respective subsidiaries, and we have not been furnished with any such evaluation or appraisal. We do not express any opinion as to any
tax or other consequences that might result from the Transactions or the Prior Agreement Transactions, nor does our opinion address any
legal, regulatory or accounting matters. We have also assumed that the final form of the Agreement conforms to the last draft reviewed by
us in all respects material to our analysis and that the Transactions and the Prior Agreement Transactions will be consummated on the
terms set forth in the Agreement and the Prior Agreement, respectively, in each case without the waiver or modification of any term or
condition the effect of which would be in any way meaningful to our analysis.
Our opinion does not address the underlying business decision of (i) Vanguard to engage in the Transactions or the Prior Agreement
Transactions, (ii) LRE to provide its consent with respect to the Transactions or (iii) LRE to engage in the Prior Agreement Transactions,
or the relative merits of the Transactions or the Prior Agreement Transactions as compared to any other alternative transactions that may
be available to Vanguard. This opinion addresses only the fairness, from a financial point of view, as of the date hereof, of the Merger
Consideration to be paid by New Vanguard pursuant to the Agreement. We do not express any view on, and our opinion does not
address, any other term or aspect of the Agreement or the Transactions, including, without limitation, (a) the fairness of the Transactions
to, or any consideration paid or received in connection therewith by, the holders of any class of securities, creditors or other constituencies
of the Partnership or Vanguard, whether relative to the Merger Consideration pursuant to the Agreement or otherwise; (b) the fairness of
the amount or nature of any compensation to be paid or payable to any of the officers, directors or employees of the Partnership or
Vanguard or any other party, or any class of such persons, in connection with the Transactions, whether relative to the Merger
Consideration pursuant to the Agreement or otherwise; or (c) any voting or similar agreement, arrangement or understanding to be entered
into in connection with or contemplated by the Transactions, any other transactions or otherwise. We do not express any view on, and our
opinion does not address, any term or aspect of the Prior Agreement or the Prior Agreement Transactions. We are not expressing any
opinion as to the price at which the Vanguard Common Units or the Partnership Common Units will trade at any time or as to the impact of
the Transactions and the Prior Agreement Transactions on the solvency or viability of the Partnership or Vanguard or the ability of each of
the Partnership or Vanguard to pay its obligations when they come due. Our opinion is necessarily based
Heritage Plaza | 1111 Bagby, Suite 5100 | Houston, Texas 77002 | www.TudorPickeringHolt.com
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Securities, Inc. | Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC | Members FINRA/SIPC
D-3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
on economic, monetary, market and other conditions as in effect on, and the information made available to us as of, the date hereof. We
assume no obligation to update, revise or reaffirm our opinion and expressly disclaim any responsibility to do so based on circumstances,
developments or events occurring after the date hereof. Our advisory services and the opinion expressed herein are provided for the
information and assistance of the Board of Directors of LRE GP in connection with its consideration of a request from Vanguard for
consent to permit Vanguard to enter into and perform the Agreement and consummate the Merger, and such opinion does not constitute a
recommendation with respect to the Transactions or such consent, including as to how any holder of interests in Vanguard, the
Partnership, any other Party to the Transactions, LRE or any other Prior Agreement Parties should vote with respect to such Transactions,
the Prior Agreement Transactions or any other matter. This opinion has been reviewed and approved by TPH’s fairness opinion
committee.
Based upon and subject to the foregoing, it is our opinion that, as of the date hereof, the Merger Consideration to be paid by New
Vanguard pursuant to the Agreement is fair, from a financial point of view, to New Vanguard.
Very truly yours,
TUDOR, PICKERING, HOLT & CO. ADVISORS, LLC
/s/ Chad Michael
Name: Chad Michael
Title:   Managing Director
Heritage Plaza | 1111 Bagby, Suite 5100 | Houston, Texas 77002 | www.TudorPickeringHolt.com
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Securities, Inc. | Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC | Members FINRA/SIPC
By:
D-4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
April 20, 2015
The Conflicts Committee of the Board of Directors
Of LRE GP, LLC
1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
Gentlemen:
You have asked us to advise you with respect to the fairness, from a financial point of view, to the holders of common units, other than
those owned by Lime Rock Management L.P. (“Management”) or affiliate entities, (such unitholders, the “Unaffiliated Unitholders”) of
the consideration to be paid to the common unitholders in the proposed merger (the “Merger”) pursuant to the Purchase Agreement and
Plan of Merger (the “Agreement”) by and among Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC (“Parent”), Lighthouse Merger Sub, LLC (“Merger
Sub”), LRE GP, LLC (“Partnership GP”), LRR Energy, L.P. (the “Partnership”), Management, and the entities Lime Rock Resources A,
L.P., Lime Rock Resources B, L.P., Lime Rock Resources C, L.P., Lime Rock Resources II-A, L.P., Lime Rock Resources II-C, L.P.
(together the “Fund Entities”), pursuant to which each Partnership common unit issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective
Time will be converted into the right to receive 0.550 Parent common units (the “Merger Consideration”, and such ratio, the “Exchange
Ratio”).
In arriving at our opinion, we have reviewed and analyzed, among other things, the following:
reviewed the draft Agreement as of April 18, 2015;
reviewed the draft Voting and Support Agreement as of April 18, 2015;
i.
ii.
iii.reviewed certain publicly available financial statements of each of the Partnership and the Parent that we deemed relevant;
iv.
reviewed certain other publicly available business, operating and financial information relating to each of the Partnership and the
Parent that we deemed relevant;
v.reviewed certain internal information, including financial and production forecasts and other financial and operating data concerning
each of the Partnership and Parent, prepared by the management of each of the Partnership and Parent, respectively;
reviewed certain estimates of the Partnership’s and Parent’s oil and gas production and reserves prepared and provided by the
management of the Partnership and the Parent, respectively, and contained in provided economic databases;
vi.
vii.reviewed certain other information and presentations prepared by the management of the Partnership and its advisors;
viii.
reviewed publicly available information concerning the trading of, and the trading market for, the securities of the Partnership and
Parent;
reviewed the historical exchange ratio based upon the closing trading prices of the units for both the Partnership and the Parent over
several time periods, which were then compared to the Exchange Ratio;
derived a relevant premium range from a list of historical transactions to compute an exchange ratio range which was then compared to
the Exchange Ratio;
ix.
x.
E-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conflicts Committee of the Board of Directors
of LRE GP, LLC
April 20, 2015
Page 2
xi.
xii.
compared the Partnership’s ownership in the pro forma combined company with the relative contribution of the Partnership to the pro
forma combined company based upon certain metrics that we deemed relevant, which were then used to derive an exchange ratio
range which was compared to the Exchange Ratio;
derived a net asset value range for both the Partnership and Parent by discounting future cash flows derived from the Partnership and
Parent economic databases at discount rates which we deemed appropriate, and used the net asset value ranges to derive an
exchange ratio range which was compared to the Exchange Ratio;
derived a unit value range based on the trading valuations of certain publicly traded partnerships in the oil and gas exploration and
production sector for both the Partnership and Parent, and used these unit value ranges to derive an exchange ratio range which was
compared to the Exchange Ratio;
reviewed the range of Wall Street analyst price targets for both the Partnership and Parent, and used such price targets to derive an
exchange ratio range which was compared to the Exchange Ratio;
reviewed the financial metrics of certain historical corporate transactions in the oil and gas exploration and production sector, and
applied such financial metrics to the Partnership’s projected results to compute an exchange ratio which was then compared to the
Exchange Ratio.
xiii.
xiv.
xv.
In addition, we have held discussions with certain officers and employees of the Partnership and Parent to discuss the foregoing, as well
as other matters believed to be relevant to our analysis and have considered such other information, financial studies, analyses and
investigations, and financial, economic, and market criteria which we deemed relevant.
In connection with our review, we have not independently verified any of the foregoing information and have relied on its being complete
and accurate in all material respects. With respect to production and financial forecasts, we have assumed that they have been
reasonably prepared on bases reflecting the best currently available estimates and judgments of the Partnership’s and Parent’s
management as to the future financial and operational performance of the Partnership and Parent, respectively. In rendering this opinion,
we have assumed that the execution version of the Agreement will be substantially the same as the draft dated April 18, 2015 and that the
Transaction will be consummated in accordance with the terms set forth in the Agreement without any waiver, amendment or delay of any
material terms or conditions. We have assumed that in connection with the receipt of all necessary governmental, regulatory or other
approvals and consents required for the Merger, no delays, limitations, conditions or restrictions will be imposed that would have a
material adverse effect on the receipt of the Merger Consideration by the unitholders of the Partnership. We are not legal, tax or regulatory
advisors and have relied upon, without independent verification, the assessment of the Partnership and its legal, tax and regulatory
advisors with respect to such matters. We have assumed, with your consent, that the Merger will be treated as a tax-free reorganization for
federal income tax purposes. In addition, we have not made an independent evaluation or appraisal of the assets of the Company. Our
opinion necessarily is based upon conditions as they exist and can be evaluated on, and on the information made available at the date
hereof. Events occurring after the date hereof may affect this opinion and the assumptions used in preparing it, and we do not assume any
obligation to update, revise or reaffirm this opinion.
E-2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conflicts Committee of the Board of Directors
of LRE GP, LLC
April 20, 2015
Page 3
Simmons & Company International (“Simmons”) is a nationally recognized investment banking firm and is continually engaged in the
valuation of businesses and their securities in connection with mergers and acquisitions, leveraged buyouts, negotiated underwritings,
secondary distributions of listed and unlisted securities and private placements. In the ordinary course of our business, we may trade the
securities of the Partnership and Parent for our own account and for the accounts of customers and may at any time hold a long or short
position in such securities. We have been engaged by the Conflicts Committee to provide a fairness opinion in connection with the Merger
and will receive a fee for our services, a portion of which was payable in connection with execution of our engagement letter with the
Conflict Committee and a portion of which is payable upon delivery of this opinion. We also will be reimbursed for expenses incurred. The
Partnership has agreed to indemnify us against liabilities arising out of or in connection with the services rendered under such
engagement. We are currently advising and have advised certain portfolio companies of Lime Rock Partners, an affiliate of Management,
in the past two years, and we may provide investment banking or other financial services to the Partnership, Parent, Management or their
respective shareholders, affiliates or portfolio companies in the future. In connection with such investment banking or other financial
services, we may receive compensation.
It is understood that this opinion is for the information and assistance of the Conflicts Committee in connection with its consideration of the
Merger and is not to be quoted or referred to, in whole or in part, in any registration statement, prospectus, or proxy statement, or in any
other written document used in connection with the offering or sale of securities, nor shall this letter be used for any other purposes,
without our prior written consent; provided, however, that (i) this opinion may be reproduced in its entirety and referred to in a proxy or
information statement or registration statement to be mailed to the holders of Partnership units in connection with the Merger and (ii) the
existence of this opinion may be disclosed by the Partnership in a press release issued in connection with the public announcement of the
Merger. Our opinion does not address the Partnership’s underlying business decision to pursue the Merger or the relative merits of the
Merger as compared to any alternative business strategies that might exist for the Partnership. This opinion does not address the fairness
of the amount or nature of the compensation to any of the Partnership’s or Parent’s officers, directors or employees, or class of such
persons, relative to the compensation to the public unitholders of the Partnership. Our opinion does not constitute a recommendation to
any unitholder as to how such unitholder should vote on the Merger. This opinion has been reviewed and approved by Simmons’ fairness
opinion committee.
Based upon and subject to the foregoing, including the various assumptions and limitations set forth herein, it is our opinion that, as of the
date hereof, the terms of the Merger contemplated by the Agreement are fair from a financial point of view to the Unaffiliated Unitholders.
Very truly yours,
Simmons & Company International
/s/ Jay Boudreaux
Mr. Jay Boudreaux
Managing Director
By:
E-3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
May 20, 2015
The Conflicts Committee of the Board of Directors
Of LRE GP, LLC
1111 Bagby Street, Suite 4600
Houston, Texas 77002
Gentlemen:
LRR Energy, L.P. (the “Partnership”), LRE GP, LLC (“Partnership GP”) and Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC (“Parent”) and other
parties entered into a Purchase Agreement and Plan of Merger dated April 20, 2015 (“Lighthouse Merger Agreement”) whereby the
Partnership will merge with Vanguard (“Lighthouse Merger”). Parent has proposed a transaction whereby it will merge with Eagle Rock
Energy Partners, L.P. (“Eagle Rock”) pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger (“Merger Agreement”) whereby each Eagle Rock
common unit will be converted into the right to receive 0.185 Parent common units (the “Merger Consideration”, and such ratio, the
“Exchange Ratio”) (“Eagle Rock Merger”). Pursuant to section 4.2 of the Lighthouse Merger Agreement, Parent’s entry into the proposed
Merger Agreement and implementation of the Eagle Rock Merger requires the prior approval of the Conflicts Committee of the board of
directors of Partnership GP. You have asked us to advise you with respect to the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the Eagle Rock
Merger to the holders of common units of the Partnership, other than those owned by Lime Rock Management L.P. (“Management”) or
affiliate entities, (such unitholders, the “Unaffiliated Unitholders”).
In arriving at our opinion, we have reviewed and analyzed, among other things, the following:
i. reviewed the draft Merger Agreement as of May 19, 2015;
ii.reviewed the draft Letter Agreement regarding Written Consent to Proposed Merger Transaction as of May 19, 2015;
iii.reviewed certain publicly available financial statements of each of the Partnership, Parent and Eagle Rock that we deemed relevant;
reviewed certain other publicly available business, operating and financial information relating to each of the Partnership, Parent and
Eagle Rock that we deemed relevant;
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.
reviewed certain internal information, including financial and production forecasts and other financial and operating data concerning
each of the Partnership, Parent and Eagle Rock, prepared by the management of each of the Partnership, Parent and Eagle Rock,
respectively;
reviewed certain estimates of the Partnership’s, Parent’s and Eagle Rock’s oil and gas production and reserves prepared and provided
by the management of the Partnership, Parent and Eagle Rock, respectively, and contained in provided economic databases;
reviewed certain other information and presentations prepared by the management of the Partnership, Parent and Eagle Rock and
certain of their advisors;
reviewed publicly available information concerning the trading of, and the trading market for, the securities of the Partnership, Parent
and Eagle Rock;
reviewed the historical exchange ratio based upon the closing trading prices of the units for both the Parent and Eagle Rock over
several time periods, which were then compared to the Exchange Ratio;
derived a relevant premium range from a list of historical transactions to compute an exchange ratio range which was then compared to
the Exchange Ratio;
ix.
x.
F-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conflicts Committee of the Board of Directors
of LRE GP, LLC
May 20, 2015
Page 2
xi.
compared the ownership of Parent, pro forma for the Lighthouse Merger (“Pro Forma Parent”), in the combined company pro forma for
the Eagle Rock Merger with the relative contribution of the Pro Forma Parent to the combined company pro forma for the Eagle Rock
Merger based upon certain metrics that we deemed relevant, which were then used to derive an exchange ratio range which was
compared to the Exchange Ratio;
derived a net asset value range for both the Pro Forma Parent and Eagle Rock by discounting future cash flows derived from the Pro
Forma Parent and Eagle Rock economic databases at discount rates which we deemed appropriate, and used the net asset value
ranges to derive an exchange ratio range which was compared to the Exchange Ratio;
derived a unit value range based on the trading valuations of certain publicly traded partnerships in the oil and gas exploration and
production sector for both the Pro Forma Parent and Eagle Rock, and used these unit value ranges to derive an exchange ratio range
which was compared to the Exchange Ratio;
reviewed the range of Wall Street analyst price targets for both the Parent and Eagle Rock, and used such price targets to derive an
exchange ratio range which was compared to the Exchange Ratio;
reviewed the financial metrics of certain historical corporate transactions in the oil and gas exploration and production sector, and
applied such financial metrics to Eagle Rock’s projected results to compute an exchange ratio which was then compared to the
Exchange Ratio.
xii.
xiii.
xiv.
xv.
In addition, we have held discussions with certain officers and employees of the Partnership, Parent, and Eagle Rock to discuss the
foregoing, as well as other matters believed to be relevant to our analysis and have considered such other information, financial studies,
analyses and investigations, and financial, economic, and market criteria which we deemed relevant.
In connection with our review, we have not independently verified any of the foregoing information and have relied on its being complete
and accurate in all material respects. With respect to production and financial forecasts, we have assumed that they have been
reasonably prepared on bases reflecting the best currently available estimates and judgments of the management of the Partnership,
Parent and Eagle Rock as to the future financial and operational performance of the Partnership, Parent and Eagle Rock, respectively. In
rendering this opinion, we have assumed that the execution version of the Merger Agreement will be substantially the same as the draft
dated May 19, 2015 and that the Eagle Rock Merger will be consummated in accordance with the terms set forth in the Merger Agreement
without any waiver, amendment or delay of any material terms or conditions. We have assumed that in connection with the receipt of all
necessary governmental, regulatory or other approvals and consents required for the Lighthouse Merger and the Eagle Rock Merger, no
delays, limitations, conditions or restrictions will be imposed that would have a material adverse effect on the closing of either the
Lighthouse Merger or the Eagle Rock Merger. We are not legal, tax or regulatory advisors and have relied upon, without independent
verification, the assessment of the Partnership and its legal, tax and regulatory advisors with respect to such matters. We have assumed,
with your consent, that the Eagle Rock Merger will be treated as a tax-free reorganization for federal income tax purposes. In addition, we
have not made an independent evaluation or appraisal of the assets of the Partnership, Parent or Eagle Rock. Our opinion necessarily is
based upon conditions as they exist and can be evaluated on, and on the information made available at the date hereof. Events occurring
after the date hereof may affect this opinion and the assumptions used in preparing it, and we do not assume any obligation to update,
revise or reaffirm this opinion.
F-2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conflicts Committee of the Board of Directors
of LRE GP, LLC
May 20, 2015
Page 3
Simmons & Company International (“Simmons”) is a nationally recognized investment banking firm and is continually engaged in the
valuation of businesses and their securities in connection with mergers and acquisitions, leveraged buyouts, negotiated underwritings,
secondary distributions of listed and unlisted securities and private placements. In the ordinary course of our business, we may trade the
securities of the Partnership, Parent and Eagle Rock for our own account and for the accounts of customers and may at any time hold a
long or short position in such securities. We have been engaged by the Conflicts Committee to provide a fairness opinion in connection
with the Eagle Rock Merger and will receive a fee for our services, a portion of which was payable in connection with execution of our
engagement letter with the Conflict Committee and a portion of which is payable upon delivery of this opinion. We also will be reimbursed
for expenses incurred. The Partnership has agreed to indemnify us against liabilities arising out of or in connection with the services
rendered under such engagement. We have advised and have acted as an underwriter for public equity offerings of certain portfolio
companies of NGP Energy Capital Management, whose certain affiliated funds have a substantial ownership interest in Eagle Rock’s
common units, in the past two years, and we may provide investment banking or other financial services to the Partnership, Parent, NGP
Energy Capital Management, Eagle Rock or their respective shareholders, affiliates or portfolio companies in the future. In connection
with such investment banking or other financial services, we may receive compensation.
It is understood that this opinion is for the information and assistance of the Conflicts Committee in connection with its consideration of the
Eagle Rock Merger and is not to be quoted or referred to, in whole or in part, in any registration statement, prospectus, or proxy statement,
or in any other written document used in connection with the offering or sale of securities, nor shall this letter be used for any other
purposes, without our prior written consent; provided, however, that (i) this opinion may be reproduced in its entirety and referred to in a
proxy or information statement or registration statement to be mailed to the holders of Partnership units in connection with the Lighthouse
Merger and/or the Eagle Rock Merger and (ii) the existence of this opinion may be disclosed by the Partnership in a press release issued
in connection with the public announcement of the Eagle Rock Merger. Our opinion does not address the Partnership’s underlying
business decision to consent to the Eagle Rock Merger or the relative merits of the Eagle Rock Merger as compared to any alternative
business strategies that might exist for the Partnership. This opinion does not address the fairness of the amount or nature of the
compensation to any of the Partnership’s, Parent’s or Eagle Rock’s officers, directors or employees, or class of such persons, relative to
the compensation to the public unitholders of the Partnership. Our opinion does not constitute a recommendation to any unitholder as to
how such unitholder should vote on the Lighthouse Merger or the Eagle Rock Merger. This opinion has been reviewed and approved by
Simmons’ fairness opinion committee.
Based upon and subject to the foregoing, including the various assumptions and limitations set forth herein, it is our opinion that, as of the
date hereof, the terms of the Eagle Rock Merger contemplated by the Merger Agreement are fair from a financial point of view to the
/s/ Jay Boudreaux
Mr. Jay Boudreaux
Managing Director
By:
F-3
Unaffiliated Unitholders.
Very truly yours,
Simmons & Company International
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 20. Indemnification of Directors and Officers
As described in the section of the proxy statement/prospectus entitled “Comparison of the Rights of Vanguard and LRE
Unitholders — Indemnification” under the “Vanguard” column, under Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement and subject to
specified limitations, Vanguard will indemnify to the fullest extent permitted by law, from and against all losses, claims, damages or similar
events, (i) any director, officer or tax matters partner of Vanguard, (ii) any person who is or was a member, partner, manager, director,
officer, fiduciary or trustee of any of Vanguard or any of its affiliates, (iii) any person who is serving at the request of Vanguard as a
director, manager, officer, tax matters partner, fiduciary or trustee of another person, or (iv) any other person designated by Vanguard.
Additionally, Vanguard will indemnify to the fullest extent permitted by law, from and against all losses, claims, damages or similar events,
any person who is or was an employee (other than an officer) or agent of Vanguard.
Any indemnification under Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement will only be out of Vanguard’s assets. Vanguard is authorized
to purchase insurance against liabilities asserted against and expenses incurred by persons for Vanguard’s activities, regardless of
whether Vanguard would have the power to indemnify the person against liabilities under Vanguard’s limited liability company
agreement.
Subject to any terms, conditions or restrictions set forth in the limited liability company agreement, Section 18-108 of the Delaware Limited
Liability Company Act empowers a Delaware limited liability company to indemnify and hold harmless any member or manager or other
persons from and against all claims and demands whatsoever.
To the extent that the indemnification provisions of Vanguard’s limited liability company agreement purport to include indemnification for
liabilities arising under the Securities Act, in the opinion of the SEC, such indemnification is contrary to public policy and is therefore
unenforceable.
Item 21. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
(a) Exhibits
Reference is made to the Index to Exhibits following the signature pages hereto, which Index to Exhibits is hereby incorporated into this
item.
(b) Financial Statement Schedule
Financial statement schedules are omitted because they are not required or the required information is shown in the consolidated
financial statements or the notes thereto incorporated by reference in the proxy statement/prospectus that forms a part of this registration
statement.
(c) Opinions
The opinions of Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC, financial advisor to the board of directors of LRE GP are attached as Annexes
C and D, and the opinions of Simmons & Company International, financial advisor to the LRE GP conflicts committee, are attached as
Annexes E and F, to the proxy statement/prospectus that forms a part of this registration statement.
Item 22. Undertakings
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(a) (1) To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this registration statement:
(i) To include any prospectus required by section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii) To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of this registration statement (or the most recent post-
effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the
registration statement. Notwithstanding
II-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that
which was registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in the form of
prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more
than a 20% change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the effective
registration statement; and
(iii) To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed in this registration statement or any
material change to such information in the registration statement.
(2) That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective amendment shall be
deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be
deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3) To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered which remain unsold at the
termination of the offering.
(4) That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser: if the registrant is subject to Rule 430C,
each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to an offering, other than registration statements
relying on Rule 430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part of and included in the
registration statement as of the date it is first used after effectiveness. Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration
statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference
into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale
prior to such first use, supersede or modify any statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the
registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such date of first use.
(5) That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser in the initial distribution
of the securities:
The undersigned registrant undertakes that in a primary offering of securities of the undersigned registrant pursuant to this registration
statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the securities are offered or sold to such
purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the undersigned registrant will be a seller to the purchaser and will be
considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i) Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
(ii) Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant or used or referred to by the
undersigned registrant;
(iii) The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material information about the undersigned registrant
or its securities provided by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant; and
(iv) Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant to the purchaser.
(b) That, for purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each filing of the registrant’s annual report pursuant to
section 13(a) or section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (and, where applicable, each filing of an employee benefit plan’s
annual report pursuant to section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) that is incorporated by reference in the registration
statement shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities
at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
II-2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(c) That prior to any public reoffering of the securities registered hereunder through use of a prospectus which is a part of this registration
statement, by any person or party who is deemed to be an underwriter within the meaning of Rule 145(c), the issuer undertakes that such
reoffering prospectus will contain the information called for by the applicable registration form with respect to reofferings by persons who
may be deemed underwriters, in addition to the information called for by the other items of the applicable form.
(d) That every prospectus (i) that is filed pursuant to paragraph (c) immediately preceding, or (ii) that purports to meet the requirements of
Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933 and is used in connection with an offering of securities subject to Rule 415, will be filed as a
part of an amendment to the registration statement and will not be used until such amendment is effective, and that, for purposes of
determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration
statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona
fide offering thereof.
(e) To respond to requests for information that is incorporated by reference into the prospectus pursuant to Items 4, 10(b), 11, or 13 of this
form, within one business day of receipt of such request, and to send the incorporated documents by first class mail or other equally
prompt means. This includes information contained in documents filed subsequent to the effective date of this registration statement
through the date of responding to the request.
(f) To supply by means of a post-effective amendment all information concerning a transaction, and the company being acquired involved
therein, that was not the subject of and included in this registration statement when it became effective.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors, officers and controlling
persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the Registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the SEC
such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act of 1933 and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that
a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director,
officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer
or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter
has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question as to whether such indemnification by it
is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act of 1933 and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
II-3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this registration statement, or amendment
thereto, to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the city of Houston, Texas, on August 6, 2015.
VANGUARD NATURAL RESOURCES, LLC
By:
/s/ Scott W. Smith
Name: Scott W. Smith
Title:  President and Chief Executive Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Amendment No. 3 to the Registration Statement on Form S-4
has been signed below by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated below.
II-4
Title
President, Chief Executive Officer and
 
Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
Executive Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer
 
(Principal Financial Officer and
Principal Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
Date
August 6, 2015
August 6, 2015
August 6, 2015
August 6, 2015
August 6, 2015
Signature
/s/ Scott W. Smith
Scott W. Smith
/s/ Richard A. Robert
Richard A. Robert
/s/ W. Richard Anderson*
W. Richard Anderson
/s/ Bruce W. McCullough*
Bruce W. McCullough
/s/ Loren Singletary*
Loren Singletary
*By:
/s/ Scott W. Smith
Scott W. Smith
Attorney in fact for persons
indicated
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXHIBIT INDEX
Exhibit
No.
Description of Exhibit
Purchase Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of April 20, 2015, by and
among Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC, Lighthouse Merger Sub, LLC,
Lime Rock Management LP, Lime Rock Resources A, L.P., Lime Rock
 
Resources B, L.P., Lime Rock Resources C, L.P., Lime Rock Resources II-A,
L.P., Lime Rock Resources II-C, L.P., LRR Energy, L.P. and LRE GP, LLC
(included as Annex A to the proxy statement/prospectus forming a part of this
Registration Statement and incorporated by reference herein).
Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 21, 2015, by and among
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC, Talon Merger Sub, LLC, Eagle Rock
 
Energy Partners, L.P. and Eagle Rock Energy GP, L.P. (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 2.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K filed by Eagle
Rock Energy Partners, L.P. with the SEC on May 22, 2015).
Fifth Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to
 
the Current Report on Form 8-K filed by Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC
with the SEC on September 15, 2014 (File No. 001-33756)).
Form of Senior Indenture for Senior Debt Securities (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC Registration
 
Statement on Form S-3 filed with the SEC on July 26, 2010 (File No. 333-
168177)).
2.1
2.2
3.1
4.1
Form of Subordinated Indenture for Subordinated Debt Securities
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the Vanguard Natural Resources,
 
LLC Registration Statement on Form S-3 filed with the SEC on July 26, 2010
(File No. 333-168177)).
Specimen Unit Certificate for the Series A Cumulative Redeemable Perpetual
 
Preferred Units (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit B to Exhibit 3.1).
Specimen Unit Certificate for the Series B Cumulative Redeemable Perpetual
 
Preferred Units (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit C to Exhibit 3.1).
Specimen Unit Certificate for the Series C Cumulative Redeemable
 
Perpetual Preferred Units (incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit D to
Exhibit 3.1).
Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of April 20, 2015, by and among
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC, Lime Rock Management LP, Lime Rock
Resources A, L.P., Lime Rock Resources B, L.P., Lime Rock Resources C,
 
L.P., Lime Rock Resources II-A, L.P. and Lime Rock Resources II-C, L.P.
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Current Report on Form 8-K
filed by LRR Energy, L.P. with the SEC on April 22, 2015).
Opinion of Paul Hastings LLP as to the legality of the securities being offered.
 Opinion of Paul Hastings LLP as to certain tax matters.
 Opinion of Andrews Kurth LLP as to certain tax matters.
Amended and Restated Voting and Support Agreement, dated as of May 21,
2015, by and among Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC, Lime Rock
Resources A, L.P., Lime Rock Resources B, L.P., Lime Rock Resources C,
L.P. LRR Energy, L.P., LRE GP, LLC, and, solely for purposes of Section 3.2,
 
Lime Rock Management LP, Lime Rock Resources II-A, L.P. and Lime Rock
Resources II-C, L.P. (included as Annex B to the proxy statement/prospectus
forming a part of this Registration Statement and incorporated by reference
herein).
List of subsidiaries of Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 21.1 to the Annual Report on Form 10-K filed by
 
Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC with the SEC on March 2, 2015 (File No.
001-33756).
 Consent of BDO USA, LLP.
 Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
 Consent of KPMG LLP.
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
5.1*
  8.1*
  8.2*
10.1
21.1
23.1*
23.2*
23.3*
II-5
*
**
II-6
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Description of Exhibit
Consent of DeGolyer and MacNaughton.
 Consent of Miller and Lents, Ltd.
 Consent of Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc.
 Consent of Ryder Scott Petroleum Consultants.
 Consent of Cawley, Gillespie & Associates, Inc.
 Consent of Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co. Advisors, LLC.
 Consent of Simmons & Company International.
 Form of Proxy Card for LRR Energy, L.P. Special Meeting.
Exhibit
No.
23.4*
23.5*
23.6*
23.7*
23.8*
99.1*
99.2*
 99.3**
Filed herewith.
Previously filed