
EX-99.1 2 ex991.htm NEWS RELEASE DATED AUGUST 18, 2016
Exhibit 99.1
Energy Fuels Announces High-Grade Uranium Intercepts at the Canyon Mine
LAKEWOOD, CO, Aug. 18, 2016 /CNW/ - Energy Fuels Inc. (NYSE MKT: UUUU; TSX: EFR)
("Energy Fuels" or the "Company"), a leading producer of uranium in the United States, is
pleased to announce that it has intercepted several large and high-grade areas of mineralization
at its Canyon Mine, a conventional uranium mine located in northern Arizona, USA.
The Company is currently pursuing an underground delineation core drilling program from a
station located at a depth of approximately 1,000 feet below the surface.  To date, thirteen (13)
core holes have been drilled, and most have encountered uranium mineralization in multiple
levels throughout the deposit, including 8.5-feet of mineralization with an average grade of 6.88%
eU3O8, 48.0-feet of mineralization with an average grade of 1.02% eU3O8, and 35-feet of
mineralization with an average grade of 1.39% eU3O8.  The Company expects to drill a total of
fifteen (15) core holes from the first station during the current drilling program, which is expected
to be followed up by additional delineation drilling from a second station later this year.
The table below summarizes the data for the ten (10) best individual intercepts that the Company
has encountered to date:
Thickness
Hole Number
(feet)
8.5
48.0
35.0
38.5
40.5
38.0
8.5
30.0
38.0
29.0
CMCH-011
CMCH-005
CMCH-007
CMCH-006
CMCH-008
CMCH-004
CMCH-007
CMCH-013
CMCH-006
CMCH-002
Avg. Grade
GT
(% eU3O8)
6.88%
1.02%
1.39%
1.11%
0.99%
1.02%
2.48%
0.66%
0.50%
0.62%
(Grade x Thickness)
58.5
49.0
48.7
42.7
40.1
38.8
21.1
20.6
19.0
18.0
All holes were logged for gamma by trained Company personnel to calculate eU3O8%.  Gamma
logging tools were calibrated prior to the drilling program and verified by an independent 3rd party
geophysicist.  Samples from the zones showing high eU3O8% assay values are currently being
sampled and sent to the Company's White Mesa Mill for further verification.
According to a June 27, 2012 technical report ("Technical Report") prepared in accordance with
National Instrument 43-101 – Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects ("NI 43-101"), the
Canyon deposit contains 83,000 tons of Inferred Mineral Resources with an average grade of
0.98% eU3O8, containing 1.63 million pounds of uranium.  The existing Technical Report was
based on the results of surface drilling.  The current underground drilling program is intended to
further define and delineate the uranium resources in the Canyon deposit – and to potentially
expand and upgrade the resources – above what are described in the Technical Report.  If
required, the Company expects to have an updated Technical Report prepared for the Canyon
deposit, in accordance with NI 43-101.
In addition to the delineation drilling, the Company is also continuing to sink an 8-foot by 20-foot
mine shaft, which will be used to access the deposit.  The shaft is currently at a depth of
approximately 1,100 feet.
Stephen P. Antony, President and CEO of Energy Fuels stated:  "So far, the results of the
underground drill program at the Canyon deposit are very positive.  The uranium grades,
thicknesses, and continuities we have encountered at this stage of our delineation drilling
program are confirming our high expectations for the deposit.  Furthermore, as we extend core
holes beyond the known zones of mineralization, additional high-grade uranium resources are
being identified that are expanding the size of the deposit beyond what was described in the
Technical Report.
"We have long known that the Canyon deposit boasts world-class uranium grades, and we have
the potential to increase the tonnage to be mined through underground delineation drilling. 
Historically, uranium produced from other similar deposits in northern Arizona was low-cost and
competitive globally with other low-cost underground uranium mines, including mines in
Canada.  In addition, the Canyon Mine enjoys other important advantages.  It is fully licensed and
permitted.  It is at a very advanced stage of construction, with all surface development completed
and the shaft is close to being complete.  And, the mine is located within economic trucking
distance of Energy Fuels' White Mesa Mill, which is licensed, operating, and has the capacity to
process the Canyon material into finished yellowcake that can be sold to global nuclear utilities. 
We look forward to completing our current drill program, potentially performing future delineation
drill programs, and continuing to confirm the size and quality of the resources."
About Energy Fuels:  Energy Fuels is a leading integrated US-based uranium mining company,
supplying U3O8 to major nuclear utilities.  Energy Fuels holds three of America's key uranium
production centers, the White Mesa Mill in Utah, the Nichols Ranch Processing Facility in
Wyoming, and the Alta Mesa Project in Texas.  The White Mesa Mill is the only conventional
uranium mill operating in the U.S. today and has a licensed capacity of over 8 million pounds of
U3O8 per year.  The Nichols Ranch Processing Facility is an ISR production center with a
licensed capacity of 2 million pounds of U3O8 per year.  Alta Mesa is an ISR production center
currently on care and maintenance.  Energy Fuels also has the largest NI 43-101 compliant
uranium resource portfolio in the U.S. among producers, and uranium mining projects located in
a number of Western U.S. states, including one producing ISR project, mines on standby, and
mineral properties in various stages of permitting and development.  The Company's common
shares are listed on the NYSE MKT under the trading symbol "UUUU", and on the Toronto Stock
Exchange under the trading symbol "EFR".
Stephen P. Antony, P.E., President & CEO of Energy Fuels, is a Qualified Person as defined
by Canadian National Instrument 43-101 and has reviewed and approved the technical
disclosure contained in this news release, including sampling, analytical, and test data
underlying such disclosure.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements:  Certain information contained in
this news release, including any information relating to: the Company being a leading producer
of uranium in the U.S.; the drilling results to date from the Canyon mine and any conclusions
which may be drawn from such results; the total number of holes the Company expects to drill in
the current delineation program;  the conclusions contained in the 2012 Technical Report and
any future technical reports which may be prepared in accordance with NI 43-101; the final depth
of the shaft; the potential that the resources and/or tonnage may be expanded beyond what is
described in the 2012 Technical Report; the Company's belief that the Canyon deposit is world-
class; the costs of production and competitiveness of other similar mines, and any inference to
the Canyon deposit; the factors which the Company believes makes the Canyon deposit unique;
and any other statements regarding Energy Fuels' future expectations, beliefs, goals or
prospects; constitute forward-looking information within the meaning of applicable securities
legislation (collectively, "forward-looking statements").  All statements in this news release that
are not statements of historical fact (including statements containing the words "expects", "does
not expect", "plans", "anticipates", "does not anticipate", "believes", "intends", "estimates",
"projects", "potential", "scheduled", "forecast", "budget" and similar expressions) should be
considered forward-looking statements.  All such forward-looking statements are subject to
important risk factors and uncertainties, many of which are beyond Energy Fuels' ability to control
or predict.  A number of important factors could cause actual results or events to differ materially
from those indicated or implied by such forward-looking statements, including without limitation
factors relating to: the Company being a leading producer of uranium in the U.S.; the drilling
results to date from the Canyon mine and any conclusions which may be drawn from such
results; the total number of holes the Company expects to drill in the current delineation program; 
the conclusions contained in the 2012 Technical Report and any future technical reports which
may be prepared in accordance with NI 43-101; the final depth of the shaft; the potential that the
resources and/or tonnage may be expanded beyond what is described in the 2012 Technical
Report; the Company's belief that the Canyon deposit is world-class; the costs of production and
competitiveness of other similar mines, and any inference to the Canyon deposit; the factors
which the Company believes makes the Canyon deposit unique;; and other risk factors as
described in Energy Fuels' most recent annual report on Form 10-K and quarterly financial
reports.  Energy Fuels assumes no obligation to update the information in this communication,
except as otherwise required by law.  Additional information identifying risks and uncertainties is
contained in Energy Fuels' filings with the various securities commissions which are available
online at www.sec.gov and www.sedar.com.  Forward-looking statements are provided for the
purpose of providing information about the current expectations, beliefs and plans of the
management of Energy Fuels relating to the future.  Readers are cautioned that such statements
may not be appropriate for other purposes.  Readers are also cautioned not to place undue
reliance on these forward-looking statements, that speak only as of the date hereof.
Cautionary Note to United States Investors Concerning Estimates of Measured, Indicated
and Inferred Resources:  This news release contains certain disclosure that has been prepared
in accordance with the requirements of Canadian securities laws, which differ from the
requirements of U.S. securities laws.  Unless otherwise indicated, all reserve and resource
estimates included in this news release have been prepared in accordance with Canadian
National Instrument 43-101 – Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects ("NI 43-101") and the
Canadian Institute of Mining, Metallurgy and Petroleum ("CIM") classification system.  Canadian
standards, including NI 43-101, differ significantly from the requirements of U.S. securities laws,
and reserve and resource information contained in this news release may not be comparable to
similar information disclosed by companies reporting only under U.S. standards.  In particular,
the term "resource" does not equate to the term "reserve" under SEC Industry Guide 7.  United
States investors are cautioned not to assume that all or any of Measured or Indicated
Mineral Resources will ever be converted into mineral reserves.  Investors are cautioned
not to assume that all or any part of an "Inferred Mineral Resource" exists or is
economically or legally minable.  Energy Fuels does not hold any Reserves as that term is
defined by SEC Industry Guide 7.  Please refer to the section entitled "Cautionary Note to
United States Investors Concerning Disclosure of Mineral Resources" in the Company's
Annual Report on Form 10-K dated March 15, 2016 for further details.
SOURCE Energy Fuels Inc.
%CIK: 0001385849
For further information: Investor Relations Inquiries: Energy Fuels Inc., Curtis Moore - VP -
Marketing & Corporate Development, (303) 974-2140 or Toll free: (888) 864-2125,
investorinfo@energyfuels.com, www.energyfuels.com
CO: Energy Fuels Inc.
CNW 08:30e 18-AUG-16