
EX-99.1 2 ex99-1.htm
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION CIRCULAR
(all information as at August 15, 2016 unless otherwise noted)
This Management Information Circular (the “Circular”) is furnished in connection with the
solicitation of proxies being made by the management of VBI Vaccines Inc. (the “Company” or
“VBI”) for use at the Annual General and Special Meeting (the “Meeting”) of holders of common
shares of the Company (the “Common Shares”), to be held on September 23, 2016 at the time and
place and for the purposes set forth in the accompanying Notice of Meeting. While it is expected that
the solicitation will be made primarily by mail, proxies may be solicited personally or by telephone by
directors, officers and employees of the Company. All costs of this solicitation will be borne by the
Company.
APPOINTMENT AND REVOCATION OF PROXIES
The individuals named in the accompanying form of proxy (the “Proxy”) are directors or officers of the
Company. A SHAREHOLDER WISHING TO APPOINT SOME OTHER PERSON (WHO NEED NOT BE
A SHAREHOLDER) TO ATTEND AND ACT FOR THE SHAREHOLDER AND ON THE
SHAREHOLDER’S BEHALF AT THE MEETING HAS THE RIGHT TO DO SO, EITHER BY INSERTING
SUCH PERSON’S NAME IN THE BLANK SPACE PROVIDED IN THE FORM OF PROXY AND
STRIKING OUT THE TWO PRINTED NAMES, OR BY COMPLETING ANOTHER FORM OF PROXY. A
Proxy will not be valid unless the completed, dated and signed Proxy is received by Computershare Trust
Company of Canada, 8th Floor, 100 University Avenue, Toronto, ON, M5J 2Y1, Attention: Proxy
Department by 12:00 pm (Eastern Time) on September 21, 2016 or if the Meeting is adjourned or
postponed, not less than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) before the date to which
the Meeting is adjourned or postponed. Voting by fax can be sent to 1-866-732-8683 and internet voting
can be completed at www.investorvote.com.
Late proxies may be accepted or rejected by the chair of the meeting (the “Chair”) at his or her discretion
and the Chair of the meeting is under no obligation to accept or reject any particular late proxy. The Chair of
the meeting may waive or extend the proxy cut-off without notice.
A shareholder who has given a Proxy may revoke it by an instrument in writing executed by the
shareholder or by the shareholder’s attorney authorized in writing or, if the shareholder is a corporation, by
a duly authorized officer or attorney of the corporation, and delivered either to the registered office of the
Company, at 200 Burrard St., P.O. Box 48600, Vancouver B.C., Canada V7X 1T2 at any time up to and
including the last business day preceding the day of the Meeting or any adjournment of it or to the Chair of
the Meeting on the day of the Meeting or any adjournment of it. A revocation of a Proxy does not affect any
matter on which a vote has been taken prior to the revocation.
If you are a non-registered shareholder, please follow the instructions from your bank, broker or other
financial intermediary for instructions on how to revoke your voting instructions.
EXERCISE OF DISCRETION
If the instructions in a Proxy are certain, the shares represented thereby will be voted on any poll by the
persons named in the Proxy and, where a choice with respect to any matter to be acted upon has been
specified in the Proxy, the shares represented thereby will, on a poll, be voted or withheld from voting
in accordance with the specifications so made. If you do not provide instructions in your Proxy, the
persons named in the enclosed Proxy will vote your Common Shares FOR the matters to be acted
on at the Meeting.
The persons named in the enclosed Proxy will have discretionary authority with respect to any
amendments or variations of these matters or any other matters properly brought before the Meeting or any
adjournment or postponement thereof, in each instance, to the extent permitted by law, whether or not the
amendment or other item of business that comes before the Meeting is routine or contested. The persons
named in the enclosed Proxy will vote on such matters in accordance with their best judgment. At the time
of the printing of this Circular, the management of the Company knows of no such amendment, variation or
other matter which may be presented to the Meeting.
NON-REGISTERED HOLDERS
All references to shareholders in this Circular and the accompanying Proxy and Notice of Meeting
are to shareholders of record unless specifically stated otherwise.
ONLY REGISTERED SHAREHOLDERS OR DULY APPOINTED PROXYHOLDERS ARE PERMITTED
TO VOTE AT THE MEETING. SHAREHOLDERS WHO DO NOT HOLD THEIR SHARES IN THEIR
OWN NAME (REFERRED TO HEREIN AS “NON-REGISTERED HOLDERS”) ARE ADVISED THAT
ONLY PROXIES FROM SHAREHOLDERS OF RECORD CAN BE RECOGNIZED AND VOTED AT
THE MEETING.
Non-Registered Holders are registered either: (a) in the name of an intermediary that the Non-Registered
Holder deals with in respect of the Common Shares, such as, among others, banks, trust companies,
securities dealers or brokers and trustees or administrators of registered plans; or (b) in the name of a
depository (such as CDS Clearing and Depository Services Inc.) of which the intermediary is a participant.
In accordance with applicable Canadian securities laws, the Company will be distributing copies of the
Meeting materials to the depository and intermediaries for further distribution to Non-Registered Holders.
Intermediaries are required to forward the Meeting materials to Non-Registered Holders and receive voting
instructions from them unless a Non-Registered Holder has waived the right to receive the Meeting
materials. The Company does not intend to pay for intermediaries to forward to objecting beneficial owners
(i.e. Non-Registered Holders who object to their ownership information being disclosed) proxy-related
materials and voting instruction forms, and that in the case of an objecting beneficial owner, the objecting
beneficial owners will not receive the materials unless the objecting beneficial owner assumes the cost of
delivery. Intermediaries often use service companies to forward the Meeting materials to Non-Registered
Holders. Generally, Non-Registered Holders who have not waived the right to receive the Meeting
materials will either:
2
(a)
be given a voting instruction form which must be completed and signed by the Non- Registered Holder
in accordance with the directions set out on the voting instruction form (which may, in some cases,
permit the completion of the voting instruction form by telephone or via the Internet); or
 
less typically, be given a Proxy which has already been signed by the intermediary which is restricted
as to the number of Common Shares beneficially owned by the Non-Registered Holder, but which is
otherwise uncompleted. In this case, the Non-Registered Holder who wishes to submit the Proxy should
otherwise properly complete and deposit it with Computershare Investor Services Inc.
(b)
In either case, the purpose of these procedures is to permit Non-Registered Holders to direct the voting of
the Common Shares which they beneficially own. Should a Non-Registered Holder wish to attend and vote
at the Meeting in person (or have another person attend and vote on behalf of the Non-Registered Holder),
the Non-Registered Holder should strike out the names of the persons named in the Proxy or voting
instruction form and insert the name of the Non-Registered Holder (or such other person) in the blank
space provided. In either case, Non-Registered Holders should carefully follow the instructions of their
intermediaries and their intermediaries’ service companies.
INTEREST OF INFORMED PERSONS IN MATERIAL TRANSACTIONS
Except as disclosed herein, since the commencement of the Company’s last completed financial year, no
informed person of the Company, proposed director of the Company, or any associate or affiliate of any
informed person or proposed director, has any material interest, direct or indirect in any transaction or any
proposed transaction which has materially affected or would materially affect the Company or any of its
subsidiaries.
On June 21, 2016, the Company announced the closing of an equity private placement financing of
3,269,688 Common Shares at a price of approximately USD$4.16 per Common Share for gross proceeds
of approximately USD$13.6 million (the “June 2016 Financing”). OPKO Health, Inc., an informed person
by virtue of being a greater than 10% shareholder of the Company, subscribed for 1,362,370 Common
Shares under the June 2016 Financing.
On May 6, 2016, the Company completed its acquisition of VBI Vaccines Inc. (Delaware) (“VBI(DE)”),
pursuant to which Seniccav Acquisition Corporation, a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned
subsidiary of the Company, merged with and into VBI(DE), with VBI(DE) continuing as the surviving
corporation and as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (the “VBI-SciVac Merger”). Upon
completion of the VBI-SciVac Merger, the Company (then named “SciVac Therapeutics Inc.”) changed its
name to “VBI Vaccines Inc.”
In connection with the VBI-SciVac Merger, Dr. Curtis Lockshin, Jim Martin, Steven Rubin, and Adam Logal
received equity awards in the form of restricted share units or stock options issued under the new equity
incentive plan (the “2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan”). Dr. Curtis Lockshin received 112,500 equity
awards; Jim Martin received 25,000 equity awards; Steve Rubin received 75,000 equity awards, and Adam
Logal received 50,000 equity awards.
3
Some of VBI(DE)’s directors and executive officers also had interests in the VBI-SciVac Merger. These
interests include the Company’s employment of Jeff Baxter, VBI(DE)’s President and Chief Executive
Officer, Dr. David E. Anderson, VBI(DE)’s Chief Scientific Officer, Egidio Nascimento, VBI(DE)’s Chief
Financial Officer, and Dr. Marc Kirchmeier, VBI(DE)’s Vice President, Formulations Development. In
connection with the VBI-SciVac Merger, the Company appointed Mr. Baxter as the President and Chief
Executive Officer of the Company, Dr. Anderson as the Company’s Chief Scientific Officer and Dr.
Kirchmeier as the Company’s Vice President, Formulation Development. Mr. Nascimento continued his
employment as the Group Financial Controller of the Company. Mr. Nascimento is not an executive officer
of the Company. The Company also elected to the Company’s board of directors, Mr. Baxter, Steven Gillis
Ph.D. (Chairman), Michel De Wilde, Ph.D. and Sam Chawla, who were members of the VBI(DE) board of
directors. Following the VBI-SciVac Merger, each of the following individuals received equity awards from
the Company’s 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan: Jeff Baxter received 125,000 equity awards; Dr. David
Anderson received 87,500 equity awards; Dr. Steven Gillis received 75,000 equity awards; Dr. Michael De
Wilde received 50,000 equity awards; and Sam Chawla received 50,000 equity awards.
Equity awards granted under the 2016 Equity Incentive Plan in connection with the VBI-SciVac Merger vest
in the following manner: in the case of stock options, the right to purchase 25% of the option shares, or in
the case of restricted stock awards, 25% of the award shares, vested on the date of grant with the balance
vesting in increments of 25% on the first, second and third anniversaries of the date of grant. The stock
options have a 10-year term. The exercise price of such stock options was the closing price of the Common
Shares on the TSX on the date of grant (June 22, 2016 – CAD$4.90).
On July 9, 2015, the Company completed a plan of arrangement under the Business Corporations Act
(British Columbia) pursuant to which SciVac Ltd. (“SciVac”) completed a reverse takeover of the Company
(then named Levon Resources Ltd. (“Levon”)) (the “SciVac-Levon Arrangement”). SciVac is now a
wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. In connection with the SciVac-Levon Arrangement,
securityholders of SciVac Ltd. received, in exchange for their securities of SciVac held, Common Shares of
the Company. CLS Therapeutics Limited (“CLS”) received 3,685,086 Common Shares and OPKO Health,
Inc. received 4,628,233 Common Shares. FDS Pharma LLP, a related party of the Company’s former
director, Dr. Dmitry Genkin, received 818,636 Common Shares. Also in connection with the SciVac-Levon
Arrangement, Jim Martin, the Company’s Chief Financial Officer, received 4,995 Common Shares and Dr.
Curtis Lockshin, the Company’s former Chief Executive Officer, received 9,476 shares. These Common
Share numbers reflect the Company’s reverse stock split of its Common Shares at a ratio of 1-for-40, which
occurred on May 2, 2016.
INTEREST OF CERTAIN PERSONS OR COMPANIES IN MATTERS TO BE ACTED UPON
Except as disclosed herein, and except for transactions carried out in the ordinary course of business of the
Company or its subsidiaries, no Person or Company has any material interest, direct or indirect, by way of
beneficial ownership of securities or otherwise, in matters to be acted upon at the Meeting other than the
election of directors or the appointment of auditors. For the purpose of this paragraph, “Person” or
“Company” shall include: (a) each person who has been a director or executive officer of the Company at
any time since the commencement of the Company’s last financial year; (b) each proposed nominee for
election as a director of the Company; and (d) each associate or affiliate of any of the persons or
companies listed in paragraphs (a) or (b).
VOTING SECURITIES AND PRINCIPAL HOLDERS OF VOTING SECURITIES
As at the date hereof, the Company has issued and outstanding 36,133,396 fully paid and non-assessable
Common Shares without par value, each share carrying the right to one vote. On May 2, 2016, the
Company completed a reverse split of its Common Shares at a ratio of 1-for-40.
Any holder of Common Shares of record at the close of business on August 5, 2016 who either personally
attends the Meeting or who has completed and delivered a Proxy in the manner specified, subject to the
provisions described above, shall be entitled to vote or to have such shareholder’s shares voted at the
Meeting.
4
To the best of the knowledge of the directors and executive officers of the Company, there are no persons
who, or corporations which, beneficially own, or control or direct, directly or indirectly, voting shares
carrying 10% or more of the voting rights attached to any class of voting shares of the Company other than:
Number of Shares held  Percentage of Issued Shares
5,990,603
16.6
%
Name of Shareholder
OPKO Health, Inc.
4400 Biscayne Blvd. Suite 850
Miami, Florida 33137
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
On July 9, 2016, the Company changed its financial year end to December 31. The audited consolidated
financial statements of the Company for the year ended December 31, 2015 and the auditors’ report
thereon (the “Statements”) and the Management Discussion and Analysis for the year ended December
31, 2015 (the “MD&A”) are available upon request from the Company. The Statements and MD&A are
available on the Company’s profile on the System for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval
(SEDAR) at www.sedar.com and on the United States Securities and Exchange Commission website at
www.sec.gov. The Statements will be placed before the Meeting for consideration by the shareholders.
APPOINTMENT AND REMUNERATION OF AUDITOR
EisnerAmper LLP has been the auditor of the Company since June 7, 2016. The previous auditor was
Smythe LLP. Smythe LLP resigned as the Company’s auditor, at the Company’s request, on June 7, 2016.
Set out in Schedule “A”, hereto, are the following documents (i) the executed Change of Auditor Notice sent
by the Company to each of Smythe LLP and EisnerAmper LLP and the relevant Canadian securities
commissions dated June 7, 2016 (the “Change of Auditor Notice”); (ii) the letter from Smythe LLP to the
relevant Canadian securities commissions dated June 7, 2016, confirming that Smythe LLP agrees with the
statements in the Change of Auditor Notice; and (iii) the letter from EisnerAmper LLP to the relevant
Canadian securities commissions dated June 13, 2016, confirming that EisnerAmper LLP agrees with the
statements in the Change of Auditor Notice.
Shareholders will be asked at the Meeting to approve the appointment of EisnerAmper LLP, Chartered
Accountants, of 111 Wood Avenue South, Iselin, NJ 08830-2700, as auditor of the Company to hold office
until the next annual general meeting of the shareholders at a remuneration to be fixed by the directors. In
the absence of instructions to the contrary, a properly executed and returned Proxy will be voted
FOR the auditor nominee herein listed.
ELECTION OF DIRECTORS
Majority Voting Policy
In accordance with good corporate governance practices and procedures, the board of directors of the
Company (the “Board”), adopted a majority voting policy on August 28, 2015 (the “Majority Voting
Policy”). The Majority Voting Policy provides that, at a meeting for the uncontested election of directors
(being an election where the number of nominees for director is not greater than the number of directors to
be elected), each director of the Company must be elected by the vote of a majority of the Company’s
Common Shares, represented in person or by proxy, at such meeting. Forms of proxy for the election of
directors will permit a shareholder to vote in favour of, or to withhold from voting, separately for each
director nominee.
5
If, in an uncontested election of directors, the number of shares withheld for a nominee exceeds the number
of shares voted for that nominee at the meeting, either in person or by proxy, that director must immediately
tender his or her resignation. The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee of the Company will
expeditiously consider whether to recommend to the Board whether or not to accept the resignation. The
Board will accept the resignation absent exceptional circumstances and such resignation will be effective
when accepted by the Board. In its deliberations, the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
may consider such extenuating circumstances as it deems appropriate.
The Board shall determine whether or not to accept the resignation within 90 days of the relevant
shareholders’ meeting. The Board shall accept the resignation absent extenuating circumstances. The
resignation will be effective when accepted by the Board. A director who tenders a resignation pursuant to
this policy will not participate in any meeting of the Board or meetings of the Nominating and Corporate
Governance Committee of the Board at which the resignation is considered. The Company shall promptly
issue a news release with the Board’s decision, which must fully state the reasons for that decision.
The Majority Voting Policy is attached hereto as Schedule “B”.
Nominees
Each of the seven persons named in the following table is proposed for nomination for election as a
director of the Company. The Board recommends a vote FOR each of the nominees listed below. In
the absence of instructions to the contrary, a properly executed and returned Proxy will be voted
FOR the director nominees herein listed.
Information concerning such persons, as furnished by the individual nominees, is as follows:
Name, Province and 
Country of 
Residence and 
Present Offices Held
Jeff Baxter
Principal Occupation
Director Since
Number of Common Shares
Held(1)(2)
Jeff Baxter
Pennsylvania, US
Chief Executive Officer
and Director
 
Steven Gillis(4)(5)
Washington, USA
Chief Executive Officer, President
 
and Director of VBI
May 6, 2016    433,556
Managing Director of ARCH
 
Venture Partners
May 6, 2016    2,788,767
Chairman of the Board
 
Scott Requadt(8)
Massachusetts, USA
Managing Director of Clarus LLC  May 6, 2016    2,719,148
Director
 
Michel De Wilde(11)(12)
New Jersey, USA
Owner of MDW Consultant, LLC  May 6, 2016    28,106
(3)
(6)
(7)
(9)
(10)
(13)
Director
6
Name,
Province and 
Country of 
Residence and
Present Offices
Held
Sam Chawla 
Connecticut,
USA 
  
Director
 
Steven D.
Rubin(4)(12)
Florida, USA
Principal Occupation
Director
 
Since
Number of Common Shares
 
Held(1)(2)
Portfolio Manager at Perceptive Advisors LLC
May 6,
2016
3,086,537
Executive Vice President – Administration of
 
OPKO Health, Inc.
July 9,
 
2015
18,750
(14)
(15)
Director
 
Adam Logal(16)
Chief Financial Officer of OPKO Health, Inc.
July 9,
 
2015
12,500
Florida, USA
Director
Notes:
(1)
The information as to Common Shares beneficially owned or over which control or direction is
exercised, not being within the knowledge of the Company, has been furnished by the respective
nominees individually.
acquired upon the exercise of immediately exercisable options.
(2) On May 2, 2016, the Company completed a reverse split of its Common Shares at a ratio of 1-for-40.
  
 (3) Including 47,000 Common Shares currently owned and 386,556 Common Shares which may be
  
 (4) Member of the Audit Committee.
  
 (5) Chair of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee.
  
 (6) Including 2,734,881 Common Shares currently owned and 53,886 Common Shares which may be
(7)
acquired upon the exercise of immediately exercisable options.
 
2,713,092 Common Shares are owned of record by ARCH Venture Fund VI, L.P. (“ARCH VI”). ARCH
Venture Partners VI, L.P. as the sole general partner of ARCH VI may be deemed to beneficially own
certain of the shares held of record by ARCH VI. ARCH Venture Partners VI, L.P. disclaims beneficial
ownership of all shares held of record by ARCH VI in which the ARCH Venture Partners VI, L.P. does
not have an actual pecuniary interest. ARCH Venture Partners VI, LLC as the sole general partner of
ARCH Venture Partners VI, L.P. may be deemed to beneficially own certain of the shares held of record
by ARCH VI. ARCH Venture Partners VI, LLC disclaims beneficial ownership of all shares held of
record by ARCH VI in which ARCH Venture Partners VI, LLC does not have an actual pecuniary
interest. Steven Gillis owns an interest in ARCH VI but does not have voting or investment control over
the shares held by ARCH VI and disclaims beneficial ownership of such shares, except to the extent of
any pecuniary interest therein.
(8) Chair of the Compensation Committee.
  
 (9) Including 2,703,542 Common Shares currently owned and 15,606 Common Shares which may be
acquired upon the exercise of immediately exercisable options.
 
2,691,042 Common Shares are owned of record by Clarus Lifesciences I, L.P. (“Clarus”). Clarus I GP,
L.P. as the sole general partner of Clarus may be deemed to beneficially own certain of the shares held
of record by Clarus. Clarus I GP, L.P. disclaims beneficial ownership of all shares held of record by
Clarus in which Clarus I GP, L.P. does not have an actual pecuniary interest. Clarus I, LLC as the sole
general partner of Clarus I GP, L.P. may be deemed to beneficially own certain of the shares held of
record by Clarus. Clarus I, LLC disclaims beneficial ownership of all shares held of record by Clarus in
(10)
which it does not have an actual pecuniary interest. Mr. Requadt, as a Managing Director of Clarus I,
LLC may be deemed to beneficially own certain of the shares held of record by Clarus. Mr. Requadt
disclaims beneficial ownership of all shares held of record by Clarus in which he does not have an
actual pecuniary interest.
acquired upon the exercise of immediately exercisable options.
(11)Member of the Compensation Committee.
  
 (12)Member of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee.
  
 (13)Including 12,500 Common Shares currently owned and 15,606 Common Shares which may be
  
 (14)Including 3,070,931 Common Shares currently owned and 15,606 Common Shares which may be
acquired upon the exercise of immediately exercisable options.
 
3,058,431 Common Shares are owned of record by Perceptive Life Sciences Master Fund and Titan-
Perc Ltd., a related entity. As a Portfolio Manager of Perceptive Advisors LLC, a related entity to
Perceptive Life Sciences Master Fund Ltd. and Titan-Perc Ltd., Mr. Chawla has voting and dispositive
control over any securities owned of record by Perceptive Life Sciences Master Fund Ltd. and Titan-
Perc Ltd. Therefore, he may be deemed to beneficially own the Common Shares held of record by
Perceptive Life Sciences Master Fund Ltd. and Titan Perc. Ltd.
(15)
(16)Chair of the Audit Committee.
7
Jeff R. Baxter, FCMA. Mr. Baxter joined VBI(DE) in September of 2009, and joined the Company following
the VBI-SciVac Merger. Mr. Baxter currently serves on the board of directors of ChromaDex Corporation
(NASDAQ: CDXC), which serves dietary supplement, food, beverage, skin care and pharmaceutical
markets. Previously, he was a managing partner for the venture capital firm, The Column Group. Until July
of 2006, Mr. Baxter was Senior Vice President, R&D Finance and Operations, of GlaxoSmithKline (GSK).
In his 19 years of pharma experience, he has held line management roles in commercial, manufacturing
and IT and the office of the CEO. His most recent position in R&D included responsibility for finance,
pipeline resource planning and allocation, business development, deal structuring and SROne (GSK’s in-
house $125m venture capital fund). He also chaired GSK’s R&D Operating Board. Prior to GSK, he worked
at Unilever and British American Tobacco. Mr. Baxter was educated at Thames Valley University and is a
Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (FCMA). Mr. Baxter’s professional
achievements, including his management experience with GSK and his knowledge of finance, led us to the
conclusion that he should be a director.
Steven Gillis, Ph.D. Dr. Gillis served as a director of the VBI(DE) since July 25, 2014, and joined the
Company following the VBI-SciVac Merger. Since 2006, he has been a Managing Director of ARCH
Venture Partners, or ARCH, a firm he joined in 2005. Dr. Gillis is focused on the evaluation of new life
science technologies and also on the development and growth of ARCH’s biotechnology portfolio
companies. He is a director of Shire PLC, Pulmatrix, Inc. and PhaseRx, Inc. Dr. Gillis represents ARCH as
a director and serves as Chairman of a number of ARCH’s private biotechnology portfolio companies. Dr.
Gillis was a founder and director of Corixa Corporation and served as Chief Executive Officer from its
inception and as its Chairman from 1999 until its acquisition in 2005 by GlaxoSmithKline. Prior to Corixa,
Dr. Gillis was a founder and director of Immunex Corp. From 1981 until his departure in 1994, Dr. Gillis
served as Immunex’s Director of Research and Development, Chief Scientific Officer, and as Chief
Executive Officer of Immunex’s R&D subsidiary. Dr. Gillis was interim Chief Executive Officer of Immunex
Corp. following its majority purchase by American Cyanamid Company and remained a member of the
board until 1997. Amgen, Inc. acquired Immunex in 2002.
Dr. Gillis is an immunologist by training with over 300 peer-reviewed publications in the areas of molecular
and tumor immunology. He is credited as being a pioneer in the field of cytokines and cytokine receptors,
directing the development of multiple marketed products including Leukine, (GM-CSF), Prokine (IL-2) and
Enbrel (soluble TNF receptor-Fc fusion protein) as well as the regulatory approval of Bexxar (radiolabeled
anti- CD20). Dr. Gillis received a B.A. from Williams College and a Ph.D. from Dartmouth College. Dr.
Gillis’ education and professional achievements, including his experience in life science technologies and
biotechnologies, led us to the conclusion that he should be a director.
Scott Requadt, JD, MBA. Mr. Requadt served as a director of the VBI(DE) since December 8, 2015, and
joined the Company following the VBI-SciVac Merger. He is also a Managing Director at Clarus, a life
sciences venture capital fund. Mr. Requadt has over 15 years of operating and investment experience in
the pharmaceutical industry. Prior to joining Clarus in 2005, Mr. Requadt was Director, Business
Development of TransForm Pharmaceuticals, Inc. until it was acquired by Johnson & Johnson, and
previously practiced for several years as a mergers and acquisitions attorney at the law firm of Davis Polk &
Wardwell. Before that, Mr. Requadt was a law clerk for a senior judge at the Supreme Court of Canada. Mr.
Requadt holds a B.Com (Economics & Finance) from McGill University (First Class Honors), an LL.B from
University of Toronto and an MBA from Harvard Business School (Baker Scholar). Mr. Requadt has been
involved in multiple Clarus investments spanning both therapeutics and medtech, including Intercept
Pharmaceuticals (NASDAQ: ICPT) as well as several R&D risk-sharing collaborations with large pharma
partners. Mr. Requadt currently serves on the board of ESSA Pharmaceuticals (NASDAQ:EPIX), AvroBio
and Edev. He has previously been active on the boards of TyRx, Catabasis (NASDAQ:CATB), Oxford
Immunotec (NASDAQ: OXFD), Link Medicine and Biolex Therapeutics. Mr. Requadt’s education and
professional achievements, including his experience in life science technologies and biotechnologies, led
us to the conclusion that he should be a director.
8
Michel De Wilde, Ph.D. Dr. De Wilde served as a director of the VBI(DE) since July 25, 2014, and joined
the Company following the VBI-SciVac Merger. Dr. De Wilde was Senior Vice President, Research &
Development, at Sanofi Pasteur, the human vaccines division of Sanofi from 2001 until June 2013. In this
position, he was responsible for managing approximately 1,500 employees and a broad portfolio of
approximately 20 development projects. Prior to joining Sanofi Pasteur in January 2000, Dr. De Wilde was
at SmithKline Beecham Biologicals (now GSK Vaccines) in Rixensart, Belgium. Dr. De Wilde joined the
group in 1978 as a research scientist upon formation of a unit focusing on the application of recombinant
DNA technology to vaccine development. He subsequently held positions of increasing responsibility and,
as Vice President, Research & Development at Sanofi Pasteur, headed a team of approximately 400
specialists, active in all aspects of preclinical vaccine development. Dr. De Wilde received his degree in
Chemistry from the Free University of Brussels in 1971, followed by a Ph.D. in Biochemistry in 1976. He
carried out postdoctoral work at the University of Wisconsin, Madison and the University of Ghent
(Belgium). Dr. De Wilde authored over 50 publications during the early part of his career. Dr. De Wilde’s
extensive experience in biopharmaceutical development led us to the conclusion that he should serve as a
director.
Sam Chawla. Mr. Chawla served as a director of the VBI(DE) since July 25, 2014, and joined the Company
following the VBI-SciVac Merger. Mr. Chawla has been a Portfolio Manager of Perceptive Advisors LLC, an
investment fund focused on the healthcare sector, since 2013. Prior to joining Perceptive Advisors in 2013,
Mr. Chawla was a Managing Director at UBS Investment Bank (“UBS”) in the Global Healthcare Group. Mr.
Chawla’s investment banking experience centered on strategic advisory work including, mergers and
acquisitions buy-side and sell-side and financial advisory assignments, including equity and debt capital
raises, for both public and private healthcare companies. Prior to joining UBS in September 2010, Mr.
Chawla was a Director (from January 2009 to September 2010) and a Vice President (from July 2007 to
January 2009) in the Healthcare Investment Banking Group of Credit Suisse, which he originally joined as
an investment banker in 2002. Mr. Chawla also worked at Bloomberg L.P. and Pelican Life Sciences. Mr.
Chawla received an M.B.A. from Georgetown University and a B.A. in Economics from Johns Hopkins
University. In addition, Mr. Chawla is a member of the board of directors of Great Basin Scientific. Mr.
Chawla’s strategic advisory and financial advisory experience with both public and private healthcare
companies led us to the conclusion that he should be a director.
Steven D. Rubin. Mr. Rubin has served as a director of SciVac since October 2012, and joined the
Company following the SciVac-Levon Arrangement. Mr. Rubin has served as Executive Vice President –
Administration of OPKO since May 2007 and as a director of OPKO since February 2007. Mr. Rubin served
as the Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary of IVAX Corporation from August 2001 until
September 2006. Mr. Rubin currently serves on the board of directors of IDI, Inc. (NYSE MKT: IDI), an
information solutions provider focused on the data-fusion market, Kidville, Inc. (OTCBB: KVIL), which
operates large, upscale facilities, catering to newborns through five-year-old children and their families and
offers a wide range of developmental classes for newborns to five-year-olds, Non-Invasive Monitoring
Systems, Inc. (OTCBB: NIMU), a medical device company, Tiger X Medical, Inc. (OTCBB: CDOM),
previously an early-stage orthopedic medical device company specializing in designing, developing and
marketing reconstructive joint devices and spinal surgical devices, Cocrystal Pharma, Inc. (OTCBB:
COCP), formerly Biozone Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a publicly traded biotechnology company developing new
treatments for viral diseases, Sevion Therapeutics, Inc. (OTCBB: SVON), a clinical stage company which
discovers and develops next-generation biologics for the treatment of cancer and immunological diseases,
Castle Brands, Inc. (NYSE MKT: ROX), a developer and marketer of premium brand spirits, and Neovasc,
Inc. (TSXV: NVC), a company developing and marketing medical specialty vascular devices. Mr. Rubin
previously served as a director of Dreams, Inc. (NYSE MKT: DRJ), a vertically integrated sports licensing
and products company, Safestitch Medical, Inc. prior to its merger with TransEnterix, Inc., and PROLOR
Biotech, Inc., prior to its acquisition by OPKO in August 2013. Mr. Rubin’s education and professional
achievements, including his experience in life science technologies and biotechnologies, led us to the
conclusion that he should be a director.
9
Adam Logal. Mr. Logal has served as a director of SciVac since April 2014, and joined the Company
following the SciVac-Levon Arrangement. Mr. Logal has served as OPKO’s Sr. Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer since April 2014 and as its Vice President of Finance, Chief Accounting
Officer and Treasurer since March 2007. From 2002 to 2007, Mr. Logal served in senior management
of Nabi Biopharmaceuticals, a publicly traded, biopharmaceutical company engaged in the
development and commercialization of proprietary products. Mr. Logal held various positions of
increasing responsibility at Nabi Biopharmaceuticals, last serving as Senior Director of Accounting
and Reporting. Mr. Logal’s education and professional achievements, including his financial
experience in life science technologies and biotechnologies, led us to the conclusion that he
should be a director.
Corporate Cease Trade Orders or Bankruptcies
No proposed director of the Company is, as of the date hereof or was within 10 years before the
date hereof, a director, chief executive officer or chief financial officer of any company (including the
Company) that:
(a)
(b)
was subject to a cease trade order, an order similar to a cease trade order or an order similar to a cease
trade order or an order that denied the relevant company access to any exemption under securities
legislation, that was in effect for a period of more than 30 consecutive days, that was issued while the
director or executive officer was acting in the capacity as director, chief executive officer or chief
financial officer; or
 
was subject to a cease trade order, an order similar to a cease trade order or an order that denied the
relevant company access to any exemption under securities legislation, for a period of more than 30
consecutive days, that was issued after the director or executive officer ceased to be a director, chief
executive officer or chief financial officer and which resulted from an event that occurred while that
person was acting in the capacity as director, chief executive officer or chief financial officer.
Except as disclosed herein, no proposed director of the Company:
is, as of the date hereof or was within 10 years before the date hereof, a director or executive officer of
any company (including the Company) that, while that person was acting in that capacity, or within a
year of that person ceasing to act in that capacity, became bankrupt made a proposal under any
legislation relating to bankruptcy or insolvency, or was subject to or instituted any proceedings, or
compromise with creditors or had a receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed to hold its assets; or
 
has, within 10 years before the date hereof, become bankrupt, made a proposal under any legislation
relating to bankruptcy or insolvency, or become subject to or instituted any proceedings, arrangement or
compromise with creditors or had a receiver, receiver manager or trustee appointed to hold the assets of
the proposed director.
(a)
(b)
Mr. Chawla was a director of Response Genetics, Inc. until he resigned on October 9, 2015. Before
Mr. Chawla resigned, Response Genetics, Inc. commenced a chapter 11 case before the U.S.
Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware. Response Genetics, Inc. plans to continue the
process of winding-down as part of its chapter 11 case before the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the
District of Delaware.
10
Penalties or Sanctions
No proposed director of the Company has been subject to:
(a)
any penalties or sanctions imposed by a court relating to securities legislation or by a securities
regulatory authority or has entered into a settlement agreement with a securities regulatory authority; or
 
any other penalties or sanctions imposed by a court or regulatory body that would likely be considered
important to a reasonable securityholder in deciding whether to vote for a proposed director.
(b)
The foregoing, not being within the knowledge of the Company, has been furnished by the
respective directors.
ADVISORY VOTE ON EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
The Board believes that shareholders should have the opportunity to not only fully understand the
objectives, philosophies and principles the Board has used in its approach to executive
compensation decisions, but to also have an advisory vote on such approach to executive
compensation (“Say on Pay”). The purpose of a Say on Pay advisory vote is to provide
shareholders the opportunity to indicate their acceptance of the Board’s overall approach to
executive compensation at the Company and provide appropriate director accountability to
shareholders for the Board’s compensation decisions. The Say on Pay vote is advisory and non-
binding. The Board of the Company remains fully responsible for its compensation decisions and
will not be relieved of these responsibilities by either a positive or negative advisory vote by
shareholders.
Shareholders are being asked at the Meeting to consider and approve the following ordinary
resolution (the “Say on Pay Advisory Resolution”) in substantially the following form:
“BE IT RESOLVED that on an advisory basis, and not to diminish the role and responsibilities of the
Company’s board of directors (the “Board”), Company shareholders accept the Board’s approach
to executive compensation delivered in advance of the 2016 annual meeting of shareholders.”
The Board diligently reviews the Company’s executive compensation plans and would expect
shareholders to also undergo their own due diligence before casting their votes. To fully
understand the objectives, philosophies and principles the Board has used in its approach to
executive compensation decisions, shareholders should carefully read the “Executive
Compensation” section of this Circular.
To pass, the Say on Pay Advisory Resolution must be approved by a majority vote of the Common
Shares voted, in person or by proxy, on the advisory resolution. In the absence of instructions to
the contrary, a properly executed and returned Proxy will be voted FOR the Say on Pay Advisory
Resolution.
OTHER MATTERS
Management of the Company knows of no other matter to come before the Meeting other than those
referred to in the Notice of Meeting accompanying this Circular. However, if any other matter
properly comes before the Meeting, it is the intention of the persons named in the Proxy
accompanying this Circular to vote the same in accordance with their best judgment of such
matters.
11
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
For the purposes of this Circular, named executive officers of the Company means the following
individuals (the “NEOs”):
(a)
The Company’s chief executive officer, or an individual who acted in a similar capacity, for any part of
the most recently completed financial year (“CEO”);
 
The Company’s chief financial officer, or an individual who acted in a similar capacity, for any part of the
most recently completed financial year (“CFO”);
 
each of the three most highly compensated executive officers of the Company, including any of its
subsidiaries, or the three most highly compensated individuals acting in a similar capacity, other than
the CEO and CFO, at the end of the most recently completed financial year whose total compensation
was, individually, more than $150,000, as determined in accordance with subsection 1.3(6) of Form 51-
102F6 Statement of Executive Compensation, for that financial year; and
 
each individual who would be an NEO under paragraph (c) but for the fact that the individual was
neither an executive officer of the Company or its subsidiaries, nor acting in a similar capacity, at the
end of that financial year.
(b)
(c)
(d)
During the most recently completed financial year the Company had four NEOs, namely, Ron
Tremblay, the CEO & President of the Company prior to the SciVac-Levon Arrangement, Annie
Chan, the CFO of the Company prior to the SciVac-Levon Arrangement, Curtis A. Lockshin, the
CEO of the Company after the SciVac-Levon Arrangement, and James J. Martin, the CFO of the
Company after the SciVac-Levon Arrangement
At or about the effective time of the VBI-SciVac Merger, the Company reconstituted its Board and
management team, including the Company’s NEOs. Jeff Baxter, the President and CEO of the
Company, David E. Anderson, the Chief Scientific Officer of the Company, Egidio Nascimento,
Group Financial Controller, and Francisco Diaz-Mitoma, Chief Medical Officer, each of whom were
appointed to such offices on completion of the VBI-SciVac Merger, were not NEOs for the financial
year ended December 31, 2015, but qualify as NEOs for the current financial year.
Compensation Discussion and Analysis
Prior to the completion of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement, the Company operated a mining
exploration business under the name Levon Resources Ltd. Immediately prior to the effective time
of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement, the Company spun out the business assets and all liabilities of
Levon Resources Ltd. to 1027949 B.C. Ltd. (now Levon Resources Ltd.) and on completion of the
SciVac-Levon Arrangement, the Company began operating the business of SciVac, being the
business of developing, producing and marketing biological products for human healthcare. As a
result of the foregoing change of business, and the reconstitution of the Company’s Board and
management team, the Company’s compensation philosophy and strategies also changed. The
following sections discuss the Company’s current compensation program, except under the
heading “Compensation Prior to the Completion of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement” which
discusses the Company’s compensation program prior to the completion of the SciVac-Levon
Arrangement.
12
Overview of Current Compensation Philosophy
The Company’s current compensation philosophy is to structure remuneration packages that are
sufficiently attractive to recruit, retain and motivate the kind of executives who will be instrumental
in helping the Company achieve its short and long-term objectives, to provide executives with
compensation that is in accordance with existing market standards generally, to align the interests
of executive officers with those of the Company’s shareholders and to link individual executive
compensation to the performance of both the Company and the individual executive.
Given the recent completion of the VBI-SciVac Merger, the Compensation Committee is reviewing
the policies outlined below to ensure that the Company’s compensation structure appropriately
furthers the Company’s long-term corporate goals.
Compensation Committee
The Company does not have a formal compensation program; however, the administration of the
Company’s compensation mechanisms are handled by the Compensation Committee. The
Compensation Committee, on behalf of the Board, monitors compensation for the executive officers
of the Company. The Compensation Committee has two members, each of whom are independent:
Michel De Wilde and Scott Requadt. Scott Requadt is the Chair of the Compensation Committee.
The Compensation Committee maintains a mandate and meets as frequently as necessary in order
to fulfil its responsibilities and, in any event, at least annually.
The following is a summary description of the mandate and responsibilities of the Compensation
Committee as it relates to NEO compensation:
●
to review and approve corporate goals and objectives relevant to NEO compensation, including the
evaluation and performance of the NEO in light of those corporate goals and objectives, and to make
recommendations to the Board with respect to NEO compensation levels (including the award of any
cash bonuses or share ownership opportunities);
●
to consider the implementation of short and long-term incentive plans, including equity-based plans,
proposed by management, to make recommendations to the Board with respect to these plans and to
review such plans after their implementation; and
●to review any other benefit plans proposed by management and to make recommendations to the Board
with respect to their implementation.
Each of the members of the Compensation Committee has direct experience which is relevant to
their responsibilities in executive compensation.
Performance Factors
Although no formal performance goals or benchmarks are in place for the NEOs, there are general
factors that are considered when the members of the Compensation Committee are considering
NEO compensation. These factors include, but are not limited to:
●the NEO’s individual contribution to the Company;
●the long-term interests of the Company and its shareholders;
    
 ●the Board’s assessment of each NEO’s individual performance;
    
 ●the Company’s share price, earnings per share and market capitalization; and
    
 ●the NEO’s responsibilities, length of service and levels of compensation provided by industry
competitors.
13
The Company’s compensation structure is designed to reward performance and to be competitive
with the compensation arrangements of other life sciences companies of similar size and scope of
operations. With each compensation award (i.e., salaries, cash bonuses or stock option grants), the
Compensation Committee will consider the industry as a whole and each member is expected to
provide his input as to whether the compensation grant is fair to the NEO, the Company and its
shareholders. Ultimately however, performance-based rewards will be underpinned by the
Company’s financial circumstances.
NEOs Jeff Baxter, David E. Anderson, and Egidio Nascimento are eligible to be considered for an
annual cash bonus of up to fifty percent (50%), thirty-five percent (35%) and twenty-five (25%),
respectively, of their applicable base salary (a “Bonus”), pursuant to their respective employment
agreements. Bonus entitlement is based on the meeting of certain performance objectives, which
are mutually established by the NEO and the Board on an annual basis. Bonus eligibility and
entitlement is at the sole discretion of the Board and is contingent upon the NEO remaining actively
employed at the Company through the date any Bonus is to be paid. Bonuses are paid in March of
the following calendar year. The NEOs are not entitled to any portion of any Bonus that might
otherwise be awarded for any calendar year during which the NEO’s employment terminates for any
reason. All determinations regarding any Bonus are made by the Board in its sole discretion.
Under Francisco Diaz-Mitoma’s consulting agreement, each of the Company and Mr. Diaz-Mitoma
have agreed to begin negotiating terms of a performance incentive for Mr. Diaz-Mitoma,
commencing on or before August 1, 2016.
Recruiting and Retention
The Company offers compensation packages that are sufficient to attract and retain the right level
of skill, expertise and talent in an increasingly competitive global market.
The structure of each remuneration package is well-balanced across the short, medium and longer
term elements, so that it is both attractive to the individual and cost effective for the Company. This
balance is achieved by providing base salary at a reasonable median level as an anchor to make the
Company a realistic prospect for talented candidates. In addition, short term incentives (including
discretionary bonuses) will provide recruits with the opportunity to achieve superior total annual
reward through their own delivery of excellence at individual and business levels. Finally, longer
term reward elements (including stock option grants or restricted stock awards), which are
described in greater detail below, provide the opportunity to build ownership and growth in the
medium and longer term future in line with the opportunities for success afforded to the Company’s
shareholders.
Role of Management in Determining Compensation
The accountability for decisions on executive remuneration is within the mandate of the
Compensation Committee, but management also has a key role in helping support the
Compensation Committee in fulfilling its obligations. For example, the CEO makes
recommendations to the Compensation Committee regarding executive officer base salary
adjustments, stock-based grants and discretionary bonuses. The Compensation Committee
reviews the basis for these recommendations and is able to exercise its discretion to modify any of
the recommendations prior to making its recommendations to the Board. The CEO does not make a
recommendation to the Compensation Committee with respect to his own remuneration package.
14
Elements of Executive Compensation
Executive compensation is composed of three elements:
●
base salaries, which its management believes are set at levels which are competitive with the base
salaries paid by companies of a comparable size and operations within the life sciences industry, thereby
enabling the Company to compete for and retain executives critical to the Company’s long-term success;
●discretionary cash bonuses, which are considered from time to time, based on individual and corporate
performance criteria; and
●
share ownership opportunities through the Company’s 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan which provides
additional incentive and aligns the interests of executive officers with the longer term interests of
shareholders.
Base Salary
The Company strives to pay its executives in the mid-range for salaries of comparable positions
and in comparable companies, although the Company does not formally benchmark its salaries
against those of other companies. In making its annual recommendations, the Compensation
Committee considers the distinct contributions of each executive, the financial performance and
ability to pay of the Company and the experience and seniority of each executive.
Short Term Incentive Compensation - Discretionary Cash Bonuses
The Company may award discretionary cash bonuses to executive officers and employees of the
Company from time to time. The Compensation Committee will provide recommendations on
discretionary cash bonuses from time to time. In arriving at a decision to award and in determining
the amount of discretionary cash bonuses, the Compensation Committee will consider the
performance factors described above under the heading “Performance Factors”, as well as
performance measures, including financial results, budgetary constraints, projects and other
initiatives. The payment of bonuses is subject to the final approval of the Board and the Board has
the discretion to amend or reject proposed bonuses in its sole discretion. On occasion, the CEO
may decide, by exception, to award a small bonus to an employee for exceptional performance.
Option-Based Awards
The stock option component of an NEO’s compensation, which includes a vesting element to
ensure retention, is expected to both motivate the executive toward increasing share value and
enable the executive to share in the future success of the Company. Individual stock options or
share awards may be granted by the Board on the recommendation of, in the case of employees,
senior management, and, in the case of executive officers, including the CEO, by the Compensation
Committee. Options or shares may be awarded by the Board upon the commencement of an
individual’s employment with the Company, based on the level of such person’s responsibility.
Additional option grants or shares may be made periodically to ensure that the number of stock
options or awards granted to any particular individual will be commensurate with the individual’s
level of ongoing responsibility within the Company. In considering additional grants, a number of
factors will be considered, including the role the individual plays in the Company, the number of
stock options or shares an individual has been granted, the exercise price, value and the term of
those options or shares.
15
Risks Associated with the Company’s Compensation Policies and Practices
Neither the Board nor the Compensation Committee has yet proceeded to a formal evaluation of the
implications of the risks associated with the Company’s compensation policies and practices. As of
the date hereof, the Board has no reason to believe that the Company’s compensation program will
result in unnecessary or inappropriate risk-taking, including risks that are likely to have a material
adverse effect on the Company.
Director and Officer Hedging Prohibition
The Company’s insider trading policy contains provisions prohibiting, among others, NEOs and
directors from purchasing financial instruments, including, for greater certainty, prepaid variable
forward contracts, equity swaps, collars, or units of exchange funds that are designed to hedge or
offset a decrease in market value of equity securities granted as compensation or held, directly or
indirectly, by any NEO or director.
Compensation Prior to the Completion of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement
Prior to the completion of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement when the Company was operating the
business of Levon Resources Ltd., the Company did not have a compensation program other than
paying base salaries, incentive bonuses, and the possibility of granting incentive stock options to
the NEOs, although no stock options were granted prior to the VBI-SciVac Merger. The Company’s
compensation program was designed to provide compensation packages that attracted and
retained qualified and experienced executives, while aligning the compensation level of each
executive to that executive’s level of responsibility. The three components of the compensation
package were included to enable the Company to meet different objectives. The objectives of base
salary were to recognize market pay, and acknowledge the competencies and skills of individuals.
The objective of incentive bonuses (paid in the form of cash payments) was to add a variable
component of compensation to recognize corporate and individual performances for executive
officers and employees. The objectives of stock option awards were to reward achievement of long-
term financial and operating performance and focus on key activities and achievements critical to
the ongoing success of the Company.
The compensation of the NEOs was reviewed and recommended for Board approval by the
Company’s previous Compensation Committee. To the best of management’s knowledge, the
Company’s previous Board did not formally evaluate or identify risks associated with the
Company’s compensation policies and practices, that would be reasonably likely to have a material
impact on the Company.
The general objectives of the Company’s compensation strategy prior to the completion of the
SciVac-Levon Arrangement were to:
●compensate management in a manner that encouraged and rewarded a high level of performance and
outstanding results with a view to increasing long term shareholder value;
    
 ●align management’s interests with the long term interests of shareholders;
provide a compensation package that was commensurate with other comparable companies to enable
●
the Company to attract and retain talent; and
●
ensure that the total compensation package was designed in a manner that took into account the
Company’s stage of development and its available financial resources. The Company’s compensation
packages were designed to provide a blend of a non-cash stock option component and a reasonable
salary. In addition, extraordinary efforts which enhance shareholder value were rewarded with cash
bonuses.
16
Actual compensation varied based on the performance of the executives relative to the
achievement of goals and the price of the Company’s securities.
Prior to the completion of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement, the Company relied on the discretion and
judgment of the directors in establishing and amending contracts for all forms of compensation,
including stock options granted to the CEO and the directors, and for reviewing the CEO’s
recommendations respecting compensation of the other officers of the Company, to ensure such
arrangements reflected the responsibilities and risks associated with each position. There was no
formal process using objectives, criteria, or analysis, for determining compensation. When
determining the compensation of its officers, the Compensation Committee and the Board were
guided by the general objectives of the Company’s compensation strategy as set out above.
Prior to the completion of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement, to the best of management’s knowledge,
the Company did not have in place a policy prohibiting NEOs and directors from purchasing
financial instruments designed to hedge or offset a decrease in market value of equity securities
granted as compensation or held, directly or indirectly, by any NEO or director.
Performance Graph
The following graph compares the total cumulative shareholder return for CAD$100 invested in the
Company’s shares for the five most recently completed financial years of the Company, compared
with the cumulative total return of the S&P/TSX Composite Index for the five most recently
completed financial years of the Company. The reader is cautioned that all periods in the below
graph occurred prior to the completion of the VBI-SciVac Merger and the Company’s current NEOs
were not NEOs at any of those periods.
17
From 2011 to 2014, the cumulative shareholder return on the Common Shares generally declined.
During the same period, salaries of the NEOs increased to provide competitive compensation
necessary to attract and retain executive talent. In the financial year ended March 31, 2015, the
cumulative shareholder return on the Common Shares increased. From March 31, 2015, to the end
of the financial year ended December 31, 2015, the cumulative shareholder return decreased.
During that time, salaries of the NEOs decreased.
Summary Compensation Table
For the financial year ended December 31, 2015, the Company had four NEOs pursuant to Form 51-
102F6, namely, Ron Tremblay, the CEO & President of the Company prior to the SciVac-Levon
Arrangement, Annie Chan, the CFO of the Company prior to the SciVac-Levon Arrangement, Curtis
A. Lockshin, the CEO of the Company after the SciVac-Levon Arrangement, and James J. Martin,
the CFO of the Company after the SciVac-Levon Arrangement. As discussed above under the
heading “Statement of Executive Compensation – Compensation Discussion and Analysis”, the
Company’s current CEO and Chief Scientific Officer were not NEOs for the financial year ended
December 31, 2015, but are NEOs for the current financial year.
The following table sets forth a summary of the total compensation paid to, or earned by the
Company’s NEOs for the financial year ended December 31, during the Company’s three most
recently completed financial years. The compensation reflected in the following table is presented in
Canadian dollars, which is the functional currency of the Company. The compensation paid to the
Company’s NEOs in the past three years is not indicative of the compensation expected to be paid
to the Company’s current NEOs following the VBI-SciVac Merger.
Name and
Principal
Position
Non-
equity Incentive
  
Plan Compensation
($)
Year(1)
Salary
($)
Share-
Option-
Annual
Based
  
Awards
Based
Incentive
  
  
Awards(3)
Plans(4)
($)
($)
($)
Long term
Incentive
  
Plans
($)(4)
All
Other
Total
Compen-
Compen-
  
  
sation
Pension
Value
($)(5)
sation
($)
($)(6)
Ron
Tremblay(8) 2015  $12,500     Nil
Former
President
and
Chief
2015(2) $342,674    Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
$12,500
$456,955     Nil
Nil
Nil
$211,895   $1,101,524
2014(2) $300,000    Nil
$25,324     Nil
2015  $3,028
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
$200,000   $525,324
Nil
$3,028
2015(2) $84,670     Nil
$14,909     Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
$99,579
2014(2) $56,216     Nil
$1,630
Nil
Nil
Nil
$57,8
Nil
Nil
Nil
2015  $107,500    Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
$107,500
2015  $95,000     Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
$95,000
Executive
Officer
 
Annie
Chan(7)
Former
Chief
Financial
Officer
 
Curtis A.
Lockshin
Former
Chief
Executive
Officer
 
James J.
Martin
Former
Chief
Financial
Officer
18
Notes:
(1)Financial year ended December 31.
  
 (2)Financial years ended March 31.
(3)
The methodology used to calculate the fair value of a stock option on the grant date is based on the
BlackScholes Option Pricing Model. The BlackScholes Option Pricing Model is the model accepted
under International Financial Reporting Standards in computing the fair value of stock options granted
and is commonly used by public companies. The Company used the following weighted average
assumptions in the model to determine the awards recorded above for 2015: Dividend Yield – Nil;
Expected Life – 4.93 years; Volatility – 87.76%; Risk Free Interest Rate – 1.47%.
any of its executive officers, including its NEOs.
(4)The Company does not have a formal non-equity annual incentive plan or long term incentive plan for
  
 (5)The Company does not have any pension, retirement or deferred compensation plans, including defined
contribution plans.
 
Discretionary cash payment of incentive bonuses. Other than as set out above, perquisites have not
been included as they do not reach the prescribed threshold of the lesser of $50,000 and 10% of total
salary for the financial year.
(6)
(7)Resigned from office on or about April 30, 2015.
Resigned from office on the completion of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement. Mr. Tremblay was a member
of the Board prior to the completion of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement. None of the compensation
disclosed above relates to Mr. Tremblay’s role as a director.
(8)
Incentive Plan Awards
Outstanding share-based awards and option-based awards
The Company did not have any share-based awards or option-based awards outstanding as of
December 31, 2015.
Defined Benefits Plans, Defined Contribution Plans, and Deferred Compensation Plans
As of December 31, 2015, the Company did not have a defined benefits pension plan, a defined
contribution plan or a deferred compensation plan
Termination and Change of Control Benefits
Levon previously entered into consulting agreements with Stone’s Throw (Barbados) Ltd., a
company wholly-owned by Ron Tremblay and on April 1, 2014, Levon renewed this consulting
agreement for a period of five years. Pursuant to the consulting agreement, Mr. Tremblay received a
“Change of Control Payment” of USD$1,500,000 immediately on closing of the SciVac-Levon
Arrangement.
The nature of James Martin’s employment is “at will”, meaning the Company or the NEO may
terminate employment at any time, and for any reason, with or without cause. The “at will” nature of
employment may only be changed in an express written agreement approved by the Board and
signed by the NEO and a duly authorized officer of the Company (other than the NEO). If the
Company fails to retain the services of the NEO beyond November 5, 2016, the NEO will be entitled
to severance benefit of USD$56,250, provided that the NEO has (i) returned all Company property in
the NEO’s possession, (ii) the NEO has resigned as a member of the Board and from the boards of
directors of all of its subsidiaries, to the extent applicable, and (iii) executed a general release of all
claims that he may have against the Company, its subsidiaries or their respective affiliated persons.
The release is to be executed and returned on or before the date specified by the Company and in
the prescribed form.
If NEOs Jeff Baxter, David E. Anderson, or Egidio Nascimento are terminated without cause, the
termination is a change of control termination, or the termination is by the NEO for good reason, the
NEO shall be entitled to payments of their respective base salary and properly documented
expense reimbursement that had accrued but had not been paid prior to the date of such
termination, payments for any accrued but unused vacation time, and payments of severance.
Severance payment is a lump sum payment equal to six months of base salary (at the rate in effect
on the date of termination) plus an additional one month’s payment of base salary for each full year
served by the NEO since July 25, 2014. The obligation of the Company to make severance
payments is subject to the NEO signing a general release of claims as set out in the agreement, and
the NEO’s compliance with the confidentiality, non-competition, and cooperation provisions of the
agreement. As these individuals were not NEOs during the previous completed financial year, the
following table sets forth the severance payable if termination occurred on August 15, 2016:
19
Six Months of Base
Salary
 
(USD$)
One Month’s Payment of
Base
Salary for each Full Year
  
Served
Severance as of August 15,
2016
  
(USD$)
$ 200,000
$ 142,500
$ 125,000
Jeff Baxter
David E.
Anderson
Egidio
Nascimento
(USD$)
  $ 66,666.67
$ 47,500.00
$ 41,666.67
$ 266,666.67
$ 190,000.00
$ 166,666.67
If Mr. Baxter, Mr. Anderson, or Mr. Nascimento, are terminated without cause, terminated during the
period that begins when negotiations with an unrelated third party for a change of control begin and
ends on the twelve (12) month anniversary of the closing of the change of control transaction, or
their employment is terminated for good reason, all options granted to the NEO by the Company
shall accelerate fully and vest immediately. None of these individuals’ unvested options were “in the
money” as of August 15, 2016.
Director Compensation
Director Compensation Table
During the Company’s most recently completed financial year, the directors of the Company,
excluding the Company’s NEOs, did not receive any compensation.
Outstanding share-based awards and option-based awards
The Company did not have any share-based awards or option-based awards outstanding as of
December 31, 2015.
SECURITIES AUTHORIZED FOR ISSUANCE UNDER EQUITY COMPENSATION PLANS
The only equity compensation plan that the Company currently has in place is the 2016 VBI Equity
Incentive Plan, which was approved by shareholders on January 29, 2016. As of December 31, 2015,
the Company had in place its previous stock option plan (the “Previous Plan”), approved by
shareholders on June 3, 2015 and adopted by the Board on July 9, 2015. Prior to the Previous Plan,
the Company had in place a stock option plan established by the Company in 2011 and amended
and restated and approved by the shareholders on September 21, 2012 (the “Levon Plan”). On
completion of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement, all options outstanding under the Levon Plan
immediately prior to the completion of the SciVac-Levon Arrangement were cancelled. As at
December 31, 2015, the following options are outstanding under the Previous Plan:
20
Plan Category
Number of
securities to
be issued upon
exercise
 
of outstanding
options,
warrants and
rights (a)
Equity compensation plans approved by
security holders
Equity compensation plans not approved
by security holders
Total
Nil
N/A
Nil
Weighted-
average
exercise price
of
outstanding
 
options,
warrants and
rights
(b)
(1)   Nil
N/A
Nil
Number of securities
remaining available
for future
issuance under
equity
  
compensation plans
(excluding securities
reflected
in column (a))
(c)
1,891,511
N/A
1,891,511
(2)
As of October 26, 2015, the Company had entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger with VBI(DE)
pursuant to which 2,104,312 options and 363,771 warrants were granted to previous optionholders and
warrantholders of VBI(DE) on June 22, 2016.
(1)
(2)As of December 31, 2015, there were 18,915,110 Common Shares issued and outstanding.
Particulars of the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan
The 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan is a rolling incentive plan that sets the number of Common
Shares issuable under the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan, together with any other security-based
compensation arrangement of the Company, at a maximum of 10% of the aggregate Common
Shares issued and outstanding on a non-diluted basis at the time of any grant under the 2016 VBI
Equity Incentive Plan. Grants under the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan include a grant or right
consisting of one or more options, stock appreciation rights (“SARs”), restricted share units
(“RSUs”), performance share units (“PSUs”), shares of restricted stock or other such award as may
be permitted under the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan. The principal features of the 2016 VBI Equity
Incentive Plan are as follows:
Eligible Participants
Eligible participants include individuals employed (including services as a director) by the
Company or its affiliates, including a service provider, who, by the nature of his or her position or
job is, in the opinion of the Board, in a position to contribute to the success of the Company
(“Eligible Persons”).
Reservation of Shares
The aggregate number of Common Shares reserved for issuance to any one participant under the
2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan, together with all other security-based compensation arrangements
must not exceed 5% of the total number of issued and outstanding Common Shares on a non-
diluted basis.
The maximum number of Common Shares (a) issued to insiders within any one year period; and (b)
issuable to insiders at any time, under the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan, when combined with all of
the Company’s other security-based compensation arrangements, must not exceed 10% of the total
number of issued and outstanding Common Shares.
21
Options and Stock Appreciation Rights
The Company may grant options to Eligible Persons on such terms and conditions consistent with
the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan. The exercise price for an option must not be less than 100% of
the market price, based on a 5- day volume weighted average trading price per Common Share, on
the date of grant of such option.
With respect to Tandem Stock Appreciation Rights attached to an option, which allows the holder,
upon vesting of the option and Tandem SAR, to choose to exercise the stock appreciation right or
to exercise the option, the exercise price is the exercise price applicable to the option (as explained
above) to which the Tandem SAR relates, subject to adjustment provisions under the 2016 VBI
Equity Incentive Plan. For Stand-Alone SARs, a SAR that is granted without reference to any related
Company options, the base price must not be less than 100% of the market price on the date of
grant of such Stand-Alone SAR. Stock appreciation rights (and in the case of Tandem SARs, the
related options) will be settled by payment in cash or Common Shares or a combination thereof,
with an aggregate value equal to the product of (a) the excess of the market price on the date of
exercise over the exercise price or base price under the applicable stock appreciation right,
multiplied by (b) the number of stock appreciation rights exercised or settled.
Under the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan, 25% of the options will vest on each of the first four
anniversaries of the grant date. The term of options will be for a maximum of 10 years, unless
exercised or terminated earlier in accordance with the terms of the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan or
the applicable grant agreement. If the expiry date of any option, other than an incentive stock
option, falls within any blackout period or within 10 business days following the end of any blackout
period, then the expiry date will be extended to the date that is 10 business days following the end
of such blackout period.
Upon a participant’s termination of employment due to death, or in the case of disability: (a) the
outstanding options that were granted prior to the year that includes the participant’s death or
disability that have not become vested prior to such date will continue to vest and, upon vesting, be
exercisable during the 36-month period following such date; and (b) the outstanding options that
have become vested prior to the participant’s death or disability will continue to be exercisable
during the 36-month period following such date.
In the case of a participant’s termination of employment or contract for services without cause: (a)
the outstanding options that have not become vested prior to the participant’s termination will
continue to vest and, upon vesting, be exercisable during the 120-day period following such date;
and (b) the outstanding options that have become vested prior to the participant’s termination will
continue to be exercisable during the 120-day period following such date.
In the case of a participant’s termination due to resignation (including voluntary withdrawal of
services by a non-employee participant): (a) the outstanding options that have not become vested
prior to the date of notice of resignation will be forfeited and cancelled as of such date; and (b) the
outstanding options that have become vested prior to the date of notice of resignation will continue
to be exercisable during the 90-day period following such date.
In the case of a participant’s termination of employment or contract for services for cause, any and
all then outstanding unvested options granted to such participant will be immediately forfeited and
cancelled, without any consideration therefor, as of the date such notice of termination is given.
Share Units
The Board may grant share units to Eligible Persons on such terms and conditions consistent with
the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan.
22
The Board will determine the grant value and the valuation date for each grant of share units. The
number of share units to be covered by each grant will be determined by dividing the grant value for
such grant by the market value of a Common Share as at the valuation date, rounded up to the next
whole number.
Share units subject to a grant will vest as specified in the grant agreement governing such grant,
provided that the participant is employed on the relevant vesting date. RSUs and PSUs will be
settled upon, or as soon as reasonably practicable following the vesting thereof, subject to the
terms of the grant agreement. In all events, RSUs and PSUs will be settled on or before the earlier of
the 90th day following the vesting date and the date that is 2 ½ months after the end of the year in
which the vesting occurred. Settlement will be made by way of issuance of one Common Share for
each RSU or PSU, a cash payment equal to the market value of the RSUs or PSUs being settled, or
a combination thereof. If the share units would be settled within a blackout period, such settlement
will be postponed until the earlier of the 6th trading day following the end of such blackout period
and the otherwise applicable date of settlement as determined in accordance with the settlement
provision set out above.
If and when cash dividends are paid with respect to Common Shares to shareholders of record
during the period from the grant date to the date of settlement of the RSUs or PSUs, a number of
dividend equivalent RSUs or PSUs, as applicable, will be credited to the share unit account of such
participant.
In the event a participant’s employment is terminated due to resignation, share units that have not
vested prior to the date of resignation will vest and all such Common Shares will be forfeited
immediately.
In the case of a participant’s termination due to death, or in the case of disability, all share units
granted prior to the year that includes the participant’s death or disability, that have not vested prior
to the participant’s death or disability will vest at the end of the vesting period and in the case of
PSUs, subject to the achievement of applicable performance conditions and the adjustment of the
number of PSUs that vest to reflect the extent to which such performance conditions were
achieved.
In the event a participant’s employment or contract for services is terminated without cause, prior to
the end of a vesting period relating to such participant’s grant, the number of RSUs or PSUs,
respectively, as determined by their respective formula set out in the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan
will become vested at the end of the vesting period.
In the event a participant’s employment is terminated for cause, share units that have not vested
prior to the date of the termination for cause will not vest and all such share units will be forfeited
immediately.
Restricted Stock
Restricted stock means Common Shares that are subject to restrictions on such participant’s free
enjoyment of the Common Shares granted. Notwithstanding the restrictions, the participant will
receive dividends paid on the restricted stock, will receive proceeds of the restricted stock in the
event of any change in the Common Shares and will be entitled to vote the restricted stock during
the restriction period.
The participant will not have rights to sell, transfer or assign, or otherwise dispose of the shares of
restricted stock or any interest therein while the restrictions remain in effect. Grants of restricted
stock will be forfeited if the applicable restriction does not lapse prior to such date or occurrence of
such event or the satisfaction of such other criteria as is specified in the grant agreement.
23
Furthermore, unless expressly provided for in the grant agreement or as otherwise determined by
the Board, any restricted stock held by the participant at the time of the participant’s termination of
employment will be forfeited.
Assignment and Transferability
No participant will assign any of his, her or its grants or the rights or interests therein other than by
testamentary disposition or the laws of intestacy. However, with respect to participants who are not
U.S. taxpayers, the VBI Board may provide that a grant is transferable or assignable (a) in the case
of a transfer without payment of consideration, to the participant’s family members and any entity in
which such family member owns more than 50% of the voting interests; and (b) to an entity in which
more than 50% of the voting interests are owned by such Persons or the participant in exchange for
an interest in that entity.
Amendment Provisions
The Board is permitted to amend or terminate the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan or options granted
thereunder at any time without shareholder approval, provided any amendment to the 2016 VBI
Equity Incentive Plan or the grants thereunder may not be made without the consent of a participant
if it adversely alters or impairs the rights of such participant. However, shareholder approval will be
required for changes to the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan that (a) increase the maximum number of
VBI Shares issuable pursuant to the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan; (b) reduce the exercise price of
any outstanding options or the base price of a Stand-Alone SAR, including a cancellation of a grant
of an option and re-grant within 6 months which constitutes a reduction of the exercise price; (c)
extend the term of any grant; (d) amend the assignment provisions; (e) increase the number of
Common Shares that may be issued or issuable to insiders above the restriction or deleting the
restriction on the number of Common Shares that may be issued or issuable to insiders; (f) include
other types of equity compensation involving issuance of Common Shares under the 2016 VBI
Equity Incentive Plan; (g) cause incentive stock options to fail to meet the requirements of Section
422 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code; or (h) amend or delete the 2016 VBI Equity Incentive Plan’s
amendment provisions or grant additional powers to the Board to amend the 2016 VBI Equity
Incentive Plan or entitlements without shareholder approval.
AUDIT COMMITTEE
The Audit Committee’s duties and responsibilities are specified by law and in the Audit Committee
Mandate, which is attached hereto as Schedule “C”. The Audit Committee, among other things:
oversees the Company’s financial statements and financial disclosures; oversees of the work of the
auditors of the Company, including the auditors’ work in preparing or issuing an audit report and
performing other audit, review or attest services or any other related work; and reviews the
Company’s system of internal controls. Any non-audit services provided to the Company by the
Company’s auditors are pre-approved by the Audit Committee. The Audit Committee also oversees
any complaints and concerns regarding accounting, internal controls or auditing matters and the
resolution of issues identified by the Company’s external auditors. The Audit Committee
recommends to the Board the firm of independent auditors to be nominated for appointment by the
Company’s shareholders and the compensation of the auditors. The Audit Committee meets as
many times per year as is necessary to carry out its responsibilities.
As required by NI 52-110, the Company’s Annual Report on Form 20-F for the year ended March 31,
2015 (the “Form 20-F”), which is available on SEDAR at www.sedar.com, contains additional
disclosure regarding the Audit Committee. Readers should be aware, however, that the disclosure
contained in the Form 20-F is prior to the VBI-SciVac Merger and the composition of the Audit
Committee has since changed, as reflected in the following section.
24
Composition of the Audit Committee
Below are the details of each Audit Committee member, including such persons’ name, whether
such person is independent and financially literate (as such terms are defined under NI 52-110 -
Audit Committees (“NI 52-110”)) and such person’s education and experience as it relates to the
performance of an audit committee member’s duties.
Financially
Literate(2)
 Yes
Education & Experience relevant to performance of audit
 
committee duties
Please see biography above.
Yes
 Yes
Please see biography above.
 Please see biography above.
Member Name  Independent(1)
Adam Logal –
Chair
Steven Gillis
Steve Rubin
Y
Y
 Y
Notes:
(1)
(2)
To be considered independent, a member of the committee must not have any direct or indirect “material
relationship” with the Company. A material relationship is a relationship which could, in the view of the
Board, reasonably interfere with the exercise of a member’s independent judgment.
 
To be considered financially literate, a member of the committee must have the ability to read and
understand a set of financial statements that present a breadth and level of complexity of accounting
issues that are generally comparable to the breadth and complexity of the issues that can reasonably be
expected to be raised by the Company’s financial statements.
Audit Committee Oversight
At no time since the commencement of the Company’s most recently completed financial year, has
a recommendation of the Audit Committee to nominate or compensate an external auditor not been
adopted by the Board.
De-Minimis Non-Audit Services
At no time since the commencement of the Company’s most recently completed financial year has
the Company relied on the exemptions contained in section 2.4 of NI 52-110 (De Minimis Non-Audit
Services), or an exemption from NI 52-110, in whole or in part, granted under Part 8 (Exemptions) of
NI 52-110.
Pre-Approval Policies and Procedures
The Audit Committee has not adopted, and does not expect to adopt specific policies and
procedures for the engagement of non-audit services; however, as provided for in NI 52-110 and the
Audit Committee Mandate, the Audit Committee will be required to pre-approve all non-audit
services to be provided to the Company or its subsidiaries, unless otherwise permitted by NI 52-
110.
STATEMENT OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE PRACTICES
General
In compliance with the requirements of the Business Corporations Act (British Columbia), under
which the Company was incorporated, the directors are elected by the shareholders to manage, or
supervise the management of, the business and affairs of the Company. In exercising their powers
and discharging their responsibilities, they are required to act honestly and in good faith with a view
to the best interests of the Company and to exercise the care, diligence and skill that a reasonably
prudent person would exercise in comparable circumstances.
25
In accordance with the recommended guidelines established by National Policy 58-201-Corporate
Governance Guidelines (“NP 58-201”), the Board has adopted the following Corporate Governance
Policies.
Board of Directors
The Board is composed of seven directors; namely, Jeff Baxter, Steven Gillis, Steven D. Rubin,
Scott Requadt, Michel De Wilde, Sam Chawla, and Adam Logal. Each of Steven Gillis, Scott
Requadt, Michel De Wilde, Sam Chawla, Steven D. Rubin, and Adam Logal are independent
directors within the meaning of NI 52-110. Directors are considered to be “independent” if they have
no direct or indirect material relationship with the Company. A “material relationship” is a
relationship which could, in the view of the Board, be reasonably expected to interfere with the
exercise of a director’s independent judgment. Jeff Baxter is not considered independent as he is
the Chief Executive Officer of the Company.
Certain directors serve as directors of other reporting issuers or reporting issuer equivalent(s), as
set out in the “Election of Directors” section of this Circular.
Board Mandate
A copy of the Board of Directors Mandate is attached as Schedule “D” to this Circular (the “Board
Mandate”). The Board Mandate is to supervise the management of the Company and the
Company’s business and affairs and in doing so to act honestly and in good faith with a view to the
best interests of the Company. The Board is responsible for: (i) approving long-term strategic plans
and annual business and capital plans recommended by management, as well as policies and
processes generated by management relating to the authorization of major investments and
significant allocations of capital; (ii) reviewing management’s implementation of the Company’s
strategic, business and capital plans; (iii) reviewing the risks identified by management related to
the Company’s business, and management’s systems to manage such risks; (iv) reviewing reports
and recommendations of the Company’s Compensation Committee related to compensation and
other matters relating to human resource management; (v) reviewing reports and recommendations
from the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee related to the Company’s approach to
corporate governance; and (vi) reviewing the Company’s overall disclosure policy and the
Company’s compliance therewith.
The frequency of meetings of the Board and the nature of agenda items may change from year to
year depending upon the activities of the Company. However, the Board expects to meet at least
quarterly and at each meeting there will be a review of the business of the Company.
The independent directors are not expected to hold regularly scheduled meetings at which non-
independent directors and members of management are not in attendance. All but one member of
the Board are considered to be independent. Where deemed necessary by the independent
directors, the independent directors will hold in-camera sessions exclusive of the non-independent
director and members of management, which process will facilitate open and candid discussion
amongst the independent directors.
26
Position Descriptions
The Company has three (3) committees: the Audit Committee; the Compensation Committee; and
the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee. The chair of each committee is be required
to ensure that the committee meets when required and performs its duties and to report to the
Board on the activities of the committee. The Board has not yet developed written position
descriptions for the chair of each Board committee.
The Board has not developed a written position description for the Chairman of the Board. The
responsibilities of the Chairman include the efficient operation of the Board, ensuring that the
Board is alert to its obligations to the Company, providing leadership to the Board and chairing
meetings of the Board.
The Board has not developed a written position description for the CEO; however the CEO is
expected to provide leadership and vision for the Company, oversee the executive management of
the Company, develop long term and short term strategic plans, financial and operating plans,
report to the Board and shareholders and manage relationships with stakeholders.
Orientation and Continuing Education
The Company will provide new directors with copies of relevant financial, technical and other
information regarding its R&D programs. Board members will also be encouraged to communicate
with management and the auditor and to keep themselves current with industry trends and
developments. Board members will have full access to the Company’s records. In addition, the
Chair of the Board will review with each new member (i) certain information and materials regarding
the Company, including the role of the Board and its committees and (ii) the legal obligations of a
director of the Company. The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee of the Company
will be responsible for developing any training programs for directors, if considered necessary.
Ethical Business Conduct
The Board has adopted a written Code of Business Conduct and Ethics (the “Code”), for directors,
officers and employees. The Code is available on the Company’s SEDAR profile at www.sedar.com
and is also available on the Company’s website.
Pursuant to the Code, directors, officers or employees who have concerns or questions about
violations of laws, rules, regulations or the Code are required to report them to their manager or
another person designated in the Code. The Board, acting through the Nominating and Corporate
Governance Committee and Audit Committee, is ultimately responsible for the Code and for
monitoring compliance with the Code.
Nomination of Directors
The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee of the Board consists of Steven Gillis
(chair), Michel De Wilde, and Steven Rubin, each of whom are independent directors.
The Board has approved a written mandate for the Nominating and Corporate Governance
Committee. The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee is responsible for (i) nominating
and recommending nominees for the Board and submitting the names of such nominees to the full
Board for their approval; (ii) evaluating the composition, seize and governance of the Board and its
committees and making recommendations regarding future planning and appointment of directors
to the committees; and (iii) establishing a policy for considering shareholder nominees for election
to the Board.
27
Compensation
The Board has a Compensation Committee to determine the compensation for the directors and the
NEOs. The proposed compensation policies of the Company are set out in this Circular under the
heading “Statement of Executive Compensation”. The Compensation Committee consists of two
independent directors: Scott Requadt (chair) and Michel De Wilde. Each member of the
Compensation Committee is experienced in the oversight of executive and operational
management teams as a result of his experience with various private and public sector businesses.
The Compensation Committee aids the Board in meeting its responsibilities with regard to oversight
and determination of executive compensation. Among other things, the Compensation Committee
reviews, recommends, and approves salaries and other compensation of the Company’s executive
officers, and will administer the Company’s equity incentive plans, including reviewing,
recommending and approving stock option and other equity incentive grants to executive officers.
Assessments
The Board and each individual director will be periodically assessed regarding its, his or her
effectiveness and contribution. The assessment will consider and take into account:
●in the case of the Board, its mandate; and
    
 ●in the case of an individual director, the competencies and skills each individual director is expected to
possess in the context of the current make-up of the Board.
Term Limits and Diversity
In the fall of 2014 the Canadian Securities Administrators (the “CSA”) introduced “comply or
explain” policies requiring companies to either adopt or explain why they have not adopted (a)
policies with respect to term limits for directors; and (b) policies and targets designed to increase
participation by women in board matters and in executive positions. Given the re-constitution of the
Board following the completion of the VBI-SciVac Merger, the Nominating and Corporate
Governance Committee has begun considering the substance of appropriate policies, but has not
yet adopted formal policies or targets on either term limits or diversity.
The Board and the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee recognize the valuable
contributions made to board deliberations and management by people of different gender,
experience and background. Selection is made as per the criteria described above and elsewhere in
this Circular (such as based on merit, skills, qualifications, needs of the Company at the time, etc.).
However, the Board is mindful of the benefit of diversity in the Company’s leadership positions and
the need to maximize the effectiveness of the Board and management in their decision making
abilities.
In considering the recently adopted CSA guidelines, the Nominating and Corporate Governance
Committee has determined to monitor developments in this area while reviewing the Company’s
own practices in order to adopt a policy that is meaningful for the Company.
28
INDEBTEDNESS OF DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
As at the date of this Circular, no executive officer, director, employee, former executive officer,
director or employee of the Company or any of its subsidiaries, has been indebted to the Company
or any of its subsidiaries, either in connection with the purchase of securities or otherwise. No
director, executive officer, proposed nominee for election as a director of the Company, or an
associate of any such director, executive officer or proposed nominee has been indebted to the
Company or any of its subsidiaries or any other entity which indebtedness is or has been the
subject of a guarantee, support agreement, letter of credit or other similar arrangement or
understanding provided by the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
MANAGEMENT CONTRACTS
Management functions of the Company are substantially performed by directors or executive
officers of the Company and not, to any substantial degree, by any other person with whom the
Company has contracted.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Additional information relating to the Company is on SEDAR at www.sedar.com. Shareholders may
contact the Company to request copies of the Company’s financial statements and MD&A at
info@vbivaccines.com. Financial information is provided in the Company’s comparative financial
statements and MD&A for its most recently completed financial year.
DATED at Cambridge, Massachusetts, August 17, 2016.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD
 
 
 
/s/ “Jeff Baxter”
 
 
Jeff Baxter
Director, President and Chief Executive Officer
29
Schedule “A”
A-1
A-2
A-3
Schedule “B”
VBI VACCINES INC.
(THE “COMPANY”)
MAJORITY VOTING POLICY
The Board of Directors of the Company (the “Board”) believes that each of its members should
carry the confidence and support of its shareholders and is committed to upholding high standards
in corporate governance.
Forms of proxy for the vote at a shareholders’ meeting where directors are to be elected will enable
the shareholder to vote in favour of, or to withhold from voting for, each nominee on an individual
basis. At the meeting, the Chair will call for a vote by ballot and the scrutineers will record, with
respect to each nominee, the number of shares in his or her favour and the number of shares
withheld from voting. Prior to receiving the scrutineer’s report on the ballot, the Chair may
announce the vote result based on the number of proxies received by the Company. At the
conclusion of the meeting, the final scrutineer’s report on the ballot must be filed on SEDAR.
If, in an uncontested election of Directors, the number of shares “withheld” for any nominee equals
or exceeds the number of shares voted “for” the nominee, then, notwithstanding that such Director
was duly elected as a matter of corporate law, he or she shall immediately tender his or her written
resignation to the Board. An “uncontested election” means an election where the number of
nominees for Director is not greater than the number of Directors to be elected. The Corporate
Governance and Nominating Committee will consider such offer of resignation and will make a
recommendation to the Board concerning the acceptance or rejection of the resignation. The Board
will accept the resignation absent exceptional circumstances, and such resignation will be effective
when accepted by the Board. In its deliberations, the Corporate Governance and Nominating
Committee may consider such extenuating circumstances as it deems appropriate. The Board will
take formal action on the Corporate Governance and Nominating Committee’s recommendation
within 90 days after the date of the applicable shareholders’ meeting and will promptly announce its
decision via press release, a copy of which shall be provided to the Toronto Stock Exchange. If the
Board declines to accept the resignation, such press release will fully state the reason or reasons
for its decision.
No Director who is required to tender his or her resignation shall participate in the Corporate
Governance and Nominating Committee’s deliberations or recommendations or in the Board’s
deliberations or determination.
If a resignation is accepted by the Board, and subject to any corporate law restrictions, the Board
may leave any resulting vacancy unfilled until the next annual general meeting, or may appoint a
new Director to fill the vacancy who the Board considers to merit the confidence of the
shareholders, or may call a special meeting of shareholders at which there will be presented a
management slate to fill the vacant position or positions.
*     *     *     *     *     *     *
Adopted by the Board of Directors of VBI Vaccines Inc. on August 28, 2015.
B-1
Schedule “C”
VBI VACCINES INC.
AUDIT COMMITTEE MANDATE
As of August 28, 2015
1. Introduction
The Audit Committee (the “Committee” or the “Audit Committee”) of SciVac Therapeutics Inc. or the
“Company”) is a committee of the Board of Directors (the “Board”). The Committee shall oversee
the accounting and financial reporting practices of the Company and the audits of the Company’s
financial statements and exercise the responsibilities and duties set out in this Mandate.
2. Membership
Number of Members
The Committee shall be composed of three or more members of the Board.
Independence of Members
Each member of the Committee must be independent. “Independent” shall have the meaning, as
the context requires, given to it in National Instrument 52-110 Audit Committees, as may be
amended from time to time.
Chair
At the time of the annual appointment of the members of the Audit Committee, the Board shall
appoint a Chair of the Audit Committee. The Chair shall be a member of the Audit Committee,
preside over all Audit Committee meetings, coordinate the Audit Committee’s compliance with this
Mandate, work with management to develop the Audit Committee’s annual work-plan and provide
reports of the Audit Committee to the Board.
Financial Literacy of Members
At the time of his or her appointment to the Committee, each member of the Committee shall have,
or shall acquire within a reasonable time following appointment to the Committee, the ability to read
and understand a set of financial statements that present a breadth and level of complexity of
accounting issues that are generally comparable to the breadth and complexity of the issues that
can reasonably be expected to be raised by the Company’s financial statements.
Term of Members
The members of the Committee shall be appointed annually by the Board. Each member of the
Committee shall serve at the pleasure of the Board until the member resigns, is removed, or ceases
to be a member of the Board. Unless a Chair is elected by the Board, the members of the Committee
may designate a Chair by majority vote of the full Committee membership.
C-1
3. Meetings
Number of Meetings
The Committee may meet as many times per year as necessary to carry out its responsibilities.
Quorum
No business may be transacted by the Committee at a meeting unless a quorum of the Committee is
present. A majority of members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.
Calling of Meetings
The Chair, any member of the Audit Committee, the external auditors, the Chairman of the Board, or
the Chief Executive Officer or the Chief Financial Officer may call a meeting of the Audit Committee
by notifying the Company’s Corporate Secretary who will notify the members of the Audit
Committee. The Chair shall chair all Audit Committee meetings that he or she attends, and in the
absence of the Chair, the members of the Audit Committee present may appoint a chair from their
number for a meeting.
Minutes; Reporting to the Board
The Committee shall maintain minutes or other records of meetings and activities of the Committee
in sufficient detail to convey the substance of all discussions held. Upon approval of the minutes by
the Committee, the minutes shall be circulated to the members of the Board. However, the Chair
may report orally to the Board on any matter in his or her view requiring the immediate attention of
the Board.
Attendance of Non-Members
The external auditors are entitled to attend and be heard at each Audit Committee meeting. In
addition, the Committee may invite to a meeting any officers or employees of the Company, legal
counsel, advisors and other persons whose attendance it considers necessary or desirable in order
to carry out its responsibilities. At least once per year, the Committee shall meet with the internal
auditor and management in separate sessions to discuss any matters that the Committee or such
individuals consider appropriate.
Meetings without Management
The Committee shall hold unscheduled or regularly scheduled meetings, or portions of meetings, at
which management is not present.
Procedure
The procedures for calling, holding, conducting and adjourning meetings of the Committee shall be
the same as those applicable to meetings of the Board.
Access to Management
The Committee shall have unrestricted access to the Company’s management and employees and
the books and records of the Company.
C-2
4. Duties and Responsibilities
The Committee shall have the functions and responsibilities set out below as well as any other
functions that are specifically delegated to the Committee by the Board and that the Board is
authorized to delegate by applicable laws and regulations. In addition to these functions and
responsibilities, the Committee shall perform the duties required of an audit committee by any
exchange upon which securities of the Company are traded, or any governmental or regulatory
body exercising authority over the Company, as are in effect from time to time (collectively, the
“Applicable Requirements”).
Financial Reports
(a) General
The Audit Committee is responsible for overseeing the Company’s financial statements and
financial disclosures. Management is responsible for the preparation, presentation and integrity of
the Company’s financial statements and financial disclosures and for the appropriateness of the
accounting principles and the reporting policies used by the Company. The auditors are
responsible for auditing the Company’s annual consolidated financial statements and for reviewing
the Company’s unaudited interim financial statements.
(b) Review of Annual Financial Reports
The Audit Committee shall review the annual consolidated audited financial statements of the
Company, the auditors’ report thereon and the related management’s discussion and analysis of
the Company’s financial condition and results of operation (“MD&A”). After completing its review, if
advisable, the Audit Committee shall approve and recommend for Board approval the annual
financial statements and the related MD&A.
(c) Review of Interim Financial Reports
The Audit Committee shall review the interim consolidated financial statements of the Company, the
auditors’ review report thereon and the related MD&A. After completing its review, if advisable, the
Audit Committee shall approve and recommend for Board approval the interim financial statements
and the related MD&A.
(d) Review Considerations
In conducting its review of the annual financial statements or the interim financial statements, the
Audit Committee shall:
(i) meet with management and the auditors to discuss the financial statements and MD&A;
  
 (ii) review the disclosures in the financial statements;
  
 (iii)review the audit report or review report prepared by the auditors;
discuss with management, the auditors and internal legal counsel, as requested, any litigation claim or
other contingency that could have a material effect on the financial statements;
(iv)
C-3
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
review the accounting policies followed and critical accounting and other significant estimates and
judgements underlying the financial statements as presented by management;
 
review any material effects of regulatory accounting initiatives or off-balance sheet structures on the
financial statements as presented by management, including requirements relating to complex or
unusual transactions, significant changes to accounting principles and alternative treatments under
IFRS;
 
review any material changes in accounting policies and any significant changes in accounting
practices and their impact on the financial statements as presented by management;
(viii)review management’s report on the effectiveness of internal controls over financial reporting;
(ix) review the factors identified by management as factors that may affect future financial results;
review results of the Company’s audit committee whistleblower hotline program; and
 
review any other matters, related to the financial statements, that are brought forward by the auditors,
management or which are required to be communicated to the Audit Committee under accounting
policies, auditing standards or Applicable Requirements.
(x)
(xi)
(e) Approval of Other Financial Disclosures
The Audit Committee shall review and, if advisable, approve and recommend for Board approval
financial disclosure in a prospectus or other securities offering document of the Company, press
releases disclosing, or based upon, financial results of the Company and any other material
financial disclosure, including financial guidance provided to analysts, rating agencies or otherwise
publicly disseminated.
Auditors
(a) General
The Audit Committee shall be responsible for oversight of the work of the auditors, including the
auditors’ work in preparing or issuing an audit report, performing other audit, review or attest
services or any other related work.
(b) Nomination and Compensation
The Audit Committee shall review and, if advisable, select and recommend for Board approval the
external auditors to be nominated and the compensation of such external auditor. The Audit
Committee shall have ultimate authority to approve all audit engagement terms and fees, including
the auditors’ audit plan.
C-4
(c) Resolution of Disagreements
The Audit Committee shall resolve any disagreements between management and the auditors as to
financial reporting matters brought to its attention.
(d) Discussions with Auditors
At least annually, the Audit Committee shall discuss with the auditors such matters as are required
by applicable auditing standards to be discussed by the auditors with the Audit Committee.
(e) Audit Plan
At least annually, the Audit Committee shall review a summary of the auditors’ annual audit plan.
The Audit Committee shall consider and review with the auditors any material changes to the scope
of the plan.
(f) Quarterly Review Report
(g) Independence of Auditors
At least annually, and before the auditors issue their report on the annual financial statements, the
Audit Committee shall obtain from the auditors a formal written statement describing all
relationships between the auditors and the Company; discuss with the auditors any disclosed
relationships or services that may affect the objectivity and independence of the auditors; and
obtain written confirmation from the auditors that they are objective and independent within the
meaning of the applicable Rules of Professional Conduct/Code of Ethics adopted by the provincial
institute or order of chartered accountants to which the auditors belong and other Applicable
Requirements. The Audit Committee shall take appropriate action to oversee the independence of
the auditors.
(h) Evaluation and Rotation of Lead Partner
At least annually, the Audit Committee shall review the qualifications and performance of the lead
partner(s) of the auditors and determine whether it is appropriate to adopt or continue a policy of
rotating lead partners of the external auditors.
(i) Requirement for Pre-Approval of Non-Audit Services
The Audit Committee shall approve in advance any retainer of the auditors to perform any non-audit
service to the Company that it deems advisable in accordance with Applicable Requirements and
Board approved policies and procedures. The Audit Committee may delegate pre-approval
authority to a member of the Audit Committee. The decisions of any member of the Audit Committee
to whom this authority has been delegated must be presented to the full Audit Committee at its next
scheduled Audit Committee meeting.
(j) Approval of Hiring Policies
The Audit Committee shall review and approve the Company’s hiring policies regarding partners,
employees and former partners and employees of the present and former external auditors of the
Company.
C-5
(k) Communication with Internal Auditor
The internal auditor shall report regularly to the Committee. The Committee shall review with the
internal auditor any problem or difficulty the internal auditor may have encountered including,
without limitation, any restrictions on the scope of activities or access to required information, and
any significant reports to management prepared by the internal auditing department and
management’s responses thereto.
The Committee shall periodically review and approve the mandate, plan, budget and staffing of the
internal audit department. The Committee shall direct management to make changes it deems
advisable in respect of the internal audit function.
The Committee shall review the appointment, performance and replacement of the senior internal
auditing executive and the activities, organization structure and qualifications of the persons
responsible for the internal audit function.
(l) Financial Executives
The Committee shall review and discuss with management the appointment of key financial
executives and recommend qualified candidates to the Board, as appropriate.
Internal Controls
(a) General
The Audit Committee shall review the Company’s system of internal controls.
(b) Establishment, Review and Approval
The Audit Committee shall require management to implement and maintain appropriate systems of
internal controls in accordance with Applicable Requirements, including internal controls over
financial reporting and disclosure and to review, evaluate and approve these procedures. At least
annually, the Audit Committee shall consider and review with management and the auditors:
(i)
(ii)
(iv)
(v)
the effectiveness of, or weaknesses or deficiencies in: the design or operation of the Company’s
internal controls (including computerized information system controls and security); the overall control
environment for managing business risks; and accounting, financial and disclosure controls (including,
without limitation, controls over financial reporting), non-financial controls, and legal and regulatory
controls and the impact of any identified weaknesses in internal controls on management’s
conclusions;
 
any significant changes in internal controls over financial reporting that are disclosed, or considered for
disclosure, including those in the Company’s periodic regulatory filings;
(iii)any material issues raised by any inquiry or investigation by the Company’s regulators;
the Company’s fraud prevention and detection program, including deficiencies in internal controls that
may impact the integrity of financial information, or may expose the Company to other significant
internal or external fraud losses and the extent of those losses and any disciplinary action in respect of
fraud taken against management or other employees who have a significant role in financial reporting;
and
 
any related significant issues and recommendations of the auditors together with management’s
responses thereto, including the timetable for implementation of recommendations to correct
weaknesses in internal controls over financial reporting and disclosure controls.
C-6
Compliance with Legal and Regulatory Requirements
The Audit Committee shall review reports from the Company’s Corporate Secretary and other
management members on: legal or compliance matters that may have a material impact on the
Company; the effectiveness of the Company’s compliance policies; and any material
communications received from regulators. The Audit Committee shall review management’s
evaluation of and representations relating to compliance with specific applicable law and guidance,
and management’s plans to remediate any deficiencies identified.
Audit Committee Hotline Whistleblower Procedures
The Audit Committee shall establish policies and procedures for (a) the receipt, retention, and
treatment of complaints received by the Company regarding accounting, internal accounting
controls, or auditing matters; and (b) the confidential, anonymous submission by employees of the
Company of concerns regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters. Any such
complaints or concerns that are received shall be reviewed by the Audit Committee and, if the Audit
Committee determines that the matter requires further investigation, it will direct the Chair of the
Audit Committee to engage outside advisors, as necessary or appropriate, to investigate the matter
and will work with management and the general counsel to reach a satisfactory conclusion.
Audit Committee Disclosure
The Audit Committee shall prepare, review and approve any audit committee disclosures required
by Applicable Requirements in the Company’s disclosure documents.
Delegation
The Audit Committee may, to the extent permissible by Applicable Requirements, designate a sub-
committee to review any matter within this mandate as the Audit Committee deems appropriate.
5. No Rights Created
This Mandate is a statement of broad policies and is intended as a component of the flexible
governance framework within which the Audit Committee, functions. While it should be interpreted
in the context of all applicable laws, regulations and listing requirements, as well as in the context of
the Company’s Notice of Articles and Articles, it is not intended to establish any legally binding
obligations.
6. Mandate Review
The Committee shall review and update this Mandate annually and present it to the Board for
approval.
Adopted: August 28, 2015
C-7
Schedule “D”
VBI VACCINES INC.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS MANDATE
As of August 28, 2015
1. Purpose
The members of the Board of Directors (the “Board”) have the duty to supervise the management of
the business and affairs of SciVac Therapeutics Inc. or the “Company”). The Board, directly and
through its committees and the chair of the Board (the “Chair”), shall provide direction to senior
management, generally through the Chief Executive Officer, to pursue the best interests of the
Company.
2. Duties and Responsibilities
The Board shall have the specific duties and responsibilities outlined below.
Strategic Planning
(a) Strategic Plans
The Board will adopt a strategic plan for the Company. At least annually, the Board shall review and,
if advisable, approve the Company’s strategic planning process and the Company’s annual
strategic plan. In discharging this responsibility, the Board shall review the plan in light of
management’s assessment of emerging trends, the competitive environment, the opportunities for
the business of the Company, risk issues, and significant business practices and products.
(b) Business and Capital Plans
At least annually, the Board shall review and, if advisable, approve the Company’s annual business
and capital plans as well as policies and processes generated by management relating to the
authorization of major investments and significant allocation of capital.
(c) Monitoring
At least annually, the Board shall review management’s implementation of the Company’s strategic,
business and capital plans. The Board shall review and, if advisable, approve any material
amendments to, or variances from, these plans.
Risk Management
(d) General
At least annually, the Board shall review reports provided by management of principal risks
associated with the Company’s business and operations, review the implementation by
management of appropriate systems to manage these risks, and review reports by management
relating to the operation of, and any material deficiencies in, these systems.
D-1
(e) Verification of Controls
The Board shall verify that internal, financial, non-financial and business control and management
information systems have been established by management.
Human Resource Management
(f) General
At least annually, the Board shall review a report of the Compensation Committee concerning the
Company’s approach to human resource management and executive compensation.
(g) Succession Review
At least annually, the Board shall review the succession plans of the Company for the Chair, the
Chief Executive Officer and other executive officers, including the appointment, training and
monitoring of such persons.
(h) Integrity of Senior Management
The Board shall, to the extent feasible, satisfy itself as to the integrity of the Chief Executive Officer
and other executive officers of the Company and that the Chief Executive Officer and other senior
officers strive to create a culture of integrity throughout the Company.
Corporate Governance
(i) General
At least annually, the Board shall review a report of the Nominating and Corporate Governance
Committee concerning the Company’s approach to corporate governance.
(j) Director Independence
At least annually, the Board shall review a report of the Nominating and Corporate Governance
Committee that evaluates the director independence standards established by the Board and the
Board’s ability to act independently from management in fulfilling its duties.
(k) Ethics Reporting
The Board has adopted a written Code of Business Conduct and Ethics (the “Code”) applicable to
directors, officers and employees of the Company. At least annually, the Board shall review the
report of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee relating to compliance with, or
material deficiencies from, the Code and approve changes it considers appropriate. The Board shall
review reports from the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee concerning
investigations and any resolutions of complaints received under the Code.
(l) Board of Directors Mandate Review
At least annually, the Board shall review and assess the adequacy of its Mandate to ensure
compliance with any rules of regulations promulgated by any regulatory body and approve any
modifications to this Mandate as considered advisable.
D-2
Communications
(m) General
The Board has adopted a Disclosure Policy for the Company. At least annually, the Board, in
conjunction with the Chief Executive Officer, shall review the Company’s overall Disclosure Policy,
including measures for receiving feedback from the Company’s stakeholders, and management’s
compliance with such policy. The Board shall, if advisable, approve material changes to the
Company’s Disclosure Policy.
(n) Shareholders
The Company endeavors to keep its shareholders informed of its progress through an annual
report, annual information form, quarterly interim reports and periodic press releases. Directors and
management meet with the Company’s shareholders at the annual meeting and are available to
respond to questions at that time.
3. Composition
General
The composition and organization of the Board, including: the number, qualifications and
remuneration of directors; the number of Board meetings; quorum requirements; meeting
procedures and notices of meetings are required by the Business Corporations Act (British
Columbia), the Securities Act (British Columbia) and the articles of the Company, subject to any
exemptions or relief that may be granted from such requirements.
Each director must have an understanding of the Company’s principal operational and financial
objectives, plans and strategies, and financial position and performance. Directors must have
sufficient time to carry out their duties and not assume responsibilities that would materially
interfere with, or be incompatible with, Board membership. Directors who experience a significant
change in their personal circumstances, including a change in their principal occupation, are
expected to advise the chair of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee.
Independence
A majority of the Board must be independent. “Independent” shall have the meaning, as the context
requires, given to it in National Policy 58-201 Corporate Governance Guidelines, as may be
amended from time to time.
4. Committees of the Board
The Board has established the following committees: the Compensation Committee, the Audit
Committee, and the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee. Subject to applicable law,
the Board may establish other Board committees or merge or dispose of any Board committee.
Committee Mandates
The Board has approved mandates for each Board committee and shall approve mandates for each
new Board committee. At least annually, each mandate shall be reviewed by the Nominating and
Corporate Governance Committee and any suggested amendments brought to the Board for
consideration and approval.
D-3
Delegation to Committees
The Board has delegated to the applicable committee those duties and responsibilities set out in
each Board committee’s mandate.
Consideration of Committee Recommendations
As required by applicable law, by applicable committee Mandate or as the Board may consider
advisable, the Board shall consider for approval the specific matters delegated for review to Board
committees.
Board/Committee Communication
To facilitate communication between the Board and each Board committee, each committee chair
shall provide a report to the Board on material matters considered by the committee at the first
Board meeting after the committee’s meeting.
5. Meetings
The Board will meet as many times as required to carry out its duties and responsibilities, with
additional meeting held as deemed advisable. The Chair is primarily responsible for the agenda and
for supervising the conduct of the meeting. Any director may propose the inclusion of items on the
agenda, request the presence of, or a report by any member of senior management, or at any Board
meeting raise subjects that are not on the agenda for that meeting.
Meetings of the Board shall be conducted in accordance with the Company’s articles.
Secretary and Minutes
The Corporate Secretary, her or his designate or any other person the Board requests shall act as
secretary of Board meetings. Minutes of Board meetings shall be recorded and maintained by the
Corporate Secretary and subsequently presented to the Board for approval.
Meetings Without Management
If necessary in order to facilitate open and candid discussion amongst the independent directors,
the independent members of the Board shall hold meetings, or portions of meetings, at which non-
independent directors and members of management are not present.
Directors’ Responsibilities
Each director is expected to attend all meetings of the Board and any committee of which he or she
is a member. Directors will be expected to have read and considered the materials sent to them in
advance of each meeting and to actively participate in the meetings.
Access to Management and Outside Advisors
The Board shall have unrestricted access to management and employees of the Company. The
Board shall have the authority to retain and terminate external legal counsel, consultants or other
advisors to assist it in fulfilling its responsibilities and to set and pay the respective reasonable
compensation of these advisors without consulting or obtaining the approval of any officer of the
Company. The Company shall provide appropriate funding, as determined by the Board, for the
services of these advisors.
D-4
Service on Other Boards and Audit Committee
Directors may serve on the boards of other public companies so long as these commitments do not
materially interfere and are compatible with their ability to fulfill their duties as a member of the
Board. Directors must advise the Chair in advance of accepting an invitation to serve on the board
of another public company.
6. Management
Position Descriptions for Directors
The Board may approve position descriptions for the Chair, and the chair of each Board committee.
If any such position descriptions are approved, at least annually, the Board shall review such
position descriptions.
Position Description for CEO
The Board may approve a position description for the Chief Executive Officer, which may include
delineating management’s responsibilities. The Board may also approve the corporate goals and
objectives that the Chief Executive Officer has responsibility for meeting. If such a position
description is approved, least annually, the Board shall review a report of the Compensation
Committee reviewing this position description and such corporate goals and objectives.
7. Director development and evaluation
Each new director shall participate in the Company’s initial orientation program and each director
shall participate in the Company’s continuing director development programs. At least annually, the
Board shall review the Company’s initial orientation program and continuing director development
programs.
8. No Rights Created
This Mandate is a statement of broad policies and is intended as a component of the flexible
governance framework within which the Board, assisted by its committees, directs the affairs of the
Company. While it should be interpreted in the context of all applicable laws, regulations and listing
requirements, as well as in the context of the Company’s Notice of Articles and Articles, it is not
intended to establish any legally binding obligations.
Adopted: August 28, 2015
D-5