
10-K 1 f10k053115_10k.htm FORM 10-K ANNUAL REPORT Form 10-K Annual Report
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
X .
ANNUAL REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF
1934
For Fiscal Year Ended: May 31, 2015
OR
.
TRANSITION REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT
OF 1934
For the transition period from __________ to __________
Commission file number: 000-52782
HK EBUS CORPORATION
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Nevada
(State or other jurisdiction
of incorporation or
organization)
26-2113613
(IRS Employer
Identification No.)
800 E. Colorado Blvd., Suite 888
Pasadena, CA 91101
Pasadena, CA 91101
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip
Code)
Registrant’s telephone number: (626) 683-7330
Securities registered under Section 12(b) of the Act: None
Securities registered under Section 12(g) of the Act: Common Stock, par value $0.00001,
trading on the OTCQB of the OTC Markets Group Inc. under the symbol “HKEB”
Rambo Medical Group, Inc.
800 E. Colorado Blvd., Suite 888
Pasadena, CA 91101
(Former name or former address, if changed since
last report)
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the
Securities Act.
Yes      . No  X .
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of
the Exchange Act.
Yes      . No  X ..
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13
or 15(d) of the Exchange Act during the past 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant
was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90
days.
Yes  X . No      .
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate
Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405
of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).
Yes  X . No      .
1
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not
contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or
information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this
Form 10-K. .      .
Indicate  by  check  mark  whether  the  registrant  is  a  large  accelerated  filer,  an  accelerated  filer,  or  a
smaller reporting company. See the definitions of the “large accelerated filer,” “accelerate filer,” and
“smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. (Check one):
Large  accelerated
filer
Non-accelerated
filer
.
Accelerated filer
.
. (Do not check if a smaller reporting
company)
Smaller 
company
reporting
X .
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act).
Yes  X . No      .
State the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates
computed by reference to the price at which the common equity was last sold, or the average bid and
asked  price  of  such  common  equity,  as  of  the  last  business  day  of  the  registrant’s  most  recently
completed second fiscal quarter.
As of November 28, 2014, the aggregate market value of the common stock held by non-affiliates of
the Registrant, computed by reference to the price at which the Registrant’s common equity was last
sold, was approximately $58,943.
Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the registrant’s classes of common stock, as of
the latest practicable date.
As of September 14, 2015, there were 992,192 shares of the Registrant’s common stock, par value
$0.00001, issued and outstanding.
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
BUSINESS
Item Number and Caption
 
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
 
PART I
 
ITEM 1.
ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS
ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
ITEM 2.
ITEM 3.
ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
 
PART II
 
ITEM 5. MARKET
PROPERTIES
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
STOCKHOLDER  MATTERS  AND 
SECURITIES
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
Page
4
5
8
12
12
12
12
13
14
14
16
16
17
17
18
19
21
FOR  REGISTRANT’S  COMMON
EQUITY,  RELATED
ISSUER  PURCHASES  OF  EQUITY
ITEM 6.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
ITEM 7A QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK  
 
ITEM 8.
ITEM 9. CHANGES
IN  AND  DISAGREEMENTS  WITH  ACCOUNTANTS  ON
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
 
ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION
 
 
PART III
 
 
 
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
ITEM 12. SECURITY  OWNERSHIP  OF  CERTAIN  BENEFICIAL  OWNERS  AND
MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
ITEM 13. CERTAIN  RELATIONSHIPS  AND  RELATED  TRANSACTIONS,  AND
DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES
 
 
PART IV  
 
 
ITEM 15. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
21
21
22
23
24
3
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Except  for  historical  information,  this  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K  (this  “Annual  Report”)  contains
forward-looking  statements  within  the  meaning  of  Section  27A  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  as
amended (the “Securities Act”) and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
(the  “Exchange  Act”).  Such  forward-looking  statements  include,  among  others,  those  statements
including  the  words  “believes”,  “anticipates”,  “expects”,  “intends”,  “estimates”,  “plans”  and  words  of
similar import. Such forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and
other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements, or industry results, to be
materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such
forward-looking statements.
Forward-looking  statements  are  based  on  our  current  expectations  and  assumptions  regarding  our
business,  potential  target  businesses,  the  economy  and  other  future  conditions.  Because  forward-
looking statements relate to the future, by their nature, they are subject to inherent uncertainties, risks
and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict. Our actual results may differ materially from
those contemplated by the forward-looking statements. We caution you therefore that you should not
rely on any of these forward-looking statements as statements of historical fact or as guarantees or
assurances of future performance. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially
from  those  in  the  forward-looking  statements  include  changes  in  local,  regional,  national  or  global
political, economic, business, competitive, market (supply and demand) and regulatory conditions and
the following:
·
our status as a development stage company;
·
our selection of a prospective target business or asset;
·
our issuance of our capital shares or incurrence of debt to complete a business combination;
·
removal  of  our  securities  from  OTC  Markets  quotation  system,  or  the  ability  to  have  our  securities
quoted on OTC Markets or listed on a national exchange following our business combination;
·
our  ability  to  consummate  an  attractive  business  combination  due  to  our  limited  resources  and  the
significant competition for business combination opportunities;
·
conflicts of interest of our officers and directors;
·
potential current or future affiliations of our officers and directors with competing businesses;
·
our ability to obtain additional financing if necessary;
·
the control by our existing stockholders of a substantial interest in us;
·
our being deemed an investment company;
·
our dependence on our key personnel;
·
our dependence on a single company after our business combination;
·
business and market outlook;
·
our and our customers’ business strategies following the consummation of a business combination;
·
environmental, obtaining permits and other regulatory risks following the consummation of a business
combination;
·
foreign  currency  fluctuations  and  overall  political  risk  in  foreign  jurisdictions  following  the
consummation of a business combination;
·
operating and capital expenditures by us following the consummation of a business combination;
·
our competitive position following the consummation of a business combination;
·
outcomes of legal proceedings following the consummation of a business combination;
·
expected  results  of  operations  and/or  financial  position  following  the  consummation  of  a  business
combination;
·
future effective tax rates; and
·
compliance with applicable laws.
These risks and others described below under Item 1A. Risk Factors are not exhaustive.
Given  these  uncertainties,  readers  of  this  Annual  Report  and  investors  are  cautioned  not  to  place
undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. We disclaim any obligation to update any such
factors  or  to  publicly  announce  the  result  of  any  revisions  to  any  of  the  forward-looking  statements
contained herein to reflect future events or developments.
All references in this Annual Report to the “Company,” “HK eBus,” “we,” “us” or “our” are to HK eBus
Corporation.
4
PART I
ITEM 1.
BUSINESS
Business Development
We were incorporated in the State of Nevada on November 18, 2005, under the name Cobra Oil and
Gas  Company.  We  were  formed  to  engage  in  identifying,  investigating,  exploring,  and  where
determined advantageous, developing, mining, refining, and marketing oil and gas.
On October 14, 2009, we filed a Certificate of Amendment to our Articles of Incorporation to change our
name to Viper Resources, Inc., and increase our authorized capitalization from 200,000,000 shares,
consisting of 100,000,000 shares of common stock, $0.00001 par value and 100,000,000 shares of
preferred  stock,  $0.00001  par  value  to  400,000,000  shares,  consisting  of  300,000,000  shares  of
common stock $0.00001 par value and 100,000,000 shares of preferred stock, $0.00001 par value.
Since inception, we were in the exploration stage as an oil and gas exploration company. In May 2012,
our management determined to discontinue our oil and gas operations, and attempt to acquire other
assets or business operations that will maximize shareholder value. During the fiscal year ended May
31,  2015,  we  engaged  in  no  oil  and  gas  activities,  had  minimal  operations,  and  generated  no
revenues.
On August 5, 2013, we filed a Certificate of Amendment to our Articles of Incorporation to effect a 1-for-
100 reverse stock split of our common stock (the “Reverse Split”) and change our name to Rambo
Medical  Group,  Inc.  The  Certificate  of  Amendment  became  effective  on  August  9,  2013.  All  share
amounts referred in this Annual Report give effect to the Reverse Split including those applicable to
periods prior to the Reverse Split.
On August 31, 2015, we filed a Certificate of Amendment to our Articles of Incorporation to change our
name to HK eBus Corporation.
We are currently in negotiations to acquire or combine with a company which operates in the medical
diagnostics  industry  and  chose  our  new  name  in  furtherance  thereof.  No  definitive  agreement  has
been  reached  and  no  assurance  can  be  given  that  we  will  successfully  complete  and  close  the
proposed  acquisition  or  business  combination.  Should  we  fail  to  do  so,  we  may  seek  alternative
acquisitions with companies engaged in the medical diagnostics industry or unrelated industries.
Our Proposed Business Activities
We intend to seek, investigate and, if such investigation warrants, engage in a business combination
with  a  private  entity  whose  business  presents  an  opportunity  for  our  shareholders.  Our  objectives
discussed below are extremely general and are not intended to restrict our discretion. This discussion
of the proposed business is not meant to be restrictive of our virtually unlimited discretion to search for
and enter into potential business opportunities.
Except as discussed above under Business Development, we have no particular acquisition in mind
and have not entered into any negotiations regarding such an acquisition and neither our officers nor
any affiliate has engaged in any negotiations with any representative of any company regarding the
possibility of an acquisition or merger between our company and such other company. We have not
yet entered into any agreement, nor do we have any commitment or understanding to enter into or
become engaged in a transaction.
We  will  not  restrict  our  potential  candidate  target  companies  to  any  specific  business,  industry  or
geographical location and, thus, may acquire any type of business. Further, we may acquire a venture
which is in its preliminary or development stage, one which is already in operation, or in a more mature
stage  of  its  corporate  existence.  Accordingly,  business  opportunities  may  be  available  in  many
different  industries  and  at  various  stages  of  development,  all  of  which  will  make  the  task  of
comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities difficult and complex.
We  believe  that  there  are  numerous  firms  seeking  the  perceived  benefits  of  a  publicly  registered
corporation. These benefits are commonly thought to include the following:
·
the ability to use registered securities to acquire assets or businesses;
·
increased visibility in the marketplace;
·
ease of borrowing from financial institutions;
·
improved stock trading efficiency;
·
shareholder liquidity;
·
greater ease in subsequently raising capital;
·
compensation of key employees through stock options;
5
·
enhanced corporate image; and
·
a presence in the United States capital market.
We have not conducted market research and are not aware of statistical data to support the perceived
benefits of a merger or acquisition transaction for the owners of a business opportunity.
Target companies interested in a business combination with us may include the following:
·
a  company  for  whom  a  primary  purpose  of  becoming  public  is  the  use  of  its  securities  for  the
acquisition of other assets or businesses;
·
a company which is unable to find an underwriter of its securities or is unable to find an underwriter of
securities on terms acceptable to it;
·
a company which desires to become public with less dilution of its common stock than would occur
upon an underwriting;
·
a company which believes that it will be able to obtain investment capital on more favorable terms after
it has become public;
·
a foreign company which may wish an initial entry into the United States securities market;
·
a  special  situation  company,  such  as  a  company  seeking  a  public  market  to  satisfy  redemption
requirements under a qualified employee stock option plan;
·
a  company  seeking  one  or  more  of  the  other  mentioned  perceived  benefits  of  becoming  a  public
company.
We  anticipate  seeking  out  a  target  business  through  solicitation.  Such  solicitation  may  include
newspaper  or  magazine  advertisements,  mailings  and  other  distributions  to  law  firms,  accounting
firms, investment bankers, financial advisors and similar persons, the use of one or more websites and
similar  methods.  No  estimate  can  be  made  as  to  the  number  of  persons  who  will  be  contacted  or
solicited.
The  analysis  of  new  business  opportunities  will  be  undertaken  by  or  under  the  supervision  of  our
executive officers and directors, none of whom is a business analyst. Therefore, it is anticipated that
outside consultants or advisors may be utilized to assist us in the search for and analysis of qualified
target companies.
A decision to participate in a specific business opportunity will be made based upon our analysis of
the  quality  of  the  prospective  business  opportunity’s  management  and  personnel,  assets,  the
anticipated acceptability of products or marketing concepts, the merit of a proposed business plan, and
numerous other factors which are difficult, if not impossible, to analyze using any objective criteria. We
have unrestricted flexibility in seeking, analyzing and participating in potential business opportunities.
In our efforts to analyze potential acquisition targets, we will consider the following kinds of factors:
·
potential for growth, indicated by new technology, anticipated market expansion or new products;
·
competitive  position  as  compared  to  other  firms  of  similar  size  and  experience  within  the  industry
segment as well as within the industry as a whole;
·
strength and diversity of management, either in place or scheduled for recruitment;
·
capital requirements and anticipated availability of required funds, to be provided by our company or
from  operations,  through  the  sale  of  additional  securities,  through  joint  ventures  or  similar
arrangements or from other sources;
·
the cost of participation by our company as compared to the perceived tangible and intangible values
and potentials;
·
the extent to which the business opportunity can be advanced;
·
the accessibility of required management expertise, personnel, raw materials, services, professional
assistance and other required items; and
·
other relevant factors.
In  applying  the  foregoing  criteria,  no  one  of  which  will  be  controlling,  management  will  attempt  to
analyze all factors and circumstances and make a determination based upon reasonable investigative
measures and available data.
Potentially  available  business  opportunities  may  occur  in  many  different  industries,  and  at  various
stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of
such business opportunities extremely difficult and complex. Due to our limited capital available for
investigation, we may not discover or adequately evaluate adverse facts about the opportunity to be
acquired.
In implementing a structure for a particular business acquisition, we may become a party to a merger,
consolidation, reorganization, joint venture, or licensing agreement with another entity. We also may
acquire stock or assets of an existing business. On the consummation of a transaction it is probable
that  the  present  management  and  shareholders  of  the  company  will  no  longer  be  in  control  of  the
company. In addition, our officers and directors, as part of the terms of the acquisition transaction, likely
will be required to resign and be replaced by one or more new officers and directors without a vote of
our shareholders.
6
It is anticipated that any securities issued in any such reorganization would be issued in reliance upon
exemption from registration under applicable federal and state securities laws. In some circumstances,
however,  as  a  negotiated  element  of  a  transaction,  we  may  agree  to  register  all  or  a  part  of  such
securities  immediately  after  the  transaction  is  consummated  or  at  specified  times  thereafter.  The
issuance of substantial additional securities and their potential sale into any trading market which may
develop in our securities may have a depressive effect on that market.
While the actual terms of a transaction to which we may be a party cannot be predicted, it may be
expected that the parties to the business transaction will find it desirable to avoid the creation of a
taxable event and thereby structure the acquisition as a “tax-free” reorganization under Sections 351 or
368 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
With respect to any merger or acquisition, negotiations with target company management are expected
to focus on the percentage of our company which the target company shareholders would acquire in
exchange for all of their shareholdings in the target company. Depending upon, among other things,
the target company’s assets and liabilities, our shareholders will in all likelihood hold a substantially
lesser  percentage  ownership  interest  in  our  company  following  any  merger  or  acquisition.  The
percentage  ownership  may  be  subject  to  significant  reduction  in  the  event  we  acquire  a  target
company with substantial assets. Any merger or acquisition effected by us can be expected to have a
significant dilutive effect on the percentage of shares held by our shareholders at such time.
We will participate in a business opportunity only after the negotiation and execution of appropriate
agreements. Although the terms of such agreements cannot be predicted, generally such agreements
will require certain representations and warranties of the parties thereto, will specify certain events of
default, will detail the terms of closing and the conditions which must be satisfied by the parties prior to
and after such closing, will outline the manner of bearing costs, including costs associated with our
attorneys and accountants, and will include miscellaneous other terms.
We are presently subject to all of the reporting requirements included in the Exchange Act. Included in
these requirements is our duty to file audited financial statements as part of our Form 8-K to be filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) upon consummation of a merger or acquisition,
as well as our audited financial statements included in its annual report on Form 10-K. If such audited
financial statements are not available at closing, or within time parameters necessary to insure our
compliance with the requirements of the Exchange Act, or if the audited financial statements provided
do  not  conform  to  the  representations  made  by  the  target  company,  the  closing  documents  may
provide that the proposed transaction will be voidable at the discretion of our present management.
It is anticipated that the investigation of specific business opportunities and the negotiation, drafting
and  execution  of  relevant  agreements,  disclosure  documents  and  other  instruments  will  require
substantial management time and attention and substantial cost for accountants, attorneys and others.
If a decision is made not to participate in a specific business opportunity, the costs theretofore incurred
in the related investigation would not be recoverable. Furthermore, even if an agreement is reached for
the  participation  in  a  specific  business  opportunity,  the  failure  to  consummate  that  transaction  may
result in our loss of the related costs incurred.
Under SEC Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Act, we are deemed to be a “shell company,” because we
have  nominal  assets  (other  than  cash)  and  nominal  operations.  Management  does  not  intend  to
undertake any efforts to cause a market to develop in our securities, either debt or equity, until we have
successfully  concluded  a  business  combination.  We  intend  to  comply  with  the  periodic  reporting
requirements of the Exchange Act for so long as we are subject to such requirements.
Competition
We expect to encounter substantial competition in our efforts to acquire a business opportunity. The
primary competition is from other companies organized and funded for similar purposes, small venture
capital partnerships and corporations, small business investment companies and wealthy individuals.
In  view  of  our  limited  financial  resources  and  limited  management  availability,  we  may  be  at  a
competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors.
Employees
We  presently  have  no  employees  apart  from  our  management.  Each  of  our  officers  is  engaged  in
outside business activities and anticipates that he will devote to our business very limited time until the
acquisition of a successful business opportunity has been identified. We expect no significant changes
in the number of our employees other than such changes, if any, incident to a business combination.
We intend to hire additional management and other support personnel when we have reached a point
in  our  proposed  growth  that  would  allow  for  such  employment.  In  the  interim,  we  will  rely  upon
consultants to assist us in identifying and investigating acquisition opportunities.
7
Reports to Security Holders
We file annual, quarterly and current reports and other information with the SEC. Reports, statements
and  other  information  that  we  file  with  the  SEC  may  be  read  and/or  copied  at  the  SEC’s  public
reference room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at (202) 551-8090
for further information on the public reference room. These SEC filings are also available to the public
from  commercial  document  retrieval  services  and  at  the  Internet  site  maintained  by  the  SEC  at
http://www.sec.gov.
We currently do not have an Internet site.
ITEM 1A.
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the
following risk factors before deciding to invest in our company. If any of the following risks actually
occur, our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects for growth would likely
suffer. As a result, you may lose all or part of your investment in our company.
We are a development stage company and may never be able to effectuate our business plan.
Since inception, we were in the exploration stage as an oil and gas exploration company. In May 2012,
our management determined to discontinue our oil and gas operations, and attempt to acquire other
assets or business operations that will maximize shareholder value. We intend to seek, investigate
and,  if  such  investigation  warrants,  engage  in  a  business  combination  with  a  private  entity  whose
business presents an opportunity for our shareholders. As a development stage company we may not
be  able  to  successfully  effectuate  our  business  plan.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  we  will  ever
achieve any revenues or profitability. The revenue and income potential of our proposed business and
operations is unproven as the lack of operating history makes it difficult to evaluate the future prospects
of our business.
We require financing to acquire businesses and implement our business plan. We cannot be certain
that  we  will  be  successful  in  obtaining  financing  or  acquiring  businesses,  or  in  operating  those
acquired businesses in a profitable manner.
We expect losses in the future because we have no revenue.
As we have no current revenue, we are expecting losses over the next 12 months because we do not
yet have any revenues to offset the expenses associated with our business plan. We cannot guarantee
that we will ever be successful in generating revenues in the future. We recognize that if we are unable
to generate revenues, we will not be able to earn profits or continue operations. There is no history
upon which to base any assumption as to the likelihood that we will prove successful, and we can
provide  investors  with  no  assurance  that  we  will  generate  any  operating  revenues  or  ever  achieve
profitable operations.
If our business plans are not successful, we may not be able to continue operations as a going
concern and our stockholders may lose their entire investment in us.
Since inception, we have had no revenues and incurred a cumulative net loss of $7,180,891 through
May 31, 2015. This raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We will,
in  all  likelihood,  sustain  operating  expenses  without  corresponding  revenues,  at  least  until  the
consummation of a business combination. This may result in our incurring a net operating loss that will
increase continuously until we can consummate a business combination with a profitable business
opportunity.  We  cannot  be  certain  that  we  can  identify  a  suitable  business  opportunity  and
consummate a business combination. If we cannot continue as a going concern, our stockholders may
lose their entire investment in us.
We do not have any definitive agreements for a business combination or other transaction.
Although we are currently in negotiations to acquire or combine with a company which operates in the
medical  diagnostics  industry,  we  have  no  present  arrangement,  agreement  or  understanding  with
respect to engaging in a merger with, joint venture with or acquisition of, such company or any other
private or public entity. We cannot be certain that we will successfully identify and evaluate suitable
business  opportunities  or  that  we  will  conclude  a  business  combination.  Management  has  not
identified  any  particular  industry  or  specific  business  within  an  industry  for  evaluation.  We  cannot
guarantee that we will be able to negotiate a business combination on favorable terms, and there is
consequently a risk that future funds allocated to the purchase of our shares will not be invested in a
company with active business operations.
8
Future  success  is  highly  dependent  on  the  ability  of  management  to  locate  and  attract  a
suitable acquisition.
The  success  of  our  proposed  plan  of  operation  will  depend  to  a  great  extent  on  the  operations,
financial condition and management of any identified target company. While business combinations
with entities having established operating histories are preferred, there can be no assurance that we
will be successful in locating candidates meeting such criteria. The decision to enter into a business
combination  will  likely  be  made  without  detailed  feasibility  studies,  independent  analysis,  market
surveys or similar information which, if we had more funds available to it, would be desirable. In the
event  we  complete  a  business  combination  the  success  of  our  operations  will  be  dependent  upon
management  of  the  target  company  and  numerous  other  factors  beyond  our  control.  We  cannot  be
certain that we will identify a target company and consummate a business combination.
There is competition for those private companies suitable for a merger transaction of the type
contemplated by management.
We are in a highly competitive market for a small number of business opportunities which could reduce
the likelihood of consummating a successful business combination. We are and will continue to be an
insignificant participant in the business of seeking mergers with, joint ventures with and acquisitions of
small private and public entities. A large number of established and well-financed entities, including
small public companies and venture capital firms, are active in mergers and acquisitions of companies
that  may  be  desirable  target  candidates  for  us.  Nearly  all  these  entities  have  significantly  greater
financial resources, technical expertise and managerial capabilities than we do; consequently, we will
be  at  a  competitive  disadvantage  in  identifying  possible  business  opportunities  and  successfully
completing  a  business  combination.  These  competitive  factors  may  reduce  the  likelihood  of  our
identifying and consummating a successful business combination.
Management intends to devote only a limited amount of time to seeking a target company which
may adversely impact our ability to identify a suitable acquisition candidate.
While  seeking  a  business  combination,  management  anticipates  devoting  very  limited  time  to  our
affairs in total. None of our officers has entered into a written employment agreement with us and is not
expected to do so in the foreseeable future. This limited commitment may adversely impact our ability
to identify and consummate a successful business combination.
We are dependent on the services of our executive officers to obtain capital required to implement our
business  plan  and  for  identifying,  investigating,  negotiating  and  integrating  potential  acquisition
opportunities. The loss of services of senior management could have a substantial adverse effect on
us. The expansion of our business will be largely contingent on our ability to attract and retain highly
qualified  corporate  and  operations  level  management  team.  We  cannot  be  certain  that  we  will  find
suitable  management  personnel  or  will  have  financial  resources  to  attract  or  retain  such  people  if
found.
The time and cost of preparing a private company to become a public reporting company may
preclude  us  from  entering  into  a  merger  or  acquisition  with  the  most  attractive  private
companies.
Target  companies  that  fail  to  comply  with  SEC  reporting  requirements  may  delay  or  preclude
acquisition. Sections 13 and 15(d) of the Exchange Act require reporting companies to provide certain
information  about  significant  acquisitions,  including  audited  financial  statements  for  the  company
acquired.
The time and additional costs that may be incurred by some target entities to prepare these statements
may  significantly  delay  or  essentially  preclude  consummation  of  an  acquisition.  Otherwise  suitable
acquisition prospects that do not have or are unable to obtain the required audited statements may be
inappropriate for acquisition so long as the reporting requirements of the Exchange Act are applicable.
We  may  be  subject  to  further  government  regulation  which  would  adversely  affect  our
operations.
Although we are subject to the reporting requirements under the Exchange Act, management believes
we  will  not  be  subject  to  regulation  under  the  Investment  Company  Act  of  1940,  as  amended  (the
“Investment Company Act”), since we will not be engaged in the business of investing or trading in
securities.  If  we  engage  in  business  combinations  which  result  in  our  holding  passive  investment
interests in a number of entities, we could be subject to regulation under the Investment Company Act.
If  so,  we  would  be  required  to  register  as  an  investment  company  and  could  be  expected  to  incur
significant registration and compliance costs. We have obtained no formal determination from the SEC
as  to  our  status  under  the  Investment  Company  Act  and,  consequently,  violation  of  the  Investment
Company Act could subject us to material adverse consequences.
9
Any potential acquisition or merger with a foreign company may subject us to additional risks.
If we enter into a business combination with a foreign concern, we will be subject to risks inherent in
business  operations  outside  of  the  United  States.  These  risks  include,  for  example,  currency
fluctuations,  regulatory  problems,  punitive  tariffs,  unstable  local  tax  policies,  trade  embargoes,  risks
related  to  shipment  of  raw  materials  and  finished  goods  across  national  borders  and  cultural  and
language differences. Foreign economies may differ favorably or unfavorably from the United States
economy in growth of gross national product, rate of inflation, market development, rate of savings, and
capital investment, resource self-sufficiency and balance of payments positions, and in other respects.
We may need to raise additional capital to expand our operations and execute our business
plan. If our operations do not produce the necessary cash flow, or if we cannot obtain needed
funds, we may be forced to reduce or cease our activities with consequent loss to investors.
We have a need for cash in order to pay obligations currently due in a timely manner, and to finance
our business operations. Our continued operations will depend upon the sustainability of cash flow
from  our  ability  to  raise  additional  funds,  as  required,  through  equity  or  debt  financing.  There  is  no
assurance that we will be able to obtain additional funding when it is needed, or that such funding, if
available, will be obtainable on terms acceptable to us. If we cannot obtain needed funds, we may be
forced to reduce or cease our activities with consequent loss to investors. In addition, should we incur
significant presently unforeseen expenses or delays, we may not be able to accomplish our goals.
If we fail to develop and maintain an effective system of internal controls, we may not be able to
accurately  report  our  financial  results  or  prevent  fraud,  as  a  result,  current  and  potential
shareholders could lose confidence in our financial reports, which could harm our business
and the trading price of our common stock.
Effective  internal  controls  are  necessary  for  us  to  provide  reliable  financial  reports  and  effectively
prevent fraud. Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 requires us to evaluate and report on our
internal controls over financial reporting and have our independent registered public accounting firm
annually  attest  to  our  evaluation.  We  plan  to  prepare  for  compliance  with  Section  404  by
strengthening, assessing and testing our system of internal controls to provide the basis for our report.
The process of strengthening our internal controls and complying with Section 404 is expensive and
time consuming, and requires significant management attention, especially given that we have not yet
undertaken any efforts to comply with the requirements of Section 404. We cannot be certain that the
measures  we  will  undertake  will  ensure  that  we  will  maintain  adequate  controls  over  our  financial
processes and reporting in the future. Furthermore, if we are able to rapidly grow our business, the
internal controls that we will need will become more complex, and significantly more resources will be
required  to  ensure  our  internal  controls  remain  effective.  Failure  to  implement  required  controls,  or
difficulties encountered in their implementation, could harm our operating results or cause us to fail to
meet  our  reporting  obligations.  If  we  or  our  auditors  discover  a  material  weakness  in  our  internal
controls, the disclosure of that fact, even if the weakness is quickly remedied, could diminish investors’
confidence  in  our  financial  statements  and  harm  our  stock  price.  In  addition,  non-compliance  with
Section  404  could  subject  us  to  a  variety  of  administrative  sanctions,  including  the  suspension  of
trading, ineligibility for listing on the OTC Bulletin Board, one of the national securities exchanges, and
the inability of registered broker-dealers to make a market in our common stock, which would further
reduce our stock price.
Our principal stockholders, officers and director own a controlling interest in our voting stock,
which could result in decisions adverse to our general shareholders.
Our officers beneficially own in the aggregate approximately 50.4% of our outstanding common stock.
As a result, our management will have the ability to control substantially all matters submitted to our
stockholders for approval including: (a) election of our Board of Directors (the “Board”); (b) removal of
any  of  our  directors;  (c)  amendments  of  our  Certificate  of  Incorporation  or  bylaws;  (d)  adoption  of
measures  that  could  delay  or  prevent  a  change  in  control  or  impede  a  merger,  takeover  or  other
business combination involving us, or (e) other significant corporate transactions.
Our failure to adopt certain corporate governance procedures may prevent us from obtaining a
listing on a national securities exchange.
We  have  only  one  director,  and  he  is  not  “independent”  as  that  term  is  defined  in  the  rules  of  any
national securities exchange. As a result, we do not have an Audit or Compensation Committee. The
functions of those committees are conducted by the Board. Consequently, there is a potential conflict
of interest in Board decisions that may adversely affect our ability of our common stock to be listed on a
national securities exchange and, as a result, may adversely affect the liquidity of our common stock.
10
Trading in our shares of common stock is limited, and will not improve unless we increase our
sales, become profitable and secure more active market makers.
There  is  a  limited  trading  market  for  our  common  stock.  There  can  be  no  assurance  that  a  regular
trading market for our securities will continue to develop or that it will be sustained. The trading price of
our securities could be subject to wide fluctuations, in response to quarterly variations in our operating
results,  announcements  by  us  or  others,  developments  affecting  us,  and  other  events  or  factors.  In
addition,  the  stock  market  has  experienced  extreme  price  and  volume  fluctuations  in  recent  years.
These  fluctuations  have  had  a  substantial  effect  on  the  market  prices  for  many  companies,  often
unrelated to the operating performance of such companies, and may adversely affect the market prices
of the securities Such risks could have an adverse effect on the stock’s future liquidity.
We may, in the future, issue additional common shares, which would reduce investors’ percent
of ownership and may dilute our share value.
Our  Certificate  of  Incorporation,  as  amended,  authorizes  the  issuance  of  400,000,000  shares,
consisting of 300,000,000 shares of common stock, $0.00001 par value per share, and 100,000,000
shares of preferred stock, $0.00001 par value per share. The future issuance of stock, including shares
that may be issued upon conversion of shares of preferred stock, may result in substantial dilution in
the  percentage  of  our  common  stock  held  by  our  then  existing  shareholders.  We  may  value  any
common  stock  issued  in  the  future  on  an  arbitrary  basis.  The  issuance  of  common  stock  for  future
services  or  acquisitions  or  other  corporate  actions  may  have  the  effect  of  diluting  the  value  of  the
shares held by our investors, and might have an adverse effect on any trading market for our common
stock.
Our Board of Directors is authorized to issue up to 100,000,000 shares of preferred stock with
powers,  rights  and  preferences  designated  by  it  which  may  be  issued  to  create  voting
impediments or to frustrate persons seeking to effect a takeover or otherwise gain control of
our company, thereby preventing investors from realizing a premium over the market value of
their shares.
Our Board is authorized to issue up to 100,000,000 shares of preferred stock with powers, rights and
preferences designated by it. Shares of voting or convertible preferred stock could be issued, or rights
to purchase such shares could be issued, to create voting impediments or to frustrate persons seeking
to effect a takeover or otherwise gain control of our company. The ability of the Board to issue such
additional shares of preferred stock, with rights and preferences it deems advisable, could discourage
an attempt by a party to acquire control of our company by tender offer or other means. Such issuances
could therefore deprive stockholders of benefits that could result from such an attempt, such as the
realization  of  a  premium  over  the  market  price  for  their  shares  in  a  tender  offer  or  the  temporary
increase in market price that such an attempt could cause. Moreover, the issuance of such additional
shares  of  preferred  stock  to  persons  friendly  to  the  Board  could  make  it  more  difficult  to  remove
incumbent  managers  and  directors  from  office  even  if  such  change  were  to  be  favorable  to
stockholders generally.
Our common shares are subject to the “Penny Stock” Rules of the SEC and the trading market
in our securities is limited, which makes transactions in our stock cumbersome and may reduce
the value of an investment in our stock.
The SEC has adopted Rule 15g-9 which establishes the definition of a “penny stock,” for the purposes
relevant to us, as any equity security that has a market price of less than $5.00 per share or with an
exercise price of less than $5.00 per share, subject to certain exceptions. For any transaction involving
a penny stock, unless exempt, the rules require: (a) that a broker or dealer approve a person’s account
for  transactions  in  penny  stocks;  and  (b)  the  broker  or  dealer  receive  from  the  investor  a  written
agreement to the transaction, setting forth the identity and quantity of the penny stock to be purchased.
In order to approve a person’s account for transactions in penny stocks, the broker or dealer must: (a)
obtain  financial  information  and  investment  experience  objectives  of  the  person;  and  (b)  make  a
reasonable determination that the transactions in penny stocks are suitable for that person and the
person has sufficient knowledge and experience in financial matters to be capable of evaluating the
risks of transactions in penny stocks.
The broker or dealer must also deliver, prior to any transaction in a penny stock, a disclosure schedule
prescribed by the Commission relating to the penny stock market, which, in highlight form: (a) sets forth
the basis on which the broker or dealer made the suitability determination; and (b) that the broker or
dealer  received  a  signed,  written  agreement  from  the  investor  prior  to  the  transaction.  Generally,
brokers may be less willing to execute transactions in securities subject to the “penny stock” rules. This
may make it more difficult for investors to dispose of our Common shares and cause a decline in the
market value of our stock.
Disclosure also has to be made about the risks of investing in penny stocks in both public offerings
and  in  secondary  trading  and  about  the  commissions  payable  to  both  the  broker-dealer  and  the
registered representative, current quotations for the securities and the rights and remedies available to
an investor in cases of fraud in penny stock transactions. Finally, monthly statements have to be sent
disclosing  recent  price  information  for  the  penny  stock  held  in  the  account  and  information  on  the
limited market in penny stocks.
11
Because we do not intend to pay any cash dividends on our common stock, our stockholders
will not be able to receive a return on their shares unless they sell them.
We intend to retain any future earnings to finance the development and expansion of our business. We
do not anticipate paying any cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. Unless we
pay dividends, our stockholders will not be able to receive a return on their shares unless they sell
them. We cannot assure be certain that investors will be able to sell their shares when they desire to
do so.
ITEM 1B.
UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
Not Applicable.
ITEM 2.
PROPERTIES
Our executive offices are located at 800 East Colorado Boulevard, Suite 888, Pasadena, CA 91101
and cover an area of approximately 8,142 square feet. The use of these offices is supplied to us on a
rent free basis by an affiliated party.
ITEM 3.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
From  time  to  time  we  may  be  a  defendant  and  plaintiff  in  various  legal  proceedings  arising  in  the
normal  course  of  our  business.  We  are  currently  not  a  party  to  any  material  legal  proceedings  or
government actions, including any bankruptcy, receivership, or similar proceedings. In addition, we are
not aware of any threatened litigation or action that could affect our operations. Furthermore, as of the
date  of  this  Annual  Report,  our  management  is  not  aware  of  any  proceedings  to  which  any  of  our
directors, officers, or affiliates, or any associate of any such director, officer, affiliate, or security holder
is a party adverse to our company or has a material interest adverse to us.
ITEM 4.
MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not Applicable.
12
PART II
ITEM 5.
MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND
ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES
Market Information
As of September 15, 2015, our common stock is trading on the OTCQB of the OTC Markets Group Inc.
under the symbol “HKEB”.
Our common stock was quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board of the OTC Markets Group Inc. under the
symbol “CGCA.OB” from July 20, 2007 until November 6, 2009, from November 6, 2009 until August 9,
2013  under  the  symbol  “VPRS.OB”,  and  from  August  9,  2013  until  September  14,  2015  under  the
symbol RMGI.PK. The following table sets forth the high and low bid prices for our common stock for
the periods indicated as reported by the OTCQB. The bid quotations reported by the OTCQB reflect
inter-dealer prices, without retail mark-up, mark-down or commission, and may not represent actual
transactions.
Quarter Ended
May 31, 2015
February 28, 2015
November 30, 2014
August 31, 2014
May 31, 2014
February 28, 2014
November 30, 2013
August 31, 2013
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
High Bid
Low Bid
0.16
.25
.24
.20
.20
.52
1.00
1.50
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
.05
.12
.10
.09
.10
.19
.02
.01
Holders
As of September 14, 2015 there were approximately 11 record holders of our common stock.
Dividends
We have never declared any cash dividends with respect to our common stock. Future payment of
dividends is within the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend on our earnings, capital
requirements, financial condition and other relevant factors. Although there are no material restrictions
limiting, or that are likely to limit, our ability to pay dividends on our common stock, we presently intend
to retain future earnings, if any, for use in our business and have no present intention to pay cash
dividends on our common stock.
Recent Sales of Unregistered Securities
We sold no unregistered securities during the year ended May 31, 2015.
Restrictions on the Use of Rule 144 by Shell Companies or Former Shell Companies
Historically,  the  SEC  staff  has  taken  the  position  that  Rule  144  is  not  available  for  the  resale  of
securities initially issued by companies that are, or previously were, blank check companies like us, to
their promoters or affiliates despite technical compliance with the requirements of Rule 144. The SEC
has codified and expanded this position in recent amendments by prohibiting the use of Rule 144 for
resale  of  securities  issued  by  any  shell  companies  (other  than  business  combination  related  shell
companies)  or  any  issuer  that  has  been  at  any  time  previously  a  shell  company.  The  SEC  has
provided an exception to this prohibition, however, if the following conditions are met:
·
the issuer of the securities that was formerly a shell company has ceased to be a shell company;
·
the  issuer  of  the  securities  is  subject  to  the  reporting  requirements  of  Section  13  or  15(d)  of  the
Exchange Act;
·
the  issuer  of  the  securities  has  filed  all  Exchange  Act  reports  and  material  required  to  be  filed,  as
applicable, during the preceding 12 months (or such shorter period that the issuer was required to file
such reports and materials), other than Form 8-K reports; and
·
at least one year has elapsed from the time that the issuer filed current Form 10 type information with
the SEC reflecting its status as an entity that is not a shell company.
13
As a result, our existing stockholders will not be able to sell the shares pursuant to Rule 144 without
registration one year after we have completed our initial business combination assuming we meet the
four conditions of a former shell company stated above at such time.
Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer and Affiliated Purchasers
None.
Securities Authorized For Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
We do not presently maintain any equity compensation plans and have not maintained any such plans
since our inception.
ITEM 6.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
As a "smaller reporting company" as defined by Item 10 of Regulation S-K, the Company is not
required to provide information required by this Item.
ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S  DISCUSSION  AND  ANALYSIS  OF  FINANCIAL  CONDITION  AND  RESULTS
OF OPERATIONS
The  following  discussion  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  our  audited  consolidated  financial
statements  and  the  accompanying  notes  included  elsewhere  in  this Annual  Report.  The  following
discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results
could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of various
factors, including those discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report .
Historically, we were in the exploration stage as an oil and gas exploration company. In May 2012, our
management determined to discontinue our oil and gas operations, and attempt to acquire other assets
or business operations that will maximize shareholder value. During the fiscal year ended May 31,
2015, we engaged in no oil and gas activities, had minimal operations, and generated no revenues.
We are currently in negotiations to acquire or combine with a company which operates in the medical
diagnostics industry. No assurance can be given that we will successfully reach an agreement with
such  company  and  successfully  complete  and  close  the  proposed  acquisition  or  business
combination. No other specific assets or businesses have been definitively identified and there is no
certainty that any such assets or business will be identified or any transactions will be consummated.
Our plan is to seek a business venture in which to participate. The selection of a business opportunity
in  which  to  participate  is  complex  and  extremely  risky  and  will  be  made  by  management  in  the
exercise of its business judgment. There is no assurance that we will be able to identify and acquire
any business opportunity that will ultimately prove to be beneficial to us and our shareholders.
We  are  pursuing  our  search  for  a  business  opportunity  primarily  through  our  officers  and  directors,
although other sources, such as professional advisors, securities broker-dealers, venture capitalists,
members of the financial community, and others, may present unsolicited proposals. Our activities are
subject to several significant risks that arise primarily as a result of the fact that we have no specific
business  and  may  acquire  or  participate  in  a  business  opportunity  based  on  the  decision  of
management  which  will,  in  all  probability,  act  without  the  consent,  vote,  or  approval  of  our
shareholders. A description of the manner in which we will pursue the search for and participation in a
business venture is described above.
We expect that we will need to raise funds in order to effectuate our business plans. We intend initially
to  seek  additional  investors  to  purchase  our  stock  to  provide  us  with  working  capital  to  fund  our
operations. Thereafter, we will seek to establish or acquire businesses or assets with additional funds
raised either via the issuance of shares or debt. There can be no assurance that additional capital will
be available to us. We may seek to raise the required capital by other means. We may have to issue
debt  or  equity  or  enter  into  a  strategic  arrangement  with  a  third  party.  We  currently  have  no
agreements,  arrangements  or  understandings  with  any  person  to  obtain  funds  through  bank  loans,
lines of credit or any other sources. Since we have no such arrangements or plans currently in effect,
our  inability  to  raise  funds  will  have  a  severe  negative  impact  on  our  ability  to  remain  a  viable
company. In pursuing the foregoing goals, we may seek to expand or change the composition of the
Board or make changes to our current capital structure, including issuing additional shares or debt and
adopting a stock option plan.
We  do  not  expect  to  generate  any  revenues  over  the  next  twelve  months.  Our  principal  business
objective for the next 12 months will be to seek, investigate and, if such investigation warrants, engage
in  a  business  combination  with  a  private  entity  whose  business  presents  an  opportunity  for  our
shareholders.
14
During the next 12 months we anticipate incurring costs related to filing of Exchange Act reports, and
costs relating to consummating an acquisition. We believe we will be able to meet these costs through
use of funds in our treasury and additional amounts, as necessary, to be loaned by or invested in us by
our  stockholders,  management  or  other  investors.  We  have  no  specific  plans,  understandings  or
agreements with respect to the raising of such funds, and we may seek to raise the required capital by
the issuance of equity or debt securities or by other means. Since we have no such arrangements or
plans currently in effect, our inability to raise funds for the consummation of an acquisition may have a
severe  negative  impact  on  our  ability  to  become  a  viable  company.  We  estimate  that  the  level  of
working capital needed for these general and administrative costs for the next twelve months will be
approximately $150,000. However, this estimate is subject to change, depending on the number of
transactions in which we ultimately become involved. In addition, funding will be required for follow-on
development of working interest obligations of any successful exploration prospects.
In its report dated September 15, 2015, our auditor, Dave Banerjee CPA, a Professional Accountancy
Corporation, expressed an opinion that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a
going  concern.  Our  financial  statements  do  not  include  any  adjustments  that  may  result  from  the
outcome of this uncertainty. We have generated no operating revenues since our inception. We had an
accumulated  deficit  of  $7,180,891  as  of  May  31,  2015.  Our  continuation  as  a  going  concern  is
dependent upon future events, including our ability to raise additional capital and to generate positive
cash flows.
Presently  we  have  no  employees  except  for  our  four  executive  officers  consisting  of  Dianwen  Ju,
Jimmy  Wang,  Xiao  Chen  and  Guofeng  Xu.  Changes  in  the  number  of  employees  during  the  next
twelve months will be a function of the level of business activity.
We intend to contract out certain technical and administrative functions on an as-needed basis in order
to conduct our operating activities. Our management team will select and hire these contractors and
manage and evaluate their work performance.
Results of Operations
Revenues
We have had no revenues since our inception.
Expenses
We  had  operating  expenses  of  $33,735  and  $41,610  for  the  years  ended  May  31,  2015  and  2014
respectively.  The  decrease  in  operating  expenses  during  the  year  ended  May  31,  2015  was
attributable to a decrease in general and administrative expenses.
Net Loss
We  incurred  net  losses  for  the  years  ended  May  31,  2015  and  2014  of  $33,735  and  $41,610,
respectively.  The  decrease  in  net  loss  was  directly  attributable  to  a  decrease  in  general  and
administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At May 31, 2015 we had a working capital deficit of $136,679 compared to a working capital deficit of
$102,943 at May 31, 2014. Current liabilities remained the same at $109,650 at May 31, 2015 from
May 31, 2014. Current assets decreased from $6,707 at May 31, 2014 to $2,972 at May 31, 2015 due
to a decrease in cash and cash equivalents.
We will attempt to raise capital for our current operational needs through loans from related parties,
debt financing, equity financing or a combination of financing options. However, there are no existing
understandings,  commitments  or  agreements  for  extension  of  outstanding  notes  or  an  infusion  of
capital,  and  there  are  no  assurances  to  that  effect.  Moreover,  our  need  for  capital  may  change
dramatically if and during that period, we acquire an interest in a business opportunity. There can be
no  assurances  that  any  additional  financings  will  be  available  to  us  on  satisfactory  terms  and
conditions,  if  at  all.  Unless  we  can  obtain  additional  financing,  our  ability  to  continue  as  a  going
concern is doubtful.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Cash and Cash Equivalents
We  consider  all  highly  liquid  investments  with  an  original  maturity  of  three  months  or  less  as  cash
equivalents.
15
Use of Estimates
The  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and
liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and
the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ
from those estimates.
Income Tax
We account for income taxes under Accounting Standard Codification 740 (“ASC 740”). Under ASC
740 deferred taxes are provided on a liability method whereby deferred tax assets are recognized for
deductible  temporary  differences  and  operating  loss  carryforwards  and  deferred  tax  liabilities  are
recognized for taxable temporary differences. Temporary differences are the differences between the
reported amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a
valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or
all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the
effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of enactment.
Net Income (Loss) per share
The  net  income  (loss)  per  share  is  computed  by  dividing  the  net  income  (loss)  by  the  weighted
average  number  of  shares  of  common  outstanding.  Warrants,  stock  options,  and  common  stock
issuable upon the conversion of our preferred stock (if any), are not included in the computation if the
effect would be anti-dilutive and would increase the earnings or decrease loss per share.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized on an accrual basis as earned under contract terms. We have had no revenue
to date.
Financial Instruments
The carrying value of our financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, as reported in
our balance sheet, approximates fair value.
Stock Based Compensation
We  account  for  employee  and  non-employee  stock  awards  under  ASC  718,  whereby  equity
instruments issued to employees for services are recorded based on the fair value of the instrument
issued and those issued to non-employees are recorded based on the fair value of the consideration
received or the fair value of the equity instrument, whichever is more reliably measurable.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 to the Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report, which discusses
new accounting pronouncements we adopted.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Contractual Obligations
Not applicable.
ITEM 7A.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
As  a  "smaller  reporting  company"  as  defined  by  Item  10  of  Regulation  S-K,  the  Company  is  not
required to provide information required by this Item.
ITEM 8.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
See the Financial Statements and notes thereto commencing on page F-1.
16
ITEM 9.
CHANGES 
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
IN  AND  DISAGREEMENTS  WITH  ACCOUNTANTS  ON  ACCOUNTING  AND
(a) Previous independent registered public accounting firm
Effective as of June 5, 2015, the Company notified Anton & Chia, LLP (“Anton”) that it was dismissing
Anton as its independent registered public accounting firm.
The report of Anton on the financial statements of the Company for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2014
did not contain any adverse opinion or disclaimer of opinion and were not qualified or modified as to
uncertainty, audit scope or accounting principles.
During the fiscal years ended May 31, 2014 and the subsequent interim periods through June 5, 2015,
there  were  no:  (i)  disagreements  with  Anton  on  any  matter  of  accounting  principles  or  practices,
financial statement disclosure or auditing scope or procedure, which disagreements, if not resolved to
the  satisfaction  of  Anton,  would  have  caused  them  to  make  reference  to  the  subject  matter  of  the
disagreement(s)  in  connection  with  its  reports  on  the  financial  statements  for  such  years;  or  (ii)
“reportable events,” as that term is described in Item 304(a)(1)(v) of Regulation S-K.
The Company provided Anton with a copy of its Current Report on Form 8-K, filed on June 11, 2015,
and  requested  that  Anton  furnish  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission
stating whether or not it agreed with the above statements and, if not, stating the respects in which it
did not agree. A copy of such letter, dated June 9, 2015, indicating that Anton is in agreement with
such disclosures, is filed as Exhibit 16.1 to such Form 8-K and is incorporated by reference herein.
(b) New independent registered public accounting firm
Effective as of June 5, 2015, the Company engaged Dave Banerjee CPA, a Professional Accountancy
Corporation (“Banerjee”) as the Registrant's independent registered public accountant.  In deciding to
select  Banerjee,  the  Board  of  Directors  reviewed  auditor  independence  issues  and  existing
commercial relationships with Banerjee and concluded that Banerjee has no commercial relationship
with the Company that would impair its independence for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015.  During
the Company’s two most recent fiscal years and the subsequent interim period through June 5, 2015,
the Company did not consult with Banerjee with respect to (1) the application of accounting principles
to  a  specific  transaction,  (2)  the  type  of  audit  opinion  that  might  be  rendered  on  the  Company’s
financial statements, (3) written or oral advice provided that would be an important factor considered by
the Company in reaching a decision as to an accounting, auditing or financial reporting issue, or (4)
any matter that was the subject of a disagreement between the Company and its predecessor auditor
as described in Item 304(a)(1)(iv) or a reportable event as described in Item 304(a)(1)(v) of Regulation
S-K.
The  foregoing  text  of  this  Item  9(b)  is  qualified  in  its  entirety  by  the  fully  executed  Engagement
Agreement between the Company and Banerjee, attached as Exhibit 16.2 of the Company’s Current
Report  on  Form  8-K,  filed  on  June  11,  2015.    The  terms  of  the  Engagement  Agreement  are
incorporated by reference herein.
ITEM 9A.
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Evaluation of Our Disclosure Controls and Internal Controls
We maintain disclosure controls and procedures that are designed to ensure that material information
required to be disclosed in our periodic reports filed under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed,
summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms and to ensure
that  such  information  is  accumulated  and  communicated  to  our  management,  including  our  chief
executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required
disclosure.  During  the  fiscal  year  ended  May  31,  2015  we  carried  out  an  evaluation,  under  the
supervision and with the participation of our management, including our principal executive officer and
our principal financial officer, of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls
and  procedures,  as  defined  in  Rules  13(a)-15(e)  and  15d-15(e)  under  the  1934  Act.  Based  on  this
evaluation, management concluded that, as of May 31, 2015, our disclosure controls and procedures
were effective.
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Our  management  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over
financial  reporting.  Our  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  is  a  process  designed  to  provide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements  for  external  reporting  purposes  in  accordance  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting
principles.
17
Our internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to
the  maintenance  of  records  that,  in  reasonable  detail,  accurately  and  fairly  reflect  transactions  and
dispositions of assets; (ii) provide reasonable assurances that transactions are recorded as necessary
to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting
principles, and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorizations
of  our  management  and  directors;  and  (iii)  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of our assets that could have a material
effect  on  our  financial  statements.  Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
Management assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of May 31,
2014 based on the framework established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the
Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway  Commission  (COSO).  Based  on  that
assessment,  management  concluded  that,  as  of  May  31,  2014,  our  internal  control  over  financial
reporting was effective based on the criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework.
Limitations on Effectiveness of Controls and Procedures
Our  management,  including  our  Chief  Executive  Officer  (principal  executive  officer)  and  Chief
Financial  Officer  (principal  financial  officer),  does  not  expect  that  our  disclosure  controls  and
procedures or our internal controls will prevent all errors and all fraud. A control system, no matter how
well conceived and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the objectives
of the control system are met. Our control systems are designed to provide such reasonable assurance
of achieving their objectives. Further, the design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are
resource constraints and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. Because of
the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance
that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, within our company have been detected. These
inherent limitations include, but are not limited to, the realities that judgments in decision-making can
be faulty and that breakdowns can occur because of simple error or mistake. Additionally, controls can
be circumvented by the individual acts of some persons, by collusion of two or more people, or by
management override of the control. The design of any system of controls also is based in part upon
certain  assumptions  about  the  likelihood  of  future  events  and  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  any
design  will  succeed  in  achieving  its  stated  goals  under  all  potential  future  conditions.  Over  time,
controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or the degree of compliance with
the  policies  or  procedures  may  deteriorate.  Because  of  the  inherent  limitations  in  a  cost-effective
control system, misstatements due to error or fraud may occur and not be detected.
Changes in Internal Controls
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015, there have been no changes in our internal control over
financial reporting that have materially affected or are reasonably likely to materially affect our internal
controls over financial reporting.
ITEM 9B.
OTHER INFORMATION
None.
18
PART III
ITEM 10.
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Executive Officers, Directors and Key Employees
Directors serve until the next annual meeting of the stockholders, until their successors are elected or
appointed  and  qualified,  or  until  their  prior  resignation  or  removal.  Officers  serve  for  such  terms  as
determined  by  our  Board.  Each  officer  holds  office  until  such  officer’s  successor  is  elected  or
appointed and qualified or until such officer’s earlier resignation or removal. No family relationships
exist between any of our present directors and officers.
The following table sets forth certain information, as of May 31, 2015, with respect to our directors and
executive officers.
Name
Positions Held
Dianwen Ju   President and Chief Executive Officer,
Sole Director
Jimmy Wang   Treasurer
Xiao Chen
Guofeng Xu   Secretary
Chief Financial Officer
Age
46
48
42
35
Date of Election
or Appointment
as Director
April 25, 2011
April 25, 2011
April 25, 2011
April 25, 2011
The following is a brief account of the business experience during the past five years or more of each
of our directors and executive officers.
Dianwen Ju, Ph.D. has served as our President, Chief Executive Officer and sole Director since April
25, 2011. He received a Ph.D. degree in Immunology in 1999, a Master’s degree in Pharmacology in
1994, and a Bachelor’s degree in Pharmacy in 1991 in Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
China. He joined Shanghai MediPharm Biotech in 2002 as a director of R&D and he is currently CEO
and  Chairman  of  MediPharm  Biotech  Pharmaceuticals  Co.  Ltd  (Bermuda).  He  is  also  a  Research
Professor in Fudan University, Shanghai, China. He has 20 years of R&D experiences in biological
drugs and new therapies for the treatment of malignant cancer. He has more than 40 publications in
peer-reviewed international journals including Journal of Clinical Oncology, Cancer Research, Gene
Therapy,  International  Journal  of  Oncology,  Cancer  Gene  Therapy,  Cancer  Immunology  &
Immunotherapy, et al. He has invented 15 biotechnologies of which 8 are patented and the remaining
7 are pending. Before joining MediPharm in 2002, Dr. Ju had been an assistant director and a senior
scientist  in  Shanghai  Brilliance  Biotech  Institute  and  a  lecturer  in  Immunology  in  Second  Military
Medical  University  for  6  years.  Mr.  Ju  brings  to  our  Board  a  wealth  of  experience  derived  from  his
services in various businesses. He has demonstrated strong acumen and ability to exercise sound
judgment and has a reputation for integrity, honesty and adherence to ethical standards.
Jimmy Wang has served as our Treasurer since April 25, 2011. He is the Chief Financial Officer of
American Compass, Inc., where he has served, initially as Chief Accounting Officer, since 2003. Prior
to joining American Compass, Inc., he served as an accounting manager for Planned Parenthood of
the Greater Miami Valley from 2000 to 2003. He has served as a Director for Nevada Gold Holdings,
Inc. since January 25, 2011. He is a graduate of the City University of New York, where he majored in
both Accounting & Information Systems and Economics.
Xiao Chen has served as our Chief Financial Officer since April 25, 2011. He worked at Brilliance
China Group from 1994 to 2001. From 2005 to 2008, he worked as director of finance at Shanghai
Medipharm Co. Ltd. Since 2008, Mr. Chen has been working at Hybrid Kinetic Group Limited as vice
general  manager  of  investments  in  China.  Mr.  Chen  holds  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  investment
management from Shanghai Finance University.
Guofeng Xu has served as our Secretary since November 21, 2011. He performed Ph.D. Research
involving the identification of new metalloprotease genes at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville,
Virginia from August 2004 until December 2011. From August 2001 until June 2004 he performed M.S.
Research in Shanghai, China involving the anti-cancer drug Onconase. Mr. Xu received a Ph.D. in
Cell Biology from the University of Virginia in 2011 and a B.D. in Biological Science and Technologies
from Zhejiang University in Hangzhou China in 2001.
19
Board of Directors; Board Committees
Our  directors  do  not  receive  any  remuneration  for  acting  as  such.  Our  directors  may  however  be
reimbursed their expenses, if any, for attendance at meetings of the Board. Our Board may designate
from  among  its  members  an  executive  committee  and  one  or  more  other  committees.  No  such
committees presently exist, due to the fact that we presently have only one director. Accordingly, we do
not have an audit committee or an audit committee financial expert. We are presently not required to
have an audit committee financial expert and do not believe we otherwise need one at this time due to
our  limited  business  operations.  Similarly  we  do  not  have  a  nominating  committee  or  a  committee
performing similar functions. Our sole director, Dianwen Ju, serves the functions of an audit committee
and a nominating committee. We have not implemented procedures by which our security holders may
recommend board nominees to us but expect to do so in the future, when and if we engage in material
business operations.
Corporate Governance
Leadership Structure
Our Board has one member, Dianwen Ju. Accordingly, we have not designated a chairman.
We  are  a  small,  development  stage  company  which  has  yet  to  achieve  operating  revenues.  We
believe that our present management structure is appropriate for a company of our size and state of
development.
Our  Board  is  actively  involved  in  our  risk  oversight  function  and  collectively  undertakes  our  risk
oversight function. This review of our risk tolerances includes, but is not limited to, financial, legal and
operational risks and other risks concerning our reputation and ethical standards.
Given our size, we do not have a nominating committee or a diversity policy. Our Board monitors and
assesses the need for and qualifications of additional directors. We may adopt a diversity policy in the
future in connection with our anticipated growth.
Compliance with Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act
Section  16(a)  of  the  Exchange  Act,  as  amended,  requires  that  our  directors,  executive  officers  and
persons  who  own  more  than  10%  of  a  class  of  our  equity  securities  that  are  registered  under  the
Exchange Act to file with the SEC initial reports of ownership and reports of changes of ownership of
such registered securities.
To our knowledge, based solely on a review of such materials as are required by the SEC, none of our
officers,  directors  or  beneficial  holders  of  more  than  10%  of  our  issued  and  outstanding  shares  of
common stock failed to timely file with the SEC any form or report required to be so filed pursuant to
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act, during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2015.
Code of Ethics
In 2007, we adopted a Code of Ethics that applies to our principal executive officer, principal financial
officer, principal accounting officer or controller, persons performing similar functions as well as to our
directors and employees. A copy of our Code of Ethics will be provided to any person requesting same
without charge. To request a copy of our Code of Ethics please make written request to our President
c/o HK eBus Corporation at 800 East Colorado Boulevard, Suite 888, Pasadena, CA 91101.
20
ITEM 11.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
The following table sets forth, for the last two fiscal years, the compensation earned by or paid to (i)
each individual who served as our principal executive officer during the last fiscal year, and (ii) our two
most  highly  compensated  executive  officers,  other  than  our  principal  executive  officer,  who  were
serving as our executive officers at the end of the last fiscal year. We refer to these individuals in the
discussion below as our “named executive officers”.
Summary Compensation Table
Stock
Awards
Option
Awards
Bonus
Salary
($)
0
0
($)
0
0
($)
0
0
($)
0
0
Name
and
2015
Principal
Position  Year 
 
  
Dianwen
 
Ju,
President
and Chief
Executive
2014
Non-Equity
Incentive Plan
Compensation
($)
0
0
Non-qualified
Deferred
Compensation
All Other
Earnings
Compensation
Total
($)
0
0
($)
0
0
($)
0
0
2015
2014
  
 2015
2014
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Officer
 
Jimmy
Wang,
Treasurer
 
Xiao
Chen,
Chief
Financial
Officer
We have not issued any stock options or maintained any stock option or other incentive plans since
our inception. We have no plans in place and have never maintained any plans that provide for the
payment of retirement benefits or benefits that will be paid primarily following retirement including, but
not  limited  to,  tax  qualified  deferred  benefit  plans,  supplemental  executive  retirement  plans,  tax-
qualified deferred contribution plans and nonqualified deferred contribution plans. Similarly, we have
no  contracts,  agreements,  plans  or  arrangements,  whether  written  or  unwritten,  that  provide  for
payments to the named executive officers or any other persons following, or in connection with the
resignation, retirement or other termination of a named executive officer, or a change in control of us or
a change in a named executive officer’s responsibilities following a change in control.
Employment Agreements
None of our current officers or directors has an employment agreement with us.
ITEM 12.
SECURITY  OWNERSHIP  OF  CERTAIN  BENEFICIAL  OWNERS  AND  MANAGEMENT  AND
RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
The following table sets forth information with respect to the beneficial ownership of our common stock
known by us as of September 14, 2015 by:
·
each person or entity known by us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of our common stock;
·
each of our directors;
·
each of our executive officers; and
·
all of our directors and executive officers as a group.
The  percentages  in  the  table  have  been  calculated  on  the  basis  of  treating  as  outstanding  for  a
particular  person,  all  shares  of  our  common  stock  outstanding  on  such  date  and  all  shares  of  our
common stock issuable to such holder in the event of exercise of outstanding options, warrants, rights
or conversion privileges owned by such person at said date which are exercisable within 60 days of
September 14, 2015. Except as otherwise indicated, the persons listed below have sole voting and
investment power with respect to all shares of our common stock owned by them, except to the extent
such power may be shared with a spouse.
21
Amount and Nature
Percentage
Name of Beneficial
Owner
Title of Class
Chimerica Capital, LLC
Common Stock,
800 East Colorado Blvd,
$0.00001 par value
of Beneficial
Ownership(1)
350,000 shares,
direct(3)
Suite 888
Pasadena, CA 91101
 
Baden Energy Group Ltd.
Rue Du Rhone 14
1204 Geneva, Switzerland
Dianwen Ju
800 East Colorado Blvd,
Suite 888
Pasadena, CA 91101
Common Stock,
$0.00001 par value
65,256 shares, direct
50,000 shares, direct
Common Stock,
$0.00001 par value
of
Class(2)
35.3%
6.58%
5.04%
Jimmy Wang
Common Stock,
400,000 shares: 50,000
40.36%
800 East Colorado Blvd,
Suite 888
Pasadena, CA 91101
 
Xiao Chen
800 East Colorado Blvd,
Suite 888
Pasadena, CA 91101
 
Goufeng Xu
800 East Colorado Blvd,
Suite 888
Common Stock,
$0.00001 par value
Common Stock,
$0.00001 par value
5.04%
–
50.44%
50,000 shares owned
–
500,000 shares(3)
Jimmy Wang
Common Stock,
400,000 shares: 50,000
40.36%
$0.00001 par value
direct and 350,000
indirect(3)
Pasadena, CA 91101
 
All directors and executive
officers as a group (4
persons)
Common Stock,
$0.00001 par value
(1)
As used herein, the term beneficial ownership with respect to a security is defined by Rule 13d-3 under
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 as consisting of sole or shared voting power (including the power
to vote or direct the vote) and/or sole or shared investment power (including the power to dispose or
direct the disposition of) with respect to the security through any contract, arrangement, understanding,
relationship or otherwise, including a right to acquire such power(s) during the next 60 days. Unless
otherwise noted, beneficial ownership consists of sole ownership, voting and investment rights.
(2)
There were 992,192 shares of common stock issued and outstanding on September 14, 2015.
(3)
Jimmy  Wang  is  deemed  to  have  voting  and  investment  power  over  the  shares  beneficially  owned
by Chimerica Capital, LLC.
Changes in Control
Not Applicable.
Securities Authorized for Issuance Under Equity Compensation Plans
We do not presently maintain any equity compensation plans and have not maintained any such plans
since our inception.
ITEM 13.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR
INDEPENDENCE
Director Independence
Our sole present director is not “independent” as that term is defined by the National Association of
Securities Dealers Automated Quotations (“NASDAQ”) as our director also serves as our President
and Chief Executive Officer.
22
ITEM 14.
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
Audit Fees.
The  aggregate  fees  billed  to  us  by  our  principal  accountant  for  services  rendered  during  the  fiscal
years ended May 31, 2015 and 2014 are set forth in the table below:
Fiscal year
ended May
Fee Category
Audit fees(1)
  $
Audit-related fees(2)   $
Tax fees(3)
  $
All other fees(4)
  $
31, 2015
6,250  $
0  $
0  $
0  $
Fiscal year
ended May
31, 2014
2,750
0
0
0
Total fees
$
6,250  $
2,750
(1)
Audit  fees  consist  of  fees  incurred  for  professional  services  rendered  for  the  audit  of  consolidated
financial  statements,  for  reviews  of  our  interim  consolidated  financial  statements  included  in  our
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and for services that are normally provided in connection with statutory
or regulatory filings or engagements.
(2)
Audit-related  fees  consist  of  fees  billed  for  professional  services  that  are  reasonably  related  to  the
performance of the audit or review of our consolidated financial statements, but are not reported under
“Audit fees.”
(3)
Tax fees consist of fees billed for professional services relating to tax compliance, tax planning, and
tax advice.
(4)
All other fees consist of fees billed for all other services.
Audit Committee’s Pre-Approval Practice.
Prior to our engagement of our independent auditor, such engagement was approved by our Board.
The services provided under this engagement may include audit services, audit-related services, tax
services  and  other  services.  Pre-approval  is  generally  provided  for  up  to  one  year  and  any  pre-
approval is detailed as to the particular service or category of services and is generally subject to a
specific budget. Pursuant our requirements, the independent auditors and management are required to
report  to  our  board  of  directors  at  least  quarterly  regarding  the  extent  of  services  provided  by  the
independent auditors in accordance with this pre-approval, and the fees for the services performed to
date.  Our  Board  of  directors  may  also  pre-approve  particular  services  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  All
audit-related fees, tax fees and other fees incurred by us for the years ended May 31, 2015 and 2014
were approved by our Board.
23
PART IV
ITEM 15.
EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
Financial Statements
 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
Balance Sheets as of May 31, 2015 and 2014
 
Statements of Operations for the years ended May 31, 2015 and 2014 and for the period
from November 18, 2005 (Inception) through May 31, 2015
 
 
Statements of Changes in Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit) for the period from November 18,
 
2005 (Inception) through May 31, 2015
 
Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended May 31, 2015 and 2014 and for the period
from November 18, 2005 (Inception) through May 31, 2015
 
Notes to the Financial Statements
Page
F-2
F-4
F-5
F-6
F-7
F-8
Financial Statement Schedules
All  financial  statement  schedules  are  omitted  because  they  are  not  applicable  or  the  required
information is shown in the financial statements or notes thereto.
Exhibits
In reviewing the agreements included as exhibits to this Annual Report, please remember that they are
included to provide investors with information regarding their terms and are not intended to provide any
other factual or disclosure information about our company or the other parties to the agreements. The
agreements  may  contain  representations  and  warranties  by  each  of  the  parties  to  the  applicable
agreement. These representations and warranties have been made solely for the benefit of the parties
to the applicable agreement and:
·
should not in all instances be treated as categorical statements of fact, but rather as a way of allocating
the risk to one of the parties if those statements prove to be inaccurate;
·
have been qualified by disclosures that were made to the other party in connection with the negotiation
of the applicable agreement, which disclosures are not necessarily reflected in the agreement;
·
may apply standards of materiality in a way that is different from what may be viewed as material to
existing and potential investors; and
·
were made only as of the date of the applicable agreement or such other date or dates as may be
specified in the agreement and are subject to more recent developments.
Accordingly, these representations and warranties may not describe the actual state of affairs as of the
date they were made or at any other time. Additional information about the Company may be found
elsewhere  in  this  Annual  Report  and  our  other  public  filings,  which  are  available  without  charge
through the SEC’s website at http://www.sec.gov.
24
The following exhibits are included as part of this report:
Exhibit
Description
No.
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4*
3.5
4.1
Articles of Incorporation of the Registrant, as filed with the Nevada Secretary of State on
November 18, 2005 (1)
Certificate of Amendment filed with the Nevada Secretary of State on October 14, 2009
(2)
Certificate of Amendment filed with the Nevada Secretary of State on August 5, 2013 (15)
 
  Certificate of Amendment filed with the Nevada Secretary of State on August 31, 2015
 
  Bylaws of the Registrant (1)
 
  Warrant dated August 12, 2009 exercisable for 319,419 shares issued to Baden Energy
Group Ltd. (3)
Warrant  dated  September  22,  2009  exercisable  for  60,000  shares  issued  to  Baden
4.2
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.15
14.1
Energy Group Ltd. (4)
Assignment of Quit Claim of Oil and Gas Leases, dated May 15, 2006 (1)
 
  Joint Venture Agreement with DNR Oil & Gas Inc., dated May 15, 2006 (1)
 
  Joint Venture Agreement with Colorado Oil & Gas, Inc., dated May 15, 2006 (1)
 
  Well  Service  and  Operating  Agreement  dated  May  11,  2007  between  Registrant  and
DNR Oil & Gas Company (5)
Memorandum of Intent, dated May 22, 2008 between Registrant and Coastal Petroleum
Company (6)
Assignment  of  Farmout  Interest  dated  June  16,  2008  between  Registrant  and  West
Canyon Energy Corp. (7)
Formal  Agreement  dated  June  18,  2008  between  Registrant  and  Coastal  Petroleum
Corp. (7)
Share Issuance Agreement dated July 6, 2009 between Registrant and Baden Energy
Group Ltd. (9)
Purchase Agreement dated July 25, 2009 between Registrant and Enercor, Inc. (10)
 
  Purchase Agreement dated August 5, 2009 between Registrant and Enercor, Inc. (11)
 
  Purchase Agreement dated August 12, 2009 between Registrant and Enercor, Inc. (12)
 
  July 6, 2009 Advisory Board Agreement with Warren Dillard (13)
Investment Agreement between Registrant and Dutchess Opportunity Fund II, LP, dated
January 28, 2010 (2)
Registration Rights Agreement between Registrant and Dutchess Opportunity Fund II,
LP, dated January 28, 2010 (2)
Settlement Agreement, effective September 8, 2009 between Registrant and Cobra Oil &
Gas Corporation (14)
Code of Ethics (8)
25
Exhibit
Description
No.
16.1
16.2
31.1*
31.2*
32.1**
32.2**
Letter from Anton & Chia, LLP regarding changes in Registrant’s certifying accountant
(16)
Engagement  Agreement  with  Dave  Banerjee  CPA,  a  Professional  Accountancy
Corporation, regarding changes in Registrant’s certifying accountant (16)
Certification  of  Principal  Executive  Officer  pursuant  to  Rule  15d-15(e),  promulgated
under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
Certification  of  Principal  Financial  Officer  pursuant  to  Rule  15d-15(e),  promulgated
under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended
Certification pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Chief Executive Officer)
Certification pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (Chief Financial Officer)
101.INS†   XBRL Instance Document
101.SCH†   XBRL Schema Document
 
101.CAL†   XBRL Calculation Linkbase Document
 
101.DEF†   XBRL Definition Linkbase Document
 
101.LAB†   XBRL Label Linkbase Document
 
101.PRE†   XBRL Presentation Linkbase Document
* Filed herewith.
** This certification is being furnished and shall not be deemed “filed” with the SEC for purposes of
Section 18 of the Exchange Act, or otherwise subject to the liability of that section, and shall not be
deemed to be incorporated by reference into any filing under the Securities Act or the Exchange Act,
except to the extent that the registrant specifically incorporates it by reference.
† Pursuant to Rule 406T of Regulation S-T, this XBRL related information shall not be deemed to be
“filed”  for  purposes  of  Section  18  of  the  Exchange  Act,  or  otherwise  subject  to  the  liability  of  that
section, and shall not be deemed part of a registration statement, prospectus or other document filed
under  the  Securities  Act  or  the  Exchange  Act,  except  as  shall  be  expressly  set  forth  by  specific
reference in such filings.
(1)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Registration Statement on Form SB-
2,  as  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  on  July  25,  2006,  which  exhibit  is
incorporated herein by reference.
(2)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K, dated
October 14, 2009, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 3, 2010, which
exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
(3)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
August 12, 2009, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 17, 2009, which
exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
(4)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
September 22, 2009, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on September 25, 2009,
which exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
(5)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-QSB
for  the  quarter  ended  August  31,  2007,  as  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  on
October 15, 2007, which exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
26
(6)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
May 22, 2008, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 27, 2008, which exhibit
is incorporated herein by reference.
(7)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
June 10, 2008, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 2, 2008, which exhibit is
incorporated herein by reference.
(8)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-KSB for
the year ended May 31, 2007, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 28,
2007, which exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
(9)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
July 6, 2009, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 14, 2009, which exhibit is
incorporated herein by reference.
(10)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
July 25, 2009, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on July 30, 2009, which exhibit
is incorporated herein by reference.
(11)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
August 5, 2009, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 11, 2009, which
exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
(12)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
August 12, 2009, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 17, 2009, which
exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
(13)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended May 31, 2009, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 20, 2009,
which exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
(14)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for
the quarter ended August 31, 2009, which exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
(15)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
August  5,  2013,  as  filed  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  on  August  8,  2013,  which
exhibit is incorporated herein by reference.
(16)
Filed as an exhibit, numbered as indicated above, to Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
June 5, 2015, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on June 11, 2015, which exhibit
is incorporated herein by reference.
27
SIGNATURES
Pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  Section  13  or  15(d)  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as
amended, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
HK EBUS CORPORATION
Dated: September 15, 2015
By: /s/ Dianwen Ju
Name: Dianwen Ju
Title: President and Chief Executive Officer
Dated: September 15, 2015
By: /s/ Xiao Chen
Name: Xiao Chen
Title: Chief Financial and Accounting Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Exchange Act this report has been signed below by the following
persons on behalf of the Registrant and in the capacities indicated on this 15th day of September,
2015.
/s/ Dianwen Ju
Dianwen Ju, President, Chief Executive Officer, and Director
28
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm0
 
Balance Sheets as of May 31, 2015 and 2014 (audited)
 
Statements of Operations for the years Ended May 31, 2015 and 2014 (audited)
 
Statements of Stockholders’ Equity for the years Ended May 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
(audited)
 
Statements of Cash Flows for the years Ended May 31, 2015 and 2014 (audited)
 
Notes to the Financial Statements (audited)
Page
F-2
F-4
F-5
F-6
F-7
F-8
F-1
F-2
F-3
HK eBus Corporation
(formerly Rambo Medical Group, Inc.)
Current assets
  Cash
Total assets (all current)
BALANCE SHEETS
ASSETS
$
  $
May 31,
2015
2,972  $
2,972  $
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIT
Accounts payable
Current liabilities
 
  Due to related party
Total current liabilities
 
Non-Current liabilities
  Due to related party, net of current portion
 
Total liabilities
 
Stockholders' deficit
$
Preferred stock, $.00001 par value; 100,000,000
shares authorized; no shares issued or
outstanding
Common stock, $.00001 par value; 300,000,000
authorized; 992,192 shares issued and
 
outstanding as of May 31, 2015 and May 31, 2014  
 
 
Additional paid in capital
 
Accumulated deficit
 
 
 
 
 
  $
Total stockholders' deficit
 
Total liabilities and stockholders' deficit
791  $
108,859 
109,650 
 
 
30,000 
 
139,650
-
991 
7,043,222 
(7,180,891) 
(136,679)
2,972  $
May 31,
2014
6,707
6,707
791
88,859
89,650
-
109,650
-
991
7,043,222
(7,147,156)
(102,943)
6,707
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-4
HK eBus Corporation
(formerly Rambo Medical Group, Inc.)
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
For the year
For the year
Revenue
  $
 
 
 
Operating expenses
 
 
 
  General and administrative expenses  
Total operating expenses
 
 
 
 
 
Loss from operations
 
 
 
 
 
Net loss
  $
 
 
 
Basic and diluted loss per common
shares
 
Weighted average shares
outstanding
$
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
992,192
ended
May 31,
2015
-  $
 
 
 
 
 
33,735 
 
33,735 
 
 
(33,735) 
 
 
 
(33,735)  $
(0.03)  $
ended
May 31,
2014
-
41,610
41,610
(41,610)
(41,610)
(0.04)
992,192
F-5
HK eBus Corporation
(formerly Rambo Medical Group, Inc.)
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIT
Preferred Stock   Common Stock  
Amount
Amount
Additional
Paid-in  
Capital
Deficit
Stockholders'
Accumulated
Equity
Shares
($)
Shares
($)
Net loss for the
period ended
Balance at May
31, 2013
 
Net loss for the
period ended
Balance at May
31, 2014
 
Net loss for the
period ended
Balance at May
31, 2015
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
($)
-
($)
($)
(38,090)
(38,090)
991  7,043,222
(7,105,546)
(61,333)
-
-
(41,610)
(41,610)
991  7,043,222
(7,147,156)
(102,943)
-
-
(33,735)
(33,735)
-
-
-  992,192
-
-
-  992,192
-
-
-  992,192
991  7,043,222
(7,180,891)
(136,678)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-6
HK eBus Corporation
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
For the year
For the year
Net loss
Operating Activities:
 
  Changes operating assets and liabilities:
 
 
Net cash provided by (used in) operating
activities
 
  Net increase (decrease) in cash
Accounts payable
  Due to related party
Cash at the beginning of period
$
ended
May 31,
ended
May 31,
2015
(33,735)  $
- 
30,000
(3,735) 
 
(3,735)
6,707
2014
 
(41,610)
 
(10,000)
53,859
2,249
2,249
4,457
Cash at the beginning of period
 
  Cash at the end of period
 
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow
Information:
  Cash paid for interest
  Cash paid for income taxes
$
$
  $
6,707
2,972  $
-  $
-  $
4,457
6,707
-
-
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
F-7
HK EBUS CORPORATION
(formerly Rambo Medical Group, Inc.)
(A Development Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
May 31, 2015 and 2014
NOTE 1. ORGANIZATION AND NATURE OF OPERATIONS
HK eBus Corporation, formerly known as Rambo Medical Group, Inc., was incorporated in the State of
Nevada  on  November  18,  2005.  On  October  14,  2009,  the  Company  filed  a  Certificate  of
Amendment  to  its  Articles  of  Incorporation  to  increase  its  shares  of  authorized  common  stock  from
100,000,000  to  300,000,000  and  to  change  its  name  from  Cobra  Oil  and  Gas  Company  to  Viper
Resources,  Inc.  The  Company  was  formed  to  engage  in  identifying,  investigating,  exploring,  and
where  determined  advantageous,  developing,  mining,  refining,  and  marketing  oil  and  gas.  The
Company may also engage in any other business permitted by law, as designated by the Board of
Directors of the Company.  On April 25, 2011, the Company’s previous management was replaced in
its  entirety.  In  May  2012,  the  Company’s  management  determined  to  discontinue  its  oil  and  gas
operations, and attempt to acquire other assets or business operations that will maximize shareholder
value.
NOTE  2.  BASIS  OF  PRESENTATION  AND  SUMMARY  OF  SIGNIFICANT  ACCOUNTING
POLICIES
A summary of significant accounting policies of HK eBus Corporation (hereinafter the “Company”), a
company organized in the state of Nevada (A Development Stage Company) is presented to assist in
understanding  the  Company’s  financial  statements.  The  accounting  policies  presented  in  these
footnotes  conform  to  accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  the  United  States  of  America  and
have been consistently applied in the preparation of the accompanying financial statements. These
financial  statements  and  notes  are  representations  of  the  Company’s  management  who  are
responsible for their integrity and objectivity. The Company has not realized significant revenues from
its planned principal business purpose and is considered to be in its development state in accordance
with ASC 915, “Development Stage Entities”, formerly known as SFAS 7, “Accounting and Reporting
by Development State Enterprises.”
Basis of Presentation
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in
the  United  States  of  America  (“GAAP”).    The  preparation  of  our  financial  statements  requires  us  to
make  estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect,  among  other  areas,  the  reported  amounts  of  trade
receivable  reserves  and  inventory  reserves,  impairment  of  long-lived  assets,  and  recoverability  of
deferred  tax  assets.    These  estimates  and  assumptions  also  impact  revenues,  expenses  and  the
disclosures in our financial statements and accompanying notes.  Although these estimates are based
on our knowledge of current events and actions we may undertake in the future, actual results may
ultimately differ from these estimates and assumptions.
Development Stage
The Company is currently in the development stage and has no significant operations. On August 9,
2013,  the  Company  effected  a  1-for-100  reverse  split  of  the  outstanding  common  stock.  The
accompanying financial statements and notes to the financial statements give retroactive effect to the
reverse stock split for all periods presented.
Fair Value Measurements
In January 2010, the FASB ASC Topic 825, Financial Instruments, began requiring disclosures about
fair value of financial instruments in quarterly reports as well as in annual reports.  For the Company,
this statement applies to certain investments and long-term debt.  Also, FASB ASC Topic 820, Fair
Value  Measurements  and  Disclosures,  clarifies  the  definition  of  fair  value  for  financial  reporting,
establishes a framework for measuring fair value and requires additional disclosures about the use of
fair value measurements.
Various inputs are considered when determining the value of the Company’s investments and long-
term debt.  The inputs or methodologies used for valuing securities are not necessarily an indication of
the risk associated with investing in these securities.  These inputs are summarized in the three broad
levels listed below.
·
Level 1 – observable market inputs that are unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities
in active markets.
·
Level  2  –  other  significant  observable  inputs  (including  quoted  prices  for  similar  securities,  interest
rates, credit risk, etc.).
·
Level 3 – significant unobservable inputs (including the Company’s own assumptions in determining
the fair value of investments).
F-8
The Company’s adoption of FASB ASC Topic 825 effectively at the inception did not have a material
impact on the Company’s financial statements.
The carrying value of financial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value is measured on a recurring
or nonrecurring basis. Financial assets and liabilities measured on a non-recurring basis are those that
are adjusted to fair value when a significant event occurs. The Company had no financial assets or
liabilities carried and measured on a nonrecurring basis during the reporting periods. Financial assets
and  liabilities  measured  on  a  recurring  basis  are  those  that  are  adjusted  to  fair  value  each  time  a
financial statement is prepared. The Company does not have financial assets as an investment carried
at fair value on a recurring basis as of May 31, 2015 and 2014.
The availability of inputs observable in the market varies from instrument to instrument and depends
on a variety of factors including the type of instrument, whether the instrument is actively traded, and
other  characteristics  particular  to  the  transaction.  For  many  financial  instruments,  pricing  inputs  are
readily  observable  in  the  market,  the  valuation  methodology  used  is  widely  accepted  by  market
participants, and the valuation does not require significant management discretion. For other financial
instruments, pricing inputs are less observable in the market and may require management judgment.
As of May 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company had assets and liabilities in cash, property and equipment
that were fully depreciated, and various payables. Management believes that they are being presented
at their fair market value.
Use of Estimates
The  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  U.S.  generally  accepted  accounting
principles requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts
reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. The Company is subject to uncertainty
of  future  events,  economic,  environmental  and  political  factors  and  changes  in  the  Company's
business  environment;  therefore,  actual  results  could  differ  from  these  estimates.  Accordingly,
accounting estimates used in the preparation of the Company's financial statements will change as
new events occur and that more experience is acquired, as additional information is obtained and as
the  Company's  operating  environment  changes.  Changes  are  made  in  estimates  as  circumstances
warrant. Such changes in estimates and refinement of estimation methodologies are reflected in the
statements.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include short-term, highly liquid investments with maturities of less than
three months when acquired. The Company had $2,972 and $6,707 in cash on May 31, 2015 and
2014, respectively. The Company had no cash equivalent on May 31, 2015 and 2014.
Accounts Payable
Services  and  goods  received  from  vendors  and  billed  but  not  yet  paid  are  recorded  as  accounts
payable  in  periods  when  the  services  and  goods  were  received.  As  of  May  31,  2015,  $791  was
recorded as accounts payable. The balance of accounts payable was $791 and $791 as of May 31,
2015 and 2014, respectively.
Income Tax
The Company accounts for income taxes under Accounting Standards Codified No. 740 (“ASC 740”).
Under ASC 740 deferred taxes are provided  on  a  liability  method  whereby  deferred  tax  assets  are
recognized  for  deductible  temporary  differences  and  operating  loss  carryforwards  and  deferred  tax
liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences. Temporary differences are the differences
between the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Deferred tax assets are
reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that
some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are
adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of enactment.
Stock Based Compensation
The  Company  accounts  for  employee  and  non-employee  stock  awards  under  ASC  718,  whereby
equity  instruments  issued  to  employees  for  services  are  recorded  based  on  the  fair  value  of  the
instrument  issued  and  those  issued  to  non-employees  are  recorded  based  on  the  fair  value  of  the
consideration  received  or  the  fair  value  of  the  equity  instrument,  whichever  is  more  reliably
measurable.
Net Income (Loss) per Share
The  net  income  (loss)  per  share  is  computed  by  dividing  the  net  income  (loss)  by  the  weighted
average  number  of  shares  of  common  outstanding.  Warrants,  stock  options,  and  common  stock
issuable  upon  the  conversion  of  the  Company’s  preferred  stock  (if  any),  are  not  included  in  the
computation if the effect would be anti-dilutive and would increase the earnings or decrease loss per
share.
F-9
Basic Loss per Share
The Company computes net loss per share in accordance with ASC 260, Accounting for Earnings per
Share. Under the provisions of ASC 260, basic net loss per share is computed by dividing the net loss
available  to  common  stockholders  for  the  period  by  the  weighted  average  number  of  shares  of
common stock outstanding during the period. The calculation of diluted net loss per share gives effect
to common stock equivalents; however, potential common shares are excluded if their effect is anti-
dilutive.
Basic net loss per common share is based on the weighted average number of shares of common
stock  outstanding  since  inception.  As  of  May  31,  2015  and  2014,  the  Company  had  992,192  and
992,192 shares of common stock outstanding, respectively.
The  computations  of  basic  loss  per  share  of  common  stock  are  based  on  the  weighted  average
number of shares outstanding at the date of the financial statements. As of May 31, 2015, there were
no common stock equivalents outstanding.
For  the  year  ended  May  31,
2015
For  the  year  ended  May  31,
2014
Loss
(Numerator)  
 
(33,735)
 
(41,610)
$
$
W.A. Shares  
(Denominator)
Loss per
Share
(Amount)
992,192
992,192
$
$
(0.03)
(0.04)
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In  June  2014,  the  FASB  issued  ASU  No.  2014-10,  “Development  Stage  Entities  (Topic  915),
Elimination of Certain Financial Reporting Requirements, Including an Amendment to Variable Interest
Entities Guidance in Topic 810, Consolidation”. The amendments in this update remove the definition
of a development stage entity from Topic 915, thereby removing the distinction between development
stage entities and other reporting entities from U.S. GAAP. In addition, the amendments eliminate the
requirements  for  development  stage  entities  to  (1)  present  inception-to-date  information  on  the
statements of income, cash flows and shareholder’s equity, (2) label the financial statements as those
of a development stage entity, (3) disclose a description of the development stage activities in which
the entity is engaged, and (4) disclose in the first year in which the entity is no longer a development
stage entity that in prior years it had been in the development stage. The Company’s early adoption of
the new standard is not expected to have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial
position or results of operations.
NOTE 3. GOING CONCERN
Under the going concern assumption, an entity is ordinarily viewed as continuing in business for the
foreseeable future with neither the intention nor the necessity of liquidation, ceasing trading, or seeking
protection  from  creditors  pursuant  to  laws  or  regulations.  Accordingly,  assets  and  liabilities  are
recorded on the basis that the entity will be able to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the
normal course of business.
The future of the Company is dependent upon its ability to obtain financing and upon future profitable
operations from the development of its planned business. Management has plans to seek additional
capital  through  a  public  or  private  offering  of  equity  or  debt  securities,  or  by  other  means.  These
conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern. These
financial statements do not include any adjustments that might arise from this uncertainty.
There  can  be  no  assurance  that  sufficient  funds  required  during  the  next  year  or  thereafter  will  be
generated from operations or that funds will be available from external sources such as debt or equity
financings  or  other  potential  sources.  The  lack  of  additional  capital  resulting  from  the  inability  to
generate  cash  flow  from  the  operations  or  to  raise  capital  from  external  sources  would  force  the
Company to substantially curtail or cease operations and would, therefore, have a material adverse
effect  on  its  business.  Furthermore,  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  any  such  required  funds,  if
available, will be available on attractive terms or that they will not have a significant dilutive effect on
the Company's existing stockholders.
The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification
of recorded assets, or the amounts of and classification of liabilities that might necessary in the event
the Company cannot continue in existence.
F-10
NOTE 4. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
On April 17, 2014, the Company accepted another loan from American Compass Inc. (“ACI”), a related
party based on the beneficial ownership of the Company held by certain key management of ACI, in
the amount of $10,000. This is a non-interest bearing and unsecured loan due on April 17, 2016. On
June 30, 2014, the Company accepted another loan from ACI in the amount of $10,000. This is a non-
interest bearing and unsecured loan due on June 30, 2016. On November 19, 2014, the Company
accepted  another  loan  from  ACI  in  the  amount  of  $10,000.  This  is  a  non-interest  bearing  and
unsecured loan due on November 19, 2016. On February 4, 2015, the Company accepted another
loan from ACI in the amount of $10,000 (the “New ACI Loan”). The New ACI Loan is a non-interest
bearing and unsecured loan due on February 4, 2017 (“Due Date”). If the New ACI Loan is not repaid
within 10 days of its Due Date, a late charge of 5% will be incurred. In addition, should the Company
be in default, ACI will charge the Company a 5% fee on the unpaid balance of the New ACI Loan.
As of May 31, 2015, the total balance due to ACI is $138,859.
Year ended May 31,
 
Current
2016
2017
$
$
108,859
30,000
-
138,859
NOTE 5. COMMON STOCK
The  Company  is  authorized  to  issue  100,000,000  shares  of  preferred  stock  with  a  par  value  of
$.00001. The Company is also authorized to issue 300,000,000 shares of common stock with a par
value of $.00001. On May 6, 2008, the Company effected a 35-for-1 forward split of its outstanding
shares of common stock. On July 20, 2010, the Company issued 50,000 shares of common stock to
investors at a price of $2 per unit for a total of $100,000. The Company issued a total of 0.15 million
shares  of  common  stock  to  compensate  its  officers  during  the  fiscal  year  of  2012.  In  order  to  seek
alternative  business  development  and  future  merging  and  stock  offering,  on  August  8,  2013,  the
Company  effected  a  1-for-100  reverse  stock  split  of  the  Company’s  outstanding  shares  of  common
stock and changed its name to Rambo Medical Group Inc. There were 992,192 and 992,192 shares
issued and outstanding as of May 31, 2015 and May 31, 2014 respectively.
NOTE 6. OFFICE LEASE
Commencing in May 2011, the company holds no lease agreement. The Company uses an office at a
location provided by one of its officers rent-free.
NOTE 7. WARRANTS
As  of  May  31,  2008,  the  Company  had  10,000  common  stock  purchase  warrants  outstanding,
originally  sold  as  part  of  a  unit,  allowing  the  holder  to  purchase  one  share  of  common  stock  at  an
exercise price of $40, anytime through May 15, 2011. In fiscal year 2009, the Company sold 10,000
units to an investor for cash at a price of $25 per unit for aggregate proceeds of $250,000. Each unit
consists of one share of common stock and one warrant to purchase one share of common stock at an
exercise price of $40, anytime through June 9, 2011. As of May 31, 2009, none of the warrants had
been  exercised,  leaving  a  year-end  balance  of  20,000  warrants.  The  aggregate  value  of  the  units
equal to $250,000 was assigned to the common stock as the warrants are non-detachable.
In fiscal year 2010, the Company sold 20,252 units to investors for cash at prices ranging from $17 -
$100 per unit, or an aggregate of $1,250,000. Each unit consists of one share of common stock, and
one warrant to purchase one share of common stock at exercise prices ranging from of $20 - $125,
anytime through expiration dates from June 2012 through February 2013. The entire value of the units
was assigned to the common stock as the warrants are non-detachable. As of May 31, 2010, none of
the warrants had been exercised or had expired, leaving a year-end balance of 40,252 warrants.
During the year ended May 31, 2011, the Company sold 50,000 units to investors at a price of $2 per
unit for an aggregate of $100,000. Each unit consists of one share of common stock, and one warrant
to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of $2.50, anytime through expiration date
of July 2013. The entire value of the units was assigned to the common stock as the warrants are non-
detachable. As of May 31, 2011, none of the warrants had been exercised. During the fiscal year of
2011, 10,000 warrants expired, leaving a year-end balance of 80,252 warrants.
During the year ended May 31, 2012, 10,000 warrants expired, leaving a year-end balance of 70,252
warrants.
F-11
During the year ended May 31, 2013, 20,252 warrants expired, leaving a year-end balance of 50,000
warrants.
During the year ended May 31, 2014, 50,000 warrants expired, leaving a year-end balance of 0
warrants.
During the year ended May 31, 2015, there were no warrants outstanding.
NOTE 8. INCOME TAX
The Company accounts for income taxes pursuant to ASC 740. Under ASC 740 deferred taxes are
provided on a liability method whereby deferred tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary
differences  and  operating  loss  carryforwards  and  deferred  tax  liabilities  are  recognized  for  taxable
temporary  differences.  Temporary  differences  are  the  differences  between  the  reported  amounts  of
assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance
when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred
tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes
in tax laws and rates on the date of enactment.
Net deferred tax assets consist of the following components as of May 31, 2015 and 2014:
Deferred tax assets:
   NOL carryover
$
Valuation
2015
2014
7,180,891  $
(7,180,891)
7,147,156
(7,147,156)
allowance                        
Net deferred tax asset
Valuation
(7,180,891)
(7,147,156)
$
-  $
-
The  income  tax  provision  differs  from  the  amount  of  income  tax  determined  by  applying  the  U.S.
federal and state income tax rates of 39% to pretax income from continuing operations for the period
ended May 31, 2015 due to the following:
Income tax benefit at statutory rate   $
 
Valuation allowance
 
  $
2015
 
(2,800,547)  $
 
-  $
2,800,547
2014
(2,787,391)
2,787,391
-
At  May  31,  2015  and  2014,  the  Company  had  net  operating  loss  carryforwards  of  approximately
$7,180,891  and  $7,147,156,  respectively,  which  begin  to  expire  in  2026.  Deferred  tax  assets  of
approximately  $2,800,547  and  $2,787,391  in  2015  and  2014,  respectively,  created  by  the  net
operating losses have been offset by a 100% valuation allowance. The Company may be subjected to
tax audit by the IRS for 2013 and 2014.
NOTE 9. COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
The Company could become a party to various legal actions arising in the ordinary course of business.
Matters  that  are  probable  of  unfavorable  outcomes  to  the  Company  and  which  can  be  reasonably
estimated  are  accrued.  Such  accruals  are  based  on  information  known  about  the  matters,  the
Company’s estimates of the outcomes of such matters and its experience in contesting, litigating and
settling similar matters.
As  of  the  date  of  this  annual  report,  there  are  no  material  pending  legal  proceedings  to  which  the
Company is a party or of which any of their property is the subject, nor are there any such proceedings
known to be contemplated by governmental authorities.
NOTE 10. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The Company changed the name to HK EBUS Corporation on August 31, 2015.
These financial statements were approved by management and available for issuance on September
15, 2015. Subsequent events have been evaluated through this date.
F-12