
MinQuest Limited (ASX: MNQ) 
ACN 146 035 127
(to be renamed ePAT Technologies Limited)
Prospectus
Lead Manager
Patersons Securities Limited ABN 69 008 896 311
Underwriters
Patersons Securities Limited ABN 69 008 896 311
and
R M Corporate Finance Pty Ltd ABN 50 108 084 386
IMPORTANT INFORMATION 
This is an important document that should be read in its entirety.  If you do not understand it you 
should consult a professional advisor without delay.
Important Information
Conditional Offer
The Offer contained in this Prospectus is an invitation by MinQuest Limited (ACN 146 035 
127) (the Company) to apply for Shares in the Company.
Persons wishing to participate in the Offer should refer to Section 11 of this Prospectus for 
further information about the Offer, and read this Prospectus in its entirety.
On 25 July 2016, the Company entered into a binding Share Sale Purchase Agreement (SSPA) 
with Electronic Pain Assessment Technologies (ePAT) Pty Ltd (ePAT) and its shareholders 
pursuant to which the Company has agreed to acquire 100% of the issued capital in ePAT 
(Acquisition).
The significant change to the nature and scale of the Company’s main business activity 
arising from the Acquisition will require re-compliance with ASX’s admission requirements in 
Chapters 1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules.
This Offer is subject to and conditional upon, amongst other things:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the Company raising a minimum of $4,000,000 under the Offer;
all necessary shareholder approvals being obtained at an extraordinary general
meeting of the Company, including amongst other things, for the Acquisition, the
Consolidation, and the issue of the New Shares;
the Company receiving ASX’s conditional approval for the reinstatement of the
Company’s Shares to quotation and those conditions being acceptable to ePAT and
the Company, acting reasonably; and
(d)
Completion of the Acquisition.
The full list of conditions to the Offer is set out in Section 2.4 of this Prospectus. If any of 
these conditions are not met, the Company will not proceed with the Offer and will repay all 
Application Monies received without interest as soon as practicable in accordance with the 
requirements of the Corporations Act.
Consolidation of Shares
The Company has called a meeting of the Shareholders (Meeting) to be held on 31 August 
2016 at which approval of the Shareholders will be sought for, amongst other things, the 
Company’s issued capital to be consolidated on a 7:4 basis.
The New Shares issued under this Prospectus are being issued on a post-consolidation basis. 
Unless otherwise stated, all references to Shares in this Prospectus are post-consolidation 
Shares and are subject to the effects of rounding.
Lodgement and Listing
This Prospectus is dated 25 August 2016 (Prospectus Date) and was lodged with ASIC on 
that date.  The Prospectus expires on 24 September 2017 (Expiry Date). No Shares will be 
issued or transferred on the basis of this Prospectus after the Expiry Date.
2
The Company will apply to ASX within 7 days of the Prospectus Date, for re-quotation of the 
Shares on issue as at the date of this Prospectus and for quotation of the New Shares.
Neither ASIC nor ASX take any responsibility for the contents of this Prospectus or the merits 
of the investment to which this Prospectus relates.
Re-compliance with Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules
The ASX has advised the Company that the Acquisition will constitute a change to the nature 
and scale of the Company's activities. Pursuant to Listing Rule 11.1.3, the ASX requires the 
Company to re-comply with the admission requirements of Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing 
Rules, as if applying for admission to the official list of ASX. Accordingly, this Prospectus is 
issued for the purpose of satisfying Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules, as well as for the 
purpose of making the Offers.
Changes in activities and suspension from trading
The Company is currently listed on ASX.  The Company’s Shares were suspended from 
trading on ASX on 18 July 2016 and will not commence re-quotation until the Company has 
satisfied Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules.  At the Meeting, the Shareholders will be 
asked to approve, amongst other things, the change in the nature and scale of the 
Company's activities as a consequence of the Acquisition. There is a risk that the Company’s 
Shares may not be reinstated to official quotation by ASX.
Not investment advice
This Prospectus does not contain investment advice. You should seek your own financial 
advice. This Prospectus does not take into account individual investment objectives, financial 
situation or particular needs. It is important that you read this Prospectus carefully and in 
full before deciding whether to invest in the Company.
In particular, in considering the prospects of the Company, you should consider the risk 
factors that could affect the financial performance of the Company in light of your own 
personal circumstances (including financial and taxation issues) and seek professional advice 
from your accountant, financial advisor, stockbroker, lawyer or other professional advisor 
before deciding whether to invest.
Applicants should carefully consider the risk factors that affect the Company and the new 
industry in which it will operate. Section 6 outlines some significant risk factors that may 
impact on the prospects of the Company. The securities offered under this Prospectus carry 
no guarantee with respect to return on capital investment, payment of dividend or the 
future value of the Shares.
Disclaimer
Except as required by law, and only to the extent required, neither the Company nor any 
other person guarantees the future performance of the Company, or any return on any 
investment made pursuant to this Prospectus.
No person is authorised to give any information or make any representation in connection 
with the Offer which is not contained in this Prospectus. Any information or representation 
not contained in this Prospectus may not be relied on as having been authorised by the 
Company or the Directors. Certain risk factors are set out in Section 6. These and other 
factors could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-
3
looking statement made by, or on behalf of, the Company. You should rely only on 
information in this Prospectus.
This Prospectus includes information regarding the past performance of the business 
conducted by the Company. Past performance is not indicative of future performance.
Electronic prospectus
An electronic version of this Prospectus is available on the Offer website at 
www.minquest.com.au. The Offer constituted by this Prospectus in electronic form is 
available only to Australian residents accessing the website and receiving this Prospectus in 
electronic form within Australia. Persons who access the Prospectus in electronic form 
should ensure that they download and read the entire Prospectus. Persons having received a 
copy of this Prospectus in its electronic form may, during the Offer Period, obtain a paper 
copy of this Prospectus (free of charge within Australia) by contacting the Lead Manager on 
(08) 9263 1111 (from within Australia) or +61 8 9263 1111 (from outside Australia).
Applications for Shares may only be made on the Application Form attached to or
accompanying this Prospectus. The Corporations Act prohibits any person from passing on to
another person the Application Form unless it is attached to or accompanies a hard copy of
the Prospectus or a complete and unaltered electronic copy of this Prospectus.
Risks
Before deciding to invest in the Company, potential investors should read the entire 
Prospectus and, in particular, in considering the Prospects of the Company potential 
investors should consider the risk factors that could affect the financial performance and 
assets of the Company. Investors should carefully consider these factors in light of their 
personal circumstances (including financial and taxation issues). The securities offered by 
this Prospectus should be considered speculative. Please refer to Section 6 for details 
relating to risk factors.
Forward-looking statements
This Prospectus contains forward-looking statements which are identified by words such as 
‘may’, ‘could’, ‘believes’, ‘estimates’, ‘targets’, ‘expects’, or ‘intends’ and other similar words 
that involve risks and uncertainties.  These statements are based on an assessment of 
present economic and operating conditions, and on a number of assumptions regarding 
future events and actions that, as at the date of this Prospectus, are considered reasonable. 
Such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve 
known and unknown risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other important factors, many of 
which are beyond the control of the Company, the Directors and the management.
The Directors cannot and do not give any assurance that the results, performance or 
achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in this 
Prospectus will actually occur and investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on 
these forward-looking statements. The Directors have no intention to update or revise 
forward-looking statements, or to publish prospective financial information in the future, 
regardless of whether new information, future events or any other factors affect the 
information contained in this Prospectus, except where required by law.  These forward 
looking statements are subject to various risk factors that could cause the Company’s actual 
results to differ materially from the results expressed or anticipated in these statements.  
These risk factors are set out in Section 6.
4
No cooling-off rights
Cooling-off rights do not apply to an investment in Shares issued or sold under this 
Prospectus. This means that, in most circumstances, you cannot withdraw your Application 
once it has been accepted.
Geographical restrictions
This Prospectus does not constitute an offer or invitation in any place in which, or to any 
person to whom, it would not be lawful to make such an offer or invitation. No action has 
been taken to register or qualify the Shares or the Offer, or to otherwise permit a public 
offering of Shares, in any jurisdiction outside Australia. The distribution of this Prospectus 
outside Australia (including electronically) may be restricted by law and persons who come 
into possession of this Prospectus outside Australia should seek advice on and observe any 
such restrictions. Any failure to comply with such restrictions may constitute a violation of 
applicable securities laws.
United States
This document may not be released or distributed in the United States. It does not 
constitute an offer to sell, or solicitation of an offer to buy, securities in the United States. 
Any securities described in this document have not been, and will not be, registered under 
the US Securities Act of 1933 and may not be offered or sold in the United States.
Hong Kong
This document has not been, and will not be, registered as a prospectus under the 
Companies Ordinance (Cap. 32) of Hong Kong (Companies Ordinance), nor has it been 
authorised by the Securities and Futures Commission in Hong Kong pursuant to the 
Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap. 571) of the Laws of Hong Kong (SFO). No action has 
been taken in Hong Kong to authorise or register this document or to permit the distribution 
of this document or any documents issued in connection with it. Accordingly, the Shares 
have not been and will not be offered or sold in Hong Kong other than to "professional 
investors" (as defined in the SFO).
No advertisement, invitation or document relating to the Shares has been or will be issued, 
or has been or will be in the possession of any person for the purpose of issue, in Hong Kong 
or elsewhere that is directed at, or the contents of which are likely to be accessed or read 
by, the public of Hong Kong (except if permitted to do so under the securities laws of Hong 
Kong) other than with respect to Shares that are or are intended to be disposed of only to 
persons outside Hong Kong or only to professional investors (as defined in the SFO and any 
rules made under that ordinance).  No person allotted Shares may sell, or offer to sell, such 
securities in circumstances that amount to an offer to the public in Hong Kong within six 
months following the date of issue of such securities.
The contents of this document have not been reviewed by any Hong Kong regulatory 
authority. You are advised to exercise caution in relation to the offer. If you are in doubt 
about any contents of this document, you should obtain independent professional advice.
Singapore
This document and any other materials relating to the Shares have not been, and will not be, 
lodged or registered as a prospectus in Singapore with the Monetary Authority of Singapore.  
Accordingly, this document and any other document or materials in connection with the
5
offer or sale, or invitation for subscription or purchase, of Shares, may not be issued, 
circulated or distributed, nor may the Shares be offered or sold, or be made the subject of 
an invitation for subscription or purchase, whether directly or indirectly, to persons in 
Singapore except pursuant to and in accordance with exemptions in Subdivision (4) Division 
1, Part XIII of the Securities and Futures Act, Chapter 289 of Singapore (SFA), or as otherwise 
pursuant to, and in accordance with the conditions of any other applicable provisions of the 
SFA.
This document has been given to you on the basis that you are (i) an existing holder of the 
Company’s shares, (ii) an "institutional investor" (as defined in the SFA) or (iii) a "relevant 
person" (as defined in section 275(2) of the SFA). In the event that you are not an investor 
falling within any of the categories set out above, please return this document immediately. 
You may not forward or circulate this document to any other person in Singapore.
Any offer is not made to you with a view to the Shares being subsequently offered for sale to 
any other party. There are on-sale restrictions in Singapore that may be applicable to 
investors who acquire Shares. As such, investors are advised to acquaint themselves with the 
SFA provisions relating to resale restrictions in Singapore and comply accordingly.
New Zealand
This document has not been registered, filed with or approved by any New Zealand 
regulatory authority under the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013 (FMC Act). The Shares 
are not being offered to the public within New Zealand.
Shares may not be offered or sold in New Zealand (or allotted with a view to being offered 
for sale in New Zealand) other than to a person who:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
is an investment business;
meets the investment activity criteria specified in clause 38 of Schedule 1 of the FMC
Act;
is large within the meaning of clause 39 of Schedule 1 of the FMC Act;
is a government agency; or
subscribes, or has subscribed, for securities that have a minimum amount payable of
at least NZ$750,000.
Currency
Monetary amounts in this Prospectus are in Australian dollars unless otherwise indicated.
Privacy
By filling out an Application Form to apply for Shares, you are providing personal information 
to the Company through its service provider, the Share Registry. The Company, and the 
Share Registry on its behalf, collect, hold and use that personal information in order to 
process your Application, service your needs as a Shareholder, provide facilities and services 
that you request and carry out appropriate administration.
If you do not provide the information requested in the Application Form, the Company and 
the Share Registry may not be able to process or accept your Application. Your personal
6
information may also be used from time to time to inform you about other products and 
services offered by the Company which it considers may be of interest to you.
Your personal information may also be provided to the Company’s agents and service 
providers on the basis that they deal with such information in accordance with the 
Company’s privacy policy and as authorised under the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth). The 
Company’s agents and service providers may be located outside Australia where your 
personal information may not receive the same level of protection as that afforded under 
Australian law. The types of agents and service providers that may be provided with your 
personal information and the circumstances in which your personal information may be 
shared are:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the Share Registry for ongoing administration of the Shareholder register;
printers and other companies for the purpose of preparation and distribution of
statements and for handling mail;
market research companies for the purpose of analysing the Company’s Shareholder
base and for product development and planning; and
legal and accounting firms, auditors, contractors, consultants and other advisers for
the purpose of administering, and advising on, the Shares for associated actions.
When you may request access to your personal information
You may be required to pay a reasonable charge to the Share Registry in order to be access 
your personal information. You can request access to your personal information by writing 
to or telephoning the Share Registry as follows:
Boardroom Pty Limited 
Level 12, 225 George Street, Sydney NSW 2000 
Telephone: 1300 737 760 (from within Australia) 
or +61 2 9290 9600 (from outside Australia) 
Facsimile: +61 2 9279 0664.
If any of your information is not correct, or has changed, please contact the Share Registry 
or the Company to update it. In accordance with the Requirements of the Corporations Act, 
information on the Share Register will be accessible to members of the public.
Glossary
Certain terms and abbreviations used in this Prospectus have defined meanings which are 
explained in the body of this Prospectus or in the Glossary in Section 14. Defined terms are 
generally identifiable by the use of an upper case first letter. Unless otherwise stated or 
implied, references to times in this Prospectus are to Brisbane time, and references to 
monetary amounts are in Australian dollars.
Questions
If you have any questions about how to apply for Shares, call your Broker. Instructions on 
how to apply for Shares are set out in Section 11 of this Prospectus and on the back of the 
Application Form.
7
If you have any questions about whether to invest in the Company, you should seek 
professional advice from your accountant, financial adviser, stockbroker, lawyer or other 
professional advisor before deciding whether to invest in the Company.
The Offer is managed by Patersons Securities Limited.
8
2
10
12
12
26
31
39
43
71
79
101
110
116
124
134
143
156
160
TABLE OF CONTENTS
IMPORTANT INFORMATION
KEY OFFER INFORMATION
CHAIRMAN’S LETTER
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
INVESTMENT OVERVIEW
TRANSACTION OVERVIEW
OVERVIEW OF THE BUSINESS
INDUSTRY OVERVIEW
FINANCIAL INFORMATION
RISK FACTORS
REGULATORY REPORT
PATENT REPORT
INDEPENDENT LIMITED ASSURANCE REPORT
10  KEY PEOPLE, INTERESTS AND BENEFITS
11  OFFER DETAILS
12  MATERIAL AGREEMENTS
13  ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
14  GLOSSARY
15  CORPORATE DIRECTORY
9
Key Offer Information
Important Dates 
Prospectus lodgement date 
Offer Opens 
Meeting of shareholders 
Offer Closes 
Issue of New Shares and Underwriter Options 
Completion of the Acquisition of ePAT 
Anticipated dispatch of holding statements 
Shares expected to begin trading on ASX
Date 
25 August 2016 
25 August 2016 
31 August 2016 
5 September 2016 
8 September 2016 
8 September 2016 
12 September 2016 
16 September 2016
These dates and times are indicative only and may change. For example, any delay by the ASX in 
granting conditional reinstatement of the Company’s securities may delay Completion of the 
Acquisition.  The Company, in consultation with the Lead Manager and Underwriters, reserves the 
right to vary the dates and times of the Offer without prior notice, including closing the Offer before 
the scheduled Closing Date.
Key Offer Statistics
Offer price per Share 
Shares offered under 
this Prospectus 
Total Shares on issue 
after the Offer and 
Completion of the 
Acquisition 
Amount to be raised 
under the Offer 
Implied market 
capitalisation at the 
Offer Price
If the following Shares are issued
Minimum Shares
$0.02
Underwritten Shares 
$0.02
Maximum Shares
$0.02
200,000,000
225,000,000
287,500,000
689,947,735
714,947,735
777,447,735
$4,000,000
$4,500,000
$5,750,000
$13,798,954
$14,298,954
$15,548,954
Notes: Assumes the Consolidation has occurred and no Options are exercised.  Exact figures may 
be subject to the rounding effects of the Consolidation.  Refer to Section 11.8 for further details 
relating to the proposed capital structure of the Company.
How to invest
Applications for Shares can only be made by completing and lodging the Application Form attached 
to or accompanying this Prospectus.  Instructions on how to apply for Shares are set out in Section 
11.10 of this Prospectus and on the back of the Application Form.
10
' I
Chairman 5 Letter
Dear Investor,
On behalf of the Directors of MinQuest Limited (Company), it is my pleasure to invite you to become
a shareholder in the Companvt
The acquisition of Electronic Pain Assessment Technologies (EPAT) Pty Ltd ('ePAT’) is a significant
strategic event for the Company. Following the successful acquisition of ePAT, the Company will be
renamed ePAT Technologies Limited (“ePAT Technologies’) and the Company will focus all of its
business activities in the emerging sector of medical applications for mobile devices (’Apps’).
ePAT is an early stage technology company that has acquired technology developed in conjunction
with research by Curtin University in Western Australia, with the aim of commercialising 3years of
research work of developing revolutionary Apps, which use facial recognition software to facilitate
and improve pain assessment and monitoring of pain treatment in people who are unable to
communicate. The Apps are being developed for the global market, initially for use in persons with
dementia and by health ca re professionals and carers, and subsequently for use in children by
parents and carers.
A prototype ePAT App for Dementia has been trialled in three aged care facilities during 2015 - 2016
with positive results compared to existing methods of pain assessment. Furthervalidationwork and
regulatory approvals is planned.
The ePAT Apps have been recognised for their innovation and potential. In June 2015, ePAT was
selected as a finalist for the AHA National iAwards. and in July 2015 ePAT was selected as an
Emerging Innovation category finalist forthe 2016 WA Innovator of the Vear awards.
ePAT has recruited Philip Daffas, a se'niorexecutive from the medical device industry to be the new
Managing Directorofthe Company. In addition a new Board, with significant experience of
commercialising technology in global markets, is proposed to oversee the development of the
Company after the Capital Raising.
Following completion of the capital raising outlined in this Prospectus and approval of the ePAT
Acquisition by the existing Shareholders, the Company will undertake an aggressive product
development and implementation plan, with the goal of commercialising the first ePAT App for
Dementia during 2017, followed by the ePAT App for Children in 2018,
This Prospectus contains detailed information about the Offer, the industry in which the Company is
proposing to operate. and the financial and operating performance of ePAT and the Company.
Following Completion of the Acquisition and the Offer, the Company will be subject to a range of
risks including regulatory approvals, protection ofintellectual property and competition The risks
associated with investing in the Company are detailed in Section 1.5 and Section 6. It is important
that you read this Prospectus carefully and in its entirety before making your investment decision,
On behalf of my fellow Directors, I look forward to welcoming you as a Shareholder.
Vou sincerely.
/ "ﬂﬂrr \\.
/,
/ 4M Terranova, Chairman
11


1
INVESTMENT OVERVIEW
This Section is a summary only and is not intended to provide full information to potential investors. 
This Prospectus should be read and considered in its entirety.
1.1
The Company
Topic
Summary
Who is the issuer 
of this 
Prospectus? 
Who is 
MinQuest?
Does the 
Company still 
have any mining 
or resources 
interests?
MinQuest Limited ACN 146 035 127 (Company) (to be renamed 
“ePAT Technologies Limited”).
The Company was incorporated on 27 August 2010 as “Minerva 
Resources Limited” and was admitted to the official list of ASX on 
27 April 2012 under the name “Merah Resources Limited”.  
The Company’s most recent primary activity has been the 
exploration of base metal projects in Australia and Western 
Canada.
No, the Company has either withdrawn from, or is in the process 
of, withdrawing from all of its mining and resources tenements 
and claims, both in Australia and Canada.
1.2
Acquisition of ePAT
Topic
Summary
What is ePAT?
What is MinQuest 
paying for the 
Acquisition?
ePAT is a privately owned Australian company which is 
developing mobile medical applications that are intended to 
provide pain assessment for individuals that are unable to 
communicate with their carers.  
In consideration for the acquisition of all the shares in ePAT, the 
Company has agreed to issue the following Consideration 
Shares to ePAT shareholders: 
•
•
213,219,616 Shares at Completion of the Acquisition; and
Shares to the value of $1,000,000 if a Milestone is satisfied
within 12 months of Completion of the Acquisition. Refer to
Section 2.1(b) for further details regarding the Milestones
and the price at which these Shares are to be issued.
No funds will be raised by the issue of the Consideration Shares 
as they are to be issued as part of the consideration for the 
Acquisition.
Further 
Information 
Sections 2, 
3 and 11.
Section 
3.17.
Section 
3.17.
Further 
Information
Sections 
2.1, 3.1, 3.2 
and 3.3.
Sections 2.1 
and 2.4.
12
The ePAT business has evolved from research undertaken by 
Curtin University over the past 3 years.  ePAT now owns the 
intellectual property resulting from Curtin University’s research 
on the ePAT Apps.  
ePAT’s technology, a mobile application (ePAT App), uses 
cameras in smartphones and tablets to capture a brief video of 
the person, which is analysed in real time using facial 
recognition software to detect the presence of facial micro-
expressions that are indicative of the presence of pain.  
This data is then combined with other indicators of pain, such 
as vocalisations, behaviours and movements captured through 
the ePAT App to calculate a pain severity score.  
Due to its ease of use and its reproducibility, it is intended that 
the ePAT App will be able to be used in the first instance to 
detect and measure a person’s pain, and then further 
measurements can be used to monitor the effectiveness of pain 
management provided to the person.  
The ePAT App is being developed and rolled out in two phases: 
first, the ePAT App for Dementia for persons who have lost the 
ability to communicate with their carers, and the second, the 
ePAT App for Children who have not yet learnt to speak.  
Additionally, ePAT is actively exploring other potential 
applications for the technology and algorithms underlying the 
ePAT App, including, but not limited to: 
•
assisting in the assessment of personal injury and workers’
compensation insurance claims; and
other groups in which the ability to communicate verbally
may be impaired, for example people who have had a
stroke, people with intellectual development delay, and
people with traumatic brain injury.
•
Sections 
3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 
3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 
3.8 and 
3.13.
What is ePAT’s 
business?
The ePAT Apps remain under development and subject to 
validation studies and are not yet currently available for sale. 
Refer to Section 3.6 for an indicative timetable for the path to 
commercialisation for the ePAT App for Dementia. 
The key research personnel of ePAT are Professor Jeff Hughes, 
Mr Mustafa Atee and Dr Kreshnik Hoti.  
Under a Research Services Agreement, Curtin University has 
agreed to provide the services of Professor Jeff Hughes and Mr 
Mustafa Atee to ePAT following Completion of the Acquisition.  
ePAT has entered into a Consultancy Agreement with Dr 
Kreshnik Hoti pursuant to which Dr Hoti has agreed to continue 
to provide his research services to ePAT following Completion 
of the Acquisition.
Sections 
3.15, 10.3 
and 12.1.
ePAT’s research operations are based in Western Australia and 
its head office will be established in Sydney, New South Wales.
Section 2.1.
Who are the key 
researchers 
behind the 
development of 
the ePAT 
business?
Where are the 
operations of 
ePAT?
13
Are there any 
independent 
reports on ePAT 
and its business?
QRC Solutions have provided a report on the regulatory aspects 
of the ePAT App in Section 7 and Griffith Hack has provided a 
report on the patent application relating to the ePAT App in 
Section 8.
Sections 7 
and 8.
Further 
Information
Sections 
3.2, 3.9, 
3.10, 3.11, 
3.12, 6.3(h), 
6.3(i), 8, 
12.4 and 
12.5.
Sections 3.3 
3.4, 3.5 and 
3.8.
1.3
Business Model
Topic
Summary
ePAT holds the following intangible assets: 
•
•
•
International Patent Application No. PCT/AU2015/000501;
copyright in the Pain Assessment Tool Checklist;
non-exclusive licence from nViso for the 3D mobile facial
imaging software development kit; 
non-exclusive licence from nViso for the facial recognition
engine and facial landmark detection algorithm; and 
exclusive licence from Darwin Digital for the ePAT
Application and Development Contract (with perpetual
ownership to pass in November 2016);
registered domain names; and
trade secrets and other non-registrable intellectual property
associated with the ePAT App.
What are the 
assets of ePAT?
•
•
•
•
How does ePAT 
generate 
revenue?
o
o
o
o
ePAT does not currently generate revenue. 
The Company intends to derive revenue from the following 
direct and indirect sources, should its business model be 
successful and following the launch or other commercialisation 
of the ePAT App: 
•
ePAT App for Dementia:  ePAT proposes to commercialise
the ePAT App for Dementia as follows:
Business-to-Business (B2B): under licence directly
or indirectly through software vendors to
residential aged care facilities, medical clinics and
hospitals; and
Business-to-Consumer (B2C): available to home and
professional carers and health care professionals
via a global distribution platform (such as the Apple
App store and/or Google Play store).
•
ePAT App for Children: ePAT proposes to commercialise the 
ePAT App for Children as follows:
Business-to-Business (B2B): under licence directly 
or indirectly through software vendors to childcare 
centres, early learning centres, schools, clinics and 
hospitals; and
Business-to-Consumer (B2C): available to parents, 
carers and health care professionals via a global 
distribution platform (such as the Apple App store 
and/or Google Play store).
14
Following Completion of the Acquisition, the Company’s strategy 
is to progress the development and commercialisation of the 
ePAT App for Dementia by: 
•
Completing the development of the ePAT App for
Dementia: completing commercial versions of the ePAT
App, both for Android and iOS.
Completing validation and implementation studies for the
ePAT App for Dementia: completing validation studies of
the commercial versions of the ePAT App for Dementia in
partnership with Mercy Care and commencing
implementation studies with industry partners, including a
major, reputable Australian aged care provider, in the second
half of 2016.
Applying for registration of the ePAT App for Dementia as a
medical device: Applying for registration of the ePAT App as
a medical device with the TGA in Australia, CE mark for the
European Union and FDA once the validation studies are
complete. It is intended that the ePAT App for Dementia will
be registered with the CE mark and TGA during the third
quarter of 2017.
Pricing and marketing: completing and implementing
cohesive pricing and marketing strategy based on the results
of the implementation studies and in consultation with
industry partners.
What is the 
Company’s 
proposed 
strategy?
•
•
•
A similar process is intended to be followed with the 
development and evaluation and registration of the ePAT App 
for Children.  
The key factors that the Company will depend upon to meet its 
objectives are: 
•
achievement of positive results in the validation and
implementation studies; 
necessary regulatory approvals required to conduct its
proposed business;
successful marketing of the ePAT Apps globally;
successful uptake and usage of the Apps by carers; and
protection of the Company’s intellectual property.
•
•
•
•
What are the key 
dependencies of 
the Company’s 
business model
15
Sections 
3.3, 3.4, 3.6, 
and 3.14.
Sections 
3.5, 3.9, 
3.10, 3.11 
and 3.12
1.4
Directors and other key people
Topic
Summary
The existing Directors of the Company are: 
• Mr Frank Terranova;
• Mr Jeremy Read;
• Mr Paul Niardone; and
• Mr Adam Davey.
On Completion of the Acquisition, changes will be made to 
the Board. Messrs Terranova, Read and Niardone will retire 
and new Directors will be appointed. After the Acquisition, it 
is intended that the Board will comprise: 
• Mr Philip Daffas;
• Mr Adam Davey;
• Mr Ross Harricks; and
• Mr John Murray.
It is intended that Mr Stephen Kelly will resign as company 
secretary and Mr Ian Hobson will become company secretary 
following Completion of the Acquisition.  
It is intended that Mr Philip Daffas will be the Company’s 
Managing Director and will manage the Company’s 
operations. 
It is intended that Mr Ian Hobson will act as Company 
Secretary. 
Professor Jeff Hughes will lead ePAT’s scientific research and 
development activities, providing his significant scientific 
experience to ePAT under the Research Services Agreement 
with Curtin University. 
Mr Mustafa Atee, one of the inventors of the ePAT App, will 
provide his extensive research skills and experience with the 
ePAT App and associated technology pursuant to the Curtin 
Research Services Agreement.  
Dr Kreshnik Hoti, another of the inventors of the ePAT App, 
will provide extensive clinical and significant research 
experience in the area of pain management in relation to the 
ePAT App, to ePAT under his Consultancy Agreement with 
ePAT. 
The interests of the existing Directors and the proposed 
Directors in securities of the Company are detailed in Section 
10. No Director, existing or proposed, holds shares in ePAT.
The interests of the existing and proposed Directors in 
contracts with the Company or ePAT are detailed in Section 
10.
Who are and who 
will be the Directors 
of the Company?
Who will be the 
Company’s key 
people?
What are the 
interests of Directors 
and other related 
parties?
16
Further 
Information
Sections 
10.1 and 
10.2.
Sections 
3.15, 6.3(b) 
6.3(c) 10.1, 
10.2, 12.1 
and 12.2.
Sections 
10.4, 10.6 
and 10.7.
1.5
Key Risks
Topic
Summary
What are the risks 
associated with the 
Company, its 
business model, the 
Shares and the 
Offer?
The Company’s ability to make money and generate income 
or capital growth for investors or otherwise meet its 
objectives is subject to a number of factors and risks beyond 
the control of the Company.  Some key risks are noted below. 
A more fulsome explanation of these risks and others is set 
out in Section 6.
The acquisition of ePAT constitutes a significant change in the 
nature and scale of the Company’s activities and the ASX 
Listing Rules oblige the Company to re-comply with Chapters 
1 and 2 of the ASX Listing Rules as if it were seeking 
admission to the official list of ASX. 
There is a risk that the Company may not be able to meet the 
requirements of the ASX for re-quotation of its shares. 
If the Acquisition does not proceed, the Company will not 
proceed with the Offer and will repay all the Application 
Monies received without interest as soon as practicable and 
in accordance with the Corporations Act. 
The Company’s reliance on key contracts entered into with 
nViso SA of Switzerland and Curtin University poses a 
significant risk.  If nViso’s services in relation to facial 
recognition technology or Curtin University’s research 
services were made unavailable, there is no guarantee that a 
suitable replacement could be found.   
The ePAT Apps remain subject to further implementation and 
validation studies. There is no guarantee that such studies 
will be permitted by the relevant regulatory authorities or 
that the results will be successful. In addition, the studies 
may take longer and cost more than anticipated. 
ePAT has no trading history and therefore an element of 
uncertainty exists for the Company and investors alike.  
Investors should consider the lack of financial history when 
considering the prospects of the Company.  There is no 
guarantee that ePAT will be able to successfully develop or 
commercialise its products which would have a detrimental 
effect on revenue generation.  
There is a risk that ePAT will not be able to successfully 
commercialise or sell its products, or will be unable to attract 
sufficient customers to be sufficiently profitable to fund 
future operations.
Change in nature 
and scale of 
activities
Reliance on Key 
Contracts
Validation and 
implementation 
studies
Lack of trading 
history
Commercialisation 
Risk
17
Further 
Information
Section 6.1.
Section 
6.2(a).
Section 
6.2(b).
Section 
6.3(e).
Section 
6.3(g).
Section 
6.3(g).
Due diligence risk
Key personnel risk
Section 
6.4(f).
Section 
6.3(b).
The Company has agreed to acquire ePAT.  Whilst pre-
acquisition due diligence has been undertaken, there is a risk 
that due diligence has not identified issues that would have 
been material to the decision to acquire the shares in ePAT.   
Reliance on key personnel poses a risk to the Company.
The skills and knowledge involved in the research and 
development of the intellectual property has been in large 
part due to the knowledge, skills and expertise of Professor 
Jeff Hughes, Mr Mustafa Atee and Dr Kreshnik Hoti.  There is 
no guarantee that ePAT and/or Curtin University will be able 
to retain the services of the researchers.  However, these key 
researchers will own significant shareholdings in the 
Company as a result of their invention of the ePAT App, 
which provides an inherent alignment of their personal 
interests with the interests of the Company and a natural 
incentive for them to remain engaged with their research for 
the Company.
The strategic management of ePAT will depend substantially 
on its senior management, including the proposed Directors.  
There is no guarantee that ePAT will be able to attract and 
retain suitably qualified personnel.
Reliance on 
outsourcing
The Company will be reliant on outsourcing to consultants 
and organisations for expert advice.   There is no guarantee 
that the consultants and organisations will be able to meet 
the expectations of the Company in the future.
Section 
6.3(m).
Intellectual 
property protection
Sections 
6.3(h) and 
6.3(i).
The possible future commercial success of the ePAT 
intellectual property may rely upon the ability to obtain and 
maintain patent protection and there is no guarantee that 
the claims and applications in respect of the ePAT IP will be 
found to be valid and enforceable or that all of the patent 
applications will be granted.
The defence and prosecution of intellectual property rights 
are costly and time consuming and their outcome is 
uncertain.  ePAT does not own the licensed intellectual 
property, but rather has contractual rights as licensee under 
the nViso agreements. (refer to Section 12 for further details)
Even after granted patent protection, the patents could be 
partially or wholly invalidated following challenges by third 
parties. The grant of a patent does not guarantee validity of 
that patent since it may be revoked on the ground of 
invalidity at any time during its life. If none of the claims of a 
granted patent are valid, the patent is unenforceable, but this 
would not prevent ePAT from commercialising technology 
which it has developed.
18
1.6
Key Financial Metrics
Summary
Further 
Information
The Company intends to apply the funds raised from the Offer as 
set out in Section 11.
Section 
11.7.
Topic
What is the 
proposed use of 
funds raised 
under the Offer?
Will the Company 
be adequately 
funded after 
completion of the 
Offer?
What is the 
Company’s pro 
forma and 
historical and 
forecast financial 
performance?
What is the 
Company’s 
dividend policy?
The Directors are satisfied that on completion of the Offers, the 
Company will have sufficient working capital to carry out its 
objectives as stated in Section 11.7.  
It is expected that other capital raisings or other funding will be 
necessary to complete the commercialisation of the ePAT Apps. 
The historical financial information of the Company and ePAT as 
at 31 December 2015 is in Section 5.  
The reviewed pro forma statement of financial position for the 
Company as at 31 December 2015 is in Section 5. 
Following the change in the nature of its activities, the Company 
will be focused on the development of the business of ePAT. 
Therefore, the Company’s past operational and financial 
performance will not be of significant relevance to future 
activities.  
The Independent Limited Assurance Report is in Section 9. 
The Company does not expect to pay dividends in the near 
future as its focus will primarily be on using cash reserves to 
grow and develop the Company's business. 
Any future determination as to the payment of dividends by the 
Company will be at the discretion of the Directors and will 
depend upon matters such as the availability of distributable 
earnings, the operating results and financial condition of the 
Company, future capital requirements, general business and 
other factors considered relevant by the Directors. No 
assurances are given in relation to the payment of dividends, or 
that any dividends may attach franking credits.
Sections 
6.4(a) and 
11.6.
Sections 5 
and 9.
Section 5.8.
Further 
Information
Section 11.1.
1.7
Overview of the Offer
Topic
Summary
What is the 
Offer?
The Offer is an offer inviting Applicants to apply for up to 
287,500,000 Shares at an issue price of $0.02 each, to raise up 
to $5,750,000 (before costs).  The minimum amount to be 
raised under the offer is $4,000,000.
19
Topic
Summary
Further 
Information
Key Offer 
Statistics
If the minimum 
number of Shares 
are issued
If the maximum 
number of Shares 
are issued
What are the key 
Offer Statistics?
What are the 
conditions to the 
Offer?
$0.02
200,000,000
287,500,000
$0.02
689,947,735
Offer price per 
Share 
Shares offered 
under this 
Prospectus 
Total Shares on 
issue after the 
Offer and 
Completion of the 
Acquisition 
Amount to be 
raised under the 
Offer 
Implied market 
capitalisation at 
the Offer Price 
Notes: 
Assumes the Consolidation has occurred and no Options are 
exercised. Exact figures may be subject to the rounding 
effects of the Consolidation.  Refer to Section 11.8 for further 
details relating to the proposed capital structure of the 
Company.
$13,798,954
$4,000,000
777,447,735
$5,750,000
$15,548,954
The Offers are conditional upon the following events occurring: 
•
the Company raising a minimum of $4,000,000 under the
Offer;
Shareholders approving the Acquisition Resolutions to be
put to them at the Meeting to be held on 31 August 2016;
•
•  Completion of the Acquisition;
•
the Company receiving ASX’s conditional approval for the
reinstatement of the Company’s Shares to quotation and 
those conditions being acceptable to ePAT and the 
Company, acting reasonably.
If any of the conditions are not satisfied then the Offers will not 
proceed and the Company will repay all Application Monies.
20
Sections, 
2.3(c) and 
11.1.
Section 11.4.
Further 
Information
Section 
11.20.
Sections 2.1 
and 11.5.
Section 11.3.
Key Offer 
Information.
Topic
Summary
Can the Offer be 
withdrawn?
The Company may withdraw the Offer at any time before the 
issue of Shares to successful Applicants. If the Offer, or any part 
of it, does not proceed, all relevant Application Monies will be 
refunded (without interest). 
The Company and the Lead Manager reserve the right to close 
the Offer or any part of it early, extend the Offer or any part of 
it, accept late Applications either generally or in particular 
cases, reject any Application, or allocate to an Applicant fewer 
Shares than applied for. 
The purposes of the Offer are to: 
• meet the requirement that the Company re-complies with
the ASX’s admission requirements in accordance with
Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules;
provide funding for the purposes outlined in Section 2;
provide the Company with access to equity capital markets
for future funding needs; and
enhance the public and financial profile of ePAT and the
Company.
Why is the Offer 
being conducted?
•
•
•
Why is the 
Underwriter 
Options Offer 
being conducted?
What are the key 
dates of the 
Offer?
Date 
25 August 2016 
25 August 2016 
31 August 2016 
5 September 2016 
8 September 2016 
8 September 2016
The Underwriter Options Offer has been included in this 
Prospectus to remove the need for an additional document to 
be issued upon the exercise of any Options issued to the 
Underwriters and/or their nominees under the Underwriter 
Options Offer. 
Indicative Timetable 
Important Dates 
Prospectus lodgement 
date 
Offer Opens 
Meeting of shareholders 
Offer Closes 
Issue of New Shares 
Completion of the 
Acquisition of ePAT 
Anticipated dispatch of 
holding statements  
Shares expected to begin 
16 September 2016 
trading on ASX  
These dates and times are indicative only and may 
change. The Company, in consultation with the Lead 
Manager and Underwriters, reserves the right to vary 
the dates and times of the Offer without prior notice, 
including closing the Offer before the scheduled Closing 
Date.
12 September  2016
21
Topic
Summary
Further 
Information
What types of 
Shares are being 
offered and what 
are the rights 
attaching to the 
Shares?
All Shares offered under this Prospectus are or will be fully paid 
ordinary Shares in the Company, ranking equally with each 
other and all currently issued Shares, with the same rights and 
liabilities (refer to Section 11 for a summary of the rights and 
liabilities attaching to Shares).
Section 
11.19.
How to apply for 
Shares?
Is the Offer 
underwritten?
Applications for Shares under the Offer must be made by 
completing the Application Form and must be accompanied by 
either proof of bank deposit or a cheque, in Australian dollars 
for the full amount of the application being the number of 
Shares applied for multiplied by $0.02 per Share. Cheques must 
be made payable to "MinQuest Limited" and should be crossed 
"Not Negotiable". 
Completed Application Forms and accompanying deposits or 
cheques must be received by the Company before 5.00pm on 
the Closing Date by either being delivered to, or posted to, the 
following address: 
1/47 Park Road, Milton, QLD 4064.
The Offer is partially underwritten by Patersons Securities 
Limited and RM Corporate Finance Pty Ltd to the amount of 
$4,500,000.   
Details of the Underwriting Agreement, including the 
circumstances in which the Underwriters may terminate 
their obligations, are set out in Section 12.10. 
The Underwriters (or nominees) will also receive the 
Underwriter Options upon completion of the Offer.
Section 
11.10.
Sections 
11.9 and 
12.10.
Who is the lead 
manager to the 
Offer?
What is the 
allocation policy?
Will the Shares 
be quoted?
The Company has appointed Patersons Securities Limited (AFSL: 
239052) to act as lead manager to the Offer. The Lead Manager 
will receive a success fee in connection with the Acquisition, as 
well as Capital Raising fees in connection with the Offer which 
are payable on completion of the Offer.  
The Underwriters have the discretion regarding the allocation 
of Shares to Applicants under the Offer and may reject an 
Application, or allocate fewer Shares than the amount applied 
for. 
The Company will apply to ASX no later than 7 days from the 
date of this Prospectus for official quotation of the Shares on 
ASX under the code “EPT” (EPT is the ASX Ticker Code reserved 
by the Company).
Sections 
12.10, 
12.11,  and 
13.20.
Section 
11.11.
Important 
Information.
22
Topic
Summary
Will any Shares 
issued by the 
Company be 
subject to 
escrow?
When are the 
Shares expected 
to commence 
trading?
Are there any 
brokerage, 
commission or 
stamp duty 
considerations?
Are there tax 
implications?
What should you 
do with any 
enquiries?
No Shares issued under the Offer will be subject to escrow. 
The  Shares issued to the ePAT shareholders as consideration 
for the Company’s acquisition of all of the issued capital of 
ePAT, will be classified by ASX as restricted securities and will be 
required to be held in escrow for up to 24 months from the 
date of reinstatement of the Company’s Shares to official 
quotation.  
It is expected that trading of the Shares on the ASX will 
commence on 14 September 2016. It is the responsibility of 
each Applicant to confirm their holding before trading in 
Shares. Applicants who sell Shares before they receive an initial 
holding statement do so at their own risk. The Company, the 
Share Registry and the Lead Manager disclaim all liability, 
whether in negligence or otherwise, if you sell your Shares 
before receiving your holding statement, even if you confirmed 
your firm allocation through a Broker or otherwise.
Further 
Information
Sections 
2.4(vii) and 
11.13.
Key Offer 
Information.
There are no brokerage fees, commissions or stamp duty 
payable by the Applicants under the Offer.
Section 
11.21.
The taxation consequences of an investment in the Company 
will depend upon the investor’s particular circumstances. 
Investors should make their own enquiries about the taxation 
consequences of an investment in the Company. 
If you require assistance or have any questions in relation to the 
Offer, or you are uncertain as to whether obtaining Shares in 
the Company is a suitable investment for you, you should seek 
professional advice from your stockbroker, lawyer, accountant 
or other professional adviser.
Section 11.
Section 
11.15.
23
1.8  Material contracts affecting intellectual property ownership
Topic
Summary
Further 
Information
The following contracts affect or have affected intellectual 
property ownership:
What are the 
material 
contracts 
affecting 
intellectual 
property 
ownership
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Licence Agreement with nViso S.A. dated 26 
September 2014 – summarised in Section 12.4;
Statement of Work between nViso and ePAT 
dated 26 September 2014 – summarised in 
Section 12.4;
ePAT Application Development Contract 
between ePAT and Darwin Digital Sàrl dated 01 
December 2015 – summarised in Section 12.5;
Memorandum of Understanding between 
Strenuus Limited and ePAT dated 11 March 
2016 – summarised in Section 12.7;
Memorandum of Understanding between a 
major, reputable Australian aged care provider 
and ePAT dated 16 March 2016 – summarised 
in Section 12.8;
Clinical Trial Research Agreement between 
Mercy Health and ePAT dated 5 May 2016 –
summarised in Section 12.9;
Research Services Agreement between Curtin 
University and ePAT, dated 2 August 2016 –
summarised in Section 12.1; and
Section 12.
Consultancy Agreement with Dr Hoti dated 19 
August 2016 – summarised in Section 12.2.
ePAT has also been a party to various contracts which assigned 
the intellectual property in the ePAT Apps to ePAT.
24
What other 
material 
contracts are the 
Company and 
ePAT a party to?
The following agreement are material contracts that either the 
Company or ePAT have entered into:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Research Services Agreement with Curtin 
University – summarised in Section 12.1;
Share Sale and Purchase Agreement between 
ePAT and the Company – summarised in Section 
12.3;
Underwriting Agreement – summarised in 
Section 12.10;
Master Services Agreement between nViso and 
ePAT – summarised in Section 12.4;
Maintenance and Support Agreement between 
nViso and ePAT – summarised in Section 12.4;
Section 12.
ePAT Application Development Contract 
between ePAT and Darwin Digital Sàrl dated 01 
December 2015 to develop the user interface 
and ePAT App for Dementia – summarised in 
Section 12.5;
Option Agreement between ePAT and Professor 
Hughes, Dr Hoti and Mr Atee; - summarised in 
Section 12.5 and
Executive Services Agreement between Philip 
Daffas and MinQuest Limited (to be renamed 
EPAT Technologies Limited – summarised in 
Section 12.9.
Which licence 
contracts is ePAT 
dependent upon? 
Which contracts 
will govern how 
the ePAT App is 
developed?
Who are ePAT’s 
key suppliers?
Who are ePAT’s 
key customers?
ePAT is dependent on a licence agreement with ‘nViso S.A’, a 
non-exclusive licence to use its 3D facial imaging technology 
software.
Section 12.4
The Statement of Work between nViso and ePAT and the ePAT 
Application Development Contract between ePAT and Darwin 
Digital Sàrl may govern how the ePAT App is developed.
Section 12.4 
and 12.5.
nViso SA, Curtin University and Darwin Digital Sàrl.
There are currently no key customers of ePAT. The targeted key 
customers consist of health care professionals, healthcare 
organisations and institutions, consumers and aged care 
providers.
Sections 
12.4, 12.1 
and 12.5.
Section 3.3 
and 3.4.
25
2
2.1
TRANSACTION OVERVIEW
ePAT Acquisition
On 29 January 2016, the Company announced that considering the continued uncertainty regarding 
the outlook for the mining and metals sector, and what is expected to remain a challenging financing 
environment for resource companies in the short term, the Board was undertaking a wide ranging 
review of the Company’s business in order to maximise the returns for shareholders, including the 
consideration of opportunities outside of the resources sector.
On 14 April 2016, the Company announced that it had agreed to acquire the entire issued capital of 
Electronic Pain Assessment Technologies (ePAT) Pty Ltd, a Perth based, privately owned company 
which is developing mobile medical applications that are intended to provide pain assessment for 
individuals who are unable to communicate with their carers.
The Acquisition is proposed to be effected by means of an all-scrip offer by the Company to acquire 
all of the shares held in ePAT on the following basis:
(a)
(b)
213,219,616 Shares to ePAT’s shareholders on Completion; and
Shares to the value of $1,000,000 if a “Milestone” is satisfied within 12 months of
Completion of the Acquisition (Refer to Section 2.4 for further details regarding the
Milestones and the valuation of the Shares).
All references to Shares in this Prospectus are on the basis that the Consolidation has taken effect, 
unless expressly stated otherwise.
Refer to Section 2.4 and Section 12.3 for a summary of the share sale and purchase agreement 
between the Company, ePAT and the shareholders of ePAT in respect of the Acquisition (SSPA).
The valuation and number of Consideration Shares to be issued to the ePAT shareholders was 
determined through arm's length negotiations between the existing Directors of the Company at the 
date of the Prospectus and the Board of ePAT.
In determining the purchase price for ePAT, the Directors took into account the following 
considerations:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
their review of the market for pain measurement technology and the current and predicted
number of people with dementia;
following review of the business of ePAT, the absence of current Apps using facial
recognition technology for pain detection, the strong results of the initial validation studies,
and the experience and skills of the researchers and management team of ePAT, the
Directors formed the view that ePAT’s product offerings, under the direction and
development of the ePAT team, may have a competitive advantage in the new market sector
of smartphone and tablet enabled medical Apps;
the potential market opportunity being developed by ePAT, the time it would take to
progress the ePAT Apps to commercialisation, the risks associated with the Apps and the
potential to gain approval for and commercialise these products; and
that the “all scrip” nature of the acquisition aligns the personal interests of the ePAT
inventors and key researchers with the performance of the Company, which provides a
natural incentive for the key researchers to maximise their efforts in the best interests of the
Company.
26
Taking these factors into account, the existing Directors determined that the Acquisition, should it 
complete, may be value accretive to existing Shareholders.
As with the acquisition of any business or asset that does not have a meaningful track record of 
revenue and profitability, there is not always a good valuation methodology available when 
determining the purchase price. Accordingly, in coming to a decision on the purchase price for ePAT, 
the existing Directors were required to take into account qualitative factors.
Completion of the Acquisition is subject to a number of conditions set out in Section 2.4.
2.2
Suspension and reinstatement on ASX
The Company's recent primary activity has been the exploration of its mining projects in Australia 
and Western Canada.
ASX has advised that the Acquisition constitutes a change in the nature and scale of the Company’s 
activities, requiring:
(a)
(b)
the approval of Shareholders; and
the Company to re-comply with the admission requirements set out in Chapters 1 and 2 of
the Listing Rules.
The Company has obtained waivers from Listing Rule 1.1 condition 11, Listing Rule 2.1 condition 2 
and Listing Rule 7.3 in connection with the re-compliance.
Shareholder approval for the change in the nature and scale of the Company's activities will be 
sought at the Meeting to be held on 31 August 2016.
The Company’s Securities were suspended from quotation on ASX on 18 July 2016 following the 
announcement that the Company had allowed its interests and obligations to lapse in relation to the 
Fyre Lake copper project in the Yukon Territory, Canada.
The Company's Securities will not be reinstated to quotation until the Company has satisfied the 
conditions to the Offer, including re-compliance with Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules.
It is expected that the conduct of the Offer pursuant to this Prospectus and Completion of the 
Acquisition will enable the Company to satisfy the requirements of Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing 
Rules.
Applicants should be aware that ASX will not re-admit or admit any Shares issued under the Offer to 
Official Quotation until the Company re-complies with Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules to the 
satisfaction of ASX.
There is a risk that the Company may not be able to meet the requirements for re-quotation on the 
ASX. In the event the conditions to the Offer are not satisfied, then the Company will not proceed 
with the Offer and will repay all Application Monies received.
The Company will apply to ASX, no later than 7 days from the date of this Prospectus, for ASX to 
grant official quotation of the Shares issued pursuant to this Prospectus. If the Shares are not 
admitted to quotation within 3 months after the date of this Prospectus, any issue or transfer of the 
Shares issued pursuant to this Prospectus will be void and the Application Monies will be refunded in 
full without interest in accordance with the Corporations Act.
27
Neither ASX nor ASIC take responsibility for the contents of this Prospectus. The fact that ASX may 
grant official quotation to the Shares issued pursuant to this Prospectus is not to be taken in any way 
as an indication by ASX as to the merits of the Company or the Shares.
2.3
Extraordinary General Meeting
At the Meeting to be held on 31 August 2016, the Company will seek Shareholder approval of the 
following Resolutions in relation to the Acquisition and the Offers:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Change in nature and scale: the Company changing the nature and scale of its activities as a
result of the Acquisition. Upon Completion of the Acquisition, the Company will effectively
change from a mineral explorer to a health and technology company.
Issue of Consideration Shares to ePAT shareholders: the Company issuing the Consideration
Shares to the ePAT shareholders in consideration for the Acquisition of 100% of the shares
of ePAT.
Offer: The Company issuing up to 287,500,000 Shares to the public under this Prospectus.
Change of name: the Company changing its name from "MinQuest Limited" to "ePAT
Technologies Limited", with effect from the date that ASIC alters the details of the
Company's registration.
Consolidation: the Company consolidating its Shares on the basis of every seven Shares
being consolidated into four Shares.
Issue of Underwriter Options: the Company issuing the Underwriter Options to the
Underwriters (or their nominees).
Election of proposed Directors: the election of Mr John Murray, Mr Ross Harricks and Mr
Philip Daffas as Directors of the Company subject to the Completion of the Share Sale and
Purchase Agreement.
If any one or more of the resolutions in paragraph (a) to (f) (but excluding (g)) are not passed by 
Shareholders, ePAT will be entitled to terminate the SSPA. If it does so, the Offer made under this 
Prospectus will be withdrawn and no Applications will be accepted and the Company will repay all 
Application Monies received without interest.
2.4
Acquisition Agreement
On 14 April 2016, the Company announced to ASX that it had entered into a conditional binding 
term sheet to acquire the entire issued capital of ePAT.
On 25 July 2016, the Company, ePAT and the ePAT shareholders entered into the SSPA, a full form 
share sale purchase agreement which replaced the initial term sheet.
The material terms of the SSPA are summarised below:
(a)
Conditions of the SSPA
Completion of the sale and purchase of 100% of the issued capital of ePAT is to occur on a
date and time agreed by the parties, following the satisfaction or waiver of the latest
condition precedent to be satisfied or waived. The remaining conditions precedent are:
(i)
(approvals) the Company obtaining all necessary Shareholder approvals;
28
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(ASX approval): the Company obtaining conditional approval for the re-quotation of
the Company’s Shares following Completion of the Acquisition and re-compliance
with Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules;
(divestment of mineral projects) the Company divesting its entire legal and
beneficial interests in its mineral projects. The Company has withdrawn from the
Marg Project and the Fyre Lake projects. Shareholders will be asked at the Meeting
to approve the Company’s withdrawal from the Coober Pedy project;
(consolidation) completion of the Consolidation by the Company;
(capital raising) the Company completing a Capital Raising of at least $4,000,000, as
contemplated by the Offer in this Prospectus;
(Curtin sale) Curtin University selling all of its ePAT shares; and
(restriction agreements) to the extent required by ASX or the Listing Rules, each
person entering into a restriction agreement imposing such restrictions as mandated
by the Listing Rules in respect of the Consideration Shares and any other securities
to be issued.
The Company, ePAT and the ePAT shareholders must use their best efforts ensure the above 
conditions precedent are satisfied. If any of the conditions precedent are not satisfied on or 
before 5.00pm (WST) on 30 September 2016 (or such later date as the parties may agree in 
writing), the Company, ePAT or the ePAT shareholders may terminate the SSPA by the 
provision of written notice to the other parties.
(b)
Consideration
In exchange for the Company acquiring ePAT, the Company agreed to issue the following
Consideration Shares to ePAT shareholders:
(i)
(ii)
213,219,616 Shares to be issued at Completion; and
$1,000,000 worth of Shares (Deferred Consideration Shares) to be issued if the
Company announces that either of the following milestones (Milestones) have been
met within 12 months from the date of Completion of the Acquisition:
(A)
Regulatory Approval having been received to enable commercial use of the
ePAT App in Australia, the United States of America or Europe. (In this
context, “Regulatory Approval” means approval by the Therapeutic Goods
Administration of Australia, Food and Drug Administration of the United
States, or a CE mark from the relevant authority in Europe); or
(B)
the execution of a binding licence agreement to licence the ePAT App to:
(i)
(ii)
one or more residential aged care facility owners managing in total
in excess of 150 beds;
one or more medical clinics which service in total in excess of 2,000
patients per year;
(iii)
a metropolitan hospital with in excess of 200 beds;
(each an "End User”) or
29
(iv)
a global distribution partner with multiple End Users as existing
customers.
The quantity of Deferred Consideration Shares to be issued to each Seller will be calculated 
using the following formula:
N =
SP x $1,000,000
P
Where:
N
SP
P
=
=
=
(c)
Board changes
Number of Deferred Consideration Shares to be received by a seller
Seller’s Percentage of ePAT
the higher of the 5 day volume weighted average price, or $0.01.
At Completion, Messrs Frank Terranova, Jeremy Read and Paul Niardone will resign as
Directors, and Messrs Philip Daffas, Ross Harricks and John Murray will be appointed.
It is intended that Mr Adam Davey will continue as a Director.
It is intended that Mr Stephen Kelly will resign as company secretary and Mr Ian Hobson will
become company secretary following Completion of the Acquisition.
(d)
Warranties and indemnities
The SSPA contains additional provisions, including warranties and indemnities in respect of
the status of ePAT and the Company, which the Company considers standard for agreements
of this kind.
2.5
Sale of Curtin University’s shares in ePAT
As Curtin University does not wish to hold shares in a listed company, Curtin University intends to 
enter into binding contracts to sell its shares in ePAT prior to the Completion of the Acquisition. 
Those contracts will oblige the purchasers of those shares to sell the shares to the Company as part 
of the Acquisition.  Completion of the sale from Curtin University to the buyers, and from the buyers 
to the Company, will occur simultaneously with completion of the SSPA.
The buyers will be subject to the same escrow treatment as would have applied to Curtin 
University.
As noted in Section 2.4(a)(vi), it is a condition to completion of the SSPA that Curtin University has 
sold all of its shares in ePAT. Curtin University currently holds 464,285 shares (comprising 46.43%) in 
ePAT.
30
3
3.1
OVERVIEW OF THE BUSINESS
The Company’s Acquisition of ePAT
On 14 April 2016, the Company announced to the ASX that it had entered into a conditional binding 
term sheet to acquire the entire issued capital of ePAT. This term sheet was replaced by a binding 
full form share sale and purchase agreement between the parties on 25 July 2016 (SSPA).
3.2
Summary of the ePAT technology
ePAT  is  developing  mobile  medical  applications  for  pain  assessment  of  individuals  unable  to 
communicate verbally. The current technology owned by ePAT evolved out of research undertaken 
by Curtin University over the past 3 years, which has now been assigned to ePAT.
The  technology  utilises  the  cameras  in  smartphones  and  tablets  to  capture  a  brief  video  of  the 
person, which is analysed in real time using facial recognition software to detect the presence of 
facial micro-expressions that are indicative of the presence of pain. These data are then combined 
with other indicators of pain, such as vocalisations, behaviours and movements captured through 
the App by the operator, allowing the automatic calculation of a pain severity score.
The  Company  envisages  that  the  ePAT  App  can  be  used  to  detect  and  measure  pain,  as  well  as 
subsequently monitor the effectiveness of pain management.
3.3
Development and Roll out
The ePAT Apps are being initially developed and rolled out in two phases: first, the ePAT App for 
Dementia, for persons with dementia who have lost the ability to communicate with their carers and 
second, the ePAT App for Children, initially focussing on a version for infants who have not yet learnt 
to speak.
ePAT  is  also  actively  exploring  other  potential  applications  of  the  technology  and  algorithms 
underlying the ePAT App, including:
(a)
(b)
assisting in the assessment of personal injury and workers’ compensation insurance claims;
and
applications for other persons with impaired verbal communication skills, such as those with
intellectual development delays, or who have suffered a stroke or traumatic brain injury.
The Company intends to develop and commercialise ePAT Apps in areas where the App can address 
significant unmet clinical need.
3.4
Commercialisation objectives
ePAT does not currently generate revenue, but the Company intends to pursue its business model as 
outlined in this Prospectus with a view to commercialising its ePAT Apps and deriving revenue from 
the following potential sources:
(a)
ePAT App for Dementia:
(i)
Business-to-Business (B2B): under licence directly or indirectly through software
vendors to residential aged care facilities, medical clinics and hospitals; and
31
(ii)
Business-to-Consumer (B2C): available to home and professional carers of persons
with dementia and health care professionals via a global distribution platform (such
as the Apple App store and/or Google Play store); and
(b)
ePAT App for Children:
(i)
(ii)
Business-to-Business (B2B): under licence directly or indirectly through software
vendors to childcare centres, early learning centres, schools, clinics and hospitals;
and
Business-to-Consumer (B2C): available to parents, carers and health care
professionals via a global distribution platform (such as the Apple App store and/or
Google Play store).
3.5
Key dependencies of the business model
The key factors that the Company will depend upon to meet its objectives are:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
successful Completion of the Acquisition;
the achievement of positive results in the validation and implementation studies of the ePAT
Apps;
the Company’s ability to obtain and maintain any necessary regulatory approvals required to
conduct its proposed business;
the successful global marketing and adoption of the ePAT Apps; and
the ability to protect the Company’s intellectual property.
3.6
ePAT App for Dementia
The Company is focussing its first version of the ePAT App to provide carers of people with dementia 
with a quick, accurate, reliable, simple to use, evidence-based and objective pain assessment tool.
The ePAT App for Dementia aims to improve the quality of life for persons with dementia, by 
accurately detecting and quantifying their pain, thus facilitating the effective treatment of that pain.
The ePAT App for Dementia has the potential to save time and money by providing a quick, accurate, 
objective and reliable means to detect and measure pain for residential aged care facilities, 
hospitals, healthcare professionals and home carers.
The Company intends that the App will be easy to use, so that home carers will be able to use it, in 
addition to professional carers and health care professionals.
The ePAT App for Dementia demonstrated excellent correlation against the current Australian gold 
standard for pain assessment, namely the paper based Abbey Pain Scale, in validation studies 
involving residents with moderate to severe dementia from three accredited residential aged care 
facilities in Western Australia in 2015 and 2016.
Validation testing of the ePAT App for Dementia was completed in May 2016. The validation studies 
(three in total) involved clinical staff members at three residential aged care facilities undertaking 
assessments of 40 residents with moderate-to-severe dementia, as part of the standard care of the 
resident, using the Abbey Pain Scale, then with a researcher repeating those measurements using 
the ePAT App. The total dataset from the three validation studies included 354 matched pairs of pain 
assessments. The correlation was assessed between the matched APS and ePAT pain intensity scores
32
for individual residents. The overall correlation coefficient achieved was in the range of 0.9 at rest 
and after activity.
An updated version of the ePAT App for Dementia is currently being developed, based on the 
findings from these validation studies. The Company anticipates undertaking further validation 
studies in the third quarter of 2016, on approximately 60 persons with moderate-to-severe 
dementia from two accredited Australian aged care homes in the Perth Metropolitan Area, namely 
Mercy Place Mandurah and Mercy Place Lathlain (approximately 30 residents from each facility 
participating).
ePAT has also arranged to undertake implementation studies with industry partners in the second 
half of 2016, to test the clinical utility of the App and provide valuable data on the benefits (and 
value) of using the App in clinical practice.
One such implementation study is the “Face of Pain in Dementia” project, an initiative between 
ePAT, a major reputable Australian aged care provider and researchers from School of Pharmacy 
at Curtin University, which provides for the clinical implementation of the App within 10 
residential aged care homes across regional and metropolitan Victoria. The initiative provides for 
researchers to work with the aged care provider to deliver the milestones of the project, including 
training, training materials and research equipment including smart mobile devices loaded with 
the ePAT App.
The “Face of Pain” project consists of 3 phases: 
(a)
Pre-implementation phase - face to face training of “pain champions” (1-2 days) and an 8
week retrospective clinical audit; 2 weeks familiarising care staff with the use and operation
of the ePAT App and baseline data collection;
(b)
(c)
Clinical implementation for 8 weeks with data collection at week 4 and week 8; and
Post-implementation – cessation of the clinical trial and a return to standard (normal) pain
assessment, with data collection at 4 and 8 weeks after cessation.
After the validation studies are concluded, the Company plans to seek regulatory approval in 
Australia, the United States and the European Union for the ePAT App to be registered as a medical 
device product.
The table below summarises the indicative timetable for the development of the ePAT for Dementia 
App. The timetable is indicative only and is subject to change.
Milestone
Complete validation studies in aged care homes 
Lodgement of registration application in Australia and the 
European Union 
Complete implementation studies in aged care homes 
Target for approval of registration in Australia and the 
European Union  
Lodgement of registration application in the United 
States 
Target for approval of registration in the United States
Dates
fourth quarter of 2016
second quarter of 2017 
third quarter of 2017
third quarter of 2017
fourth quarter of 2017 
first quarter of 2018
If registration is not achieved, the Company will endeavour to continue to commercialise the ePAT 
Apps in a manner not requiring registration. The Company does not expect there to be any issues in 
obtaining the proposed registration.
33
3.7
ePAT App for Children
The Company intends that its ePAT App for Children will be an innovative pain assessment tool that 
combines automated facial recognition technology and common pain expressions with the aim of 
assisting clinicians, carers and parents to identify pain in pre-verbal children.
Pre-verbal children include neonates (aged 0-1 month) and infants and toddlers (1 month-3 years).
ePAT plans to develop an App for Children covering the age groups of 0-1 year, 1-3 years and 
children older than 3 years.
Sources of pain in children can include rashes, teething pain, middle ear infections, and, once they 
become mobile, cuts and abrasions. Currently, diagnosis of pain in pre-verbal children requires 
consultation with a health care professional as this age group lacks the language ability to describe 
their pain. Such assessments are not always accurate. For instance, parents often rely on intuitions, 
assumptions, and personal beliefs in order to assess the child’s pain rather than objective, accurate 
and adaptable assessment.
The ePAT App for Children will use facial recognition technology in a similar manner to the ePAT App 
for Dementia, but will use an expanded range of facial micro-expressions which indicate the 
presence of pain. ePAT is also compiling a library of audio-visual recordings of neonates, infants and 
young children with and without pain, and has recently completed BabyFACS1 coding of a sample of 
20 infant videos which will be used in the development of a prototype of the infant component of 
the ePAT App for Children. Other features associated with pain, such as particular vocalisations, 
movements, behaviour and the ability to comfort the child, will be collected via the App to allow the 
calculation of a pain severity score. In the case of vocalisation, automated analysis is also planned. 
Preliminary work on an algorithm to differentiate child cries which are and are not associated with 
pain has already been undertaken independently by Prof Jeff Hughes, Dr Kreshnik Hoti and Mr 
Mustafa Atee. ePAT has a acquired a two year option to purchase this technology at a cost of 
$36,000, if it deems it fit for purpose for the development of ePAT App for Children (with more 
details set out in Section 12.5.
ePAT has entered into a contract with nViso to use their expertise in facial micro expression to 
develop prototypes of the ePAT App for Children. More details of this contract are set out in Section 
12.4. The Company expects development to commence in the fourth quarter of 2016, with a 
prototype available for initial validation testing in the second quarter of 2017. All three versions of 
the ePAT App for Children, dependent on development progression and the results of the validation 
and clinical utility trials, are intended to be regulatory approved with CE mark or TGA approval and 
ready for commercialisation in those jurisdictions during the second half of 2018.
There is also potential to expand the use of the App to cover children and adolescents with 
disabilities, whose pain may be ignored or underestimated as a result of communication difficulties 
and the presence of other medical problems with higher priority.
1  Facial  Action  Coding  System  for  Infants  and  Young  Children  (BabyFACS)  is  used  to  research  changes  and  continuities  in  facial 
expressions  of  emotion,  infants’  responses  to  taste,  odour,  and  other  sensory  stimuli,  cognitive  information  processing,  and  expressive 
behaviour occurring in naturalistic and experimental situations, and during parent-child interactions.
34
3.8
Other potential applications of the ePAT technology
On 15 June 2016, the Company announced that ePAT had signed a binding Memorandum of 
Understanding with UK-based insurance counter-fraud group Strenuus Ltd.
This gives ePAT an exclusive working relationship with Strenuus Limited for the purpose of 
developing a scalable anti-fraud medico-legal assessment platform through the integration of ePAT’s 
capabilities within Strenuus Limited’s behavioural assessment platform, SCAn.
One of the goals of this relationship is to develop a tool incorporating ePAT’s pain recognition 
technology to assess the validity of whiplash injury claims.
The terms of this contract are summarised more fully in Section 12.7.
3.9
Intellectual Property protections - Patents
ePAT has filed an international PCT patent application consisting of a number of claims based around 
methods for determining the effect of treating pain with drugs, by capturing and processing visible 
and audible features of the person including facial features. If granted, the patent is expected to 
provide protection from competitors using similar methods to monitor the effectiveness of 
treatment of pain using drugs, although not the effectiveness of using alternative remedies such as 
massage. A granted patent would not prevent a competitor from using facial assessment technology 
to initially detect pain, but ePAT believes that ongoing monitoring of pain is a significant market 
requirement.
Section 8 contains a detailed report on ePAT’s patent application.
Even if ePAT’s patent is granted, it is possible that the use of facial assessment technology to detect 
pain infringes existing third party patents in this field of use. ePAT has not conducted an extensive 
search of granted patents to ascertain whether it is infringing any third party patents, due to the cost 
and time involved in such searches. If such a third party patent exists, ePAT may need to license 
rights to use the technology for this purpose.
3.10
nViso licences
ePAT contracted a third party technology company, nViso, to develop prototype mobile Android pain 
detection applications for Dementia and Children incorporating nViso’s proprietary facial detection 
technology. Further, it contracted nViso to develop Apple iOS based SDKs to allow iOS versions of 
the applications to be developed. ePAT owns the resulting applications, and has licensed the use of 
the underlying facial detection technology from nViso for this purpose. The current nViso license is a 
non-exclusive, worldwide right to use this technology for pain assessment in children and adults for 
a period of 5 years expiring on 26 September 2019. ePAT is obliged to pay nViso a royalty based on 
revenues derived from sales of these applications.
nViso has agreed not to develop a similar application for pain assessment for a third party for a 
period of 5 years expiring on 26 September 2020, subject to ePAT continuing to pay support and 
maintenance fees, and undertaking reasonable commercial efforts to achieve placement of the ePAT 
App on the Apple Store or the Google Play store by 26 September 2017 or otherwise generate 
revenue of $120,000 (on which royalties are paid) by this date. If this condition is not met, nViso may 
licence its technology to, and develop a competing application for, others. A competitor could 
independently license nViso’s facial detection technology or another company’s technology and 
develop its own pain assessment applications.
35
ePAT is currently in negotiation with nViso to extend these 5 year periods to August 2021. If the 
extensions are not granted before the end of the contract, the Company intends to determine 
whether it can source an alternative supplier of such technology which could be adapted to work 
with the ePAT App. These agreements are summarised more fully in Section 12.4.
3.11
Copyright
ePAT has ownership and copyright protection for the software code and user interface design of its 
mobile applications and also has copyright in the content and layout of its pain assessment tool.
3.12
Know How
(a)
(b)
(c)
ePAT has commenced development of its own database of facial action coded images of 
infants to incorporate into the planned ePAT App for Children.
ePAT has developed processes and conducted validation trials for pain assessment of 
dementia.
ePAT has developed a proprietary algorithm to generate a pain score based on facial 
recognition information and other non-facial indicators of pain assessment.
3.13
Competitive Advantage
ePAT believes it has a competitive advantage in using facial detection technology to assess pain due 
to the following factors:
(a)
(b)
ePAT owns or licenses relevant intellectual property as described above; and
ePAT believes it has a time to market advantage from having focused on developing and 
validating a pain assessment application for dementia over the past 3 years. Further planned 
validation work will enable the Company to seek regulatory approval for the dementia App 
in Australia, Europe and the United States. These regulatory approvals are critical to position 
ePAT as a recognised and safe medical device application and further enhances the 
commercialisation process.
3.14
Timeline
The key milestones achieved by ePAT are summarised below:
36
•commencement of research at Curtin University  and development of a working prototype
•ePAT becomes a registered company
•ePAT signs an agreement with nViso to develop App with embedding 3-D Facial Recognistion technology
•Curtin assigns IP to ePAT
•ePAT carries out succesful validation studies
Jan 13
July 14
Sept 14
Oct 14
Sept 15
•ePAT signs a development agreement with Darwin Digital to develop Apps; and
•Successful validation tests
Jan 16
•ePAT signs a Binding Confidential Heads of Agreement with MinQuest
•agreement to trial the ePAT App with a major reputable Australian aged care provider
•ePAT selected for CSIRO's On Accelerator Program
April 16
May 16
May 16
•nominated as a finalist for the WAITTA Awards held in Perth
•signed binding memorandum of understanding with UK-based insurance counter-fraud group, Strenuus Ltd
June 16
•nominated as a finalist for the 2016 WA Innovator of the Year Awards ('Emerging Innovation' category)
Aug 16
3.15
Key personnel
The research and development of the ePAT Apps to date has been in large part due to the 
knowledge, skills and expertise of Curtin University’s team of Professor Jeff Hughes, Mr Mustafa 
Atee and Dr Kreshnik Hoti. After ePAT was registered as a company, ePAT became the owner of the 
intellectual property in the ePAT App.
ePAT has entered into a Research Services Agreement with Curtin University, pursuant to which 
Curtin University has agreed to procure Professor Jeff Hughes and Mr Mustafa Atee to continue to 
provide research services to the Company in consideration for a research fee. ePAT has also secured 
the research services of Dr Hoti under a Consultancy Agreement.
3.16  Awards
At the WAITTA Incite Awards held on 24 June 2016, ePAT was chosen to represent Western Australia 
as a finalist for the AIIA National iAwards for the ePAT App in the category of Best Student Project of
37
the Year (Peter Fillery) Award category. The key goal of the iAwards is to discover, recognise and 
reward ICT innovations that have the potential to, or are already having a positive impact on the 
community – at home, in the office, and on a global scale.
In addition, ePAT has been selected as a 2016 finalist in the Emerging Innovation category for the 
Western Australia Innovator of the Year Awards. This government-supported program has rewarded 
innovative and entrepreneurial individuals and businesses since 2006. ePAT will present its work to 
the evaluation panel in September 2016, and the winner will be announced in November 2016.
ePAT has also been recognised as a semi-finalist twice in the OzAPP Awards, in 2014 and in 2015. 
These awards recognise early startup mobile, web and cloud apps in the Asia-Pacific region.
Further, ePAT was a finalist in the Aging2.0 AgeTech Expo Global Start-up Showcase in San Francisco 
in November 2015.
3.17
Prior activities of the Company
The investment in ePAT represents a new direction for the Company, as the Company previously had 
investments in the minerals resources sector. The ePAT Acquisition follows on from the Company’s 
announcement on 29 January 2016, that the Company was considering opportunities outside the 
minerals resources sector, so as to maximise shareholder returns.
The Company has divested itself of substantially all of its assets in the minerals resource sector, in 
compliance with its obligation in the SSPA to divest itself of all such assets prior to Completion of the 
Acquisition. In particular, the Company has allowed the lapse of its rights in the Fyre Lake project 
located in the Finlayson Lake District, and in the Marg VMS Project, both in the Yukon Territory, 
Canada.
The Company also intends to divest itself of its rights in the Coober Pedy project prior to Completion 
of the Acquisition. This comprises the contractual rights held by its subsidiary, Oresearch Limited, to 
earn up to a 100% interest in three exploration licenses in the Gawler Craton, South Australia 
pursuant to a contract with Teck Australia Pty Ltd.
The Company also has two non-operational African subsidiary companies and one non-operational 
Canadian subsidiary. The Company plans to wind up and deregister all three of these subsidiaries. 
The Directors are not aware of any material amounts payable in respect of the winding up of any of 
these companies.
The following table sets out information about the Company’s current subsidiaries, each of which is 
100% owned by the Company:
Name
Merah African Exploration 
Limited 
Merah West Africa 
Limited 
Oresearch Limited
Merah Resources Canada 
Limited
Country of registration / 
incorporation 
Zambia
Date registered / 
incorporated  
13.09.11
Nature of activities
Non-operating
Ghana
Australia
Canada
14.10.13
Non-operating
30.09.11
15.09.14
Coober Pedy project 
discussed above 
Non-operating
38
4
4.1
INDUSTRY OVERVIEW
Introduction
ePAT’s business is focused on the development of mobile Apps for the detection and assessment of 
pain. The first versions of the ePAT Apps will be designed for those caring for people with dementia 
and for children, because of their inability to tell people they are in pain, due to moderate to severe 
cognitive impairment or age.
The ePAT Apps represent an innovation in the way by which pain can be detected and measured – as 
well as providing a means of monitoring the effectiveness of treatments used for pain management.
4.2
Overview of the mobile Health (mHealth) App market
The number of mobile health apps and mobile medical applications available, is growing. One study 
has found that adoption of health-related apps has doubled in two years.2 Much of this growth has 
come from general health and fitness apps, as well as chronic care management, and connected 
health devices.
The high cost of healthcare is driving the search for value-based healthcare models. The rising 
penetration of mobile devices, coupled with expanding availability and accessibility of the internet, is 
driving increased adoption of mobile health applications.
4.3
Pain management market
Acute pain is a presenting symptom in many physician visits and medical research estimates chronic 
pain to be often under-treated.3
Some 100 million adults in America alone are affected by chronic pain, costing between $560 to 
$635 billion (in 2010 US dollars) each year, according to a 2012 estimate published in the Journal of 
Pain,4 which found that the annual costs of pain was greater than heart disease, cancer and 
diabetes.
Pain Australia reports that chronic pain affects 20% of Australians, and one in three people over 65.5 
In 2003, it was reported that almost one in five surveyed Europeans (19%) had moderate or severe 
chronic pain.6 In Europe, chronic pain and associated conditions represents billions in national 
healthcare and socioeconomic costs, and accounts for between 3 and 10% of gross domestic 
product. Chronic pain is a complex health issue. While the person suffers the disabling symptoms, its 
burden extends to the whole of society.
2 See https://newsroom.accenture.com/news/consumers-use-of-health-apps-and-wearables-doubled-in-past-two-years-accenture-survey-
finds.htm, which discusses a seven country survey (USA, Australia, Brazil, England, Norway, Saudi Arabia and Nielsen) involving 
approximately 8000 consumers, commissioned by Accenture and conducted by Neilsen between November 2015 and January 2016. (The 
authors have not provided consent for this statement to appear in this Prospectus).  
3Mularski, R.A., White-Chu, F., Overbay, D., Miller, L., Asch, S.M., Ganzini, L., ‘Measuring Pain as the 5th Vital Sign Does Not Improve 
Quality of Pain Management’ (2006) 21(6) Journal of General Internal Medicine 607. (The authors have not provided consent for this 
statement to appear in this Prospectus). 
4 Gaskin, D.J., and Richard, P., ‘The economic costs of pain in the United States’, (2012) 13(8) Journal of Pain 715. (The authors have not 
provided consent for this statement to appear in this Prospectus). 
5 Pain Australia, http://www.painaustralia.org.au. (The authors have not provided consent for this statement to appear in this Prospectus). 
6 Breivik, H., Collett, B., Ventafridda, V., Cohen, R. and Gallacher, D., ‘Survey of chronic pain in Europe: prevalence, impact on daily life, 
and treatment’ (2006) 13 European Journal of Pain 287. (The authors have not provided consent for this statement to appear in this 
Prospectus).
39
Research indicates that one of the major reasons pain is undertreated, is that it is under detected.7 
Whilst there are a large number of pain-related apps currently available on the market, the majority 
are designed to allow the user to ‘track’ their own pain, but most of these rely on personal reporting 
of pain scores, with or without immediate communication with a virtual professional. Studies of such 
apps have been favourable,8 but the Directors believe there is no app currently on the market which 
objectively assesses pain, and in particular which can be used to assess pain adequately in non-
communicative people such as the very young who have not yet learned to talk or in those who have 
lost the ability to communicate effectively such as those with advanced dementia.
The ePAT Apps are being designed differently, in that they:
(a)
(b)
(c)
will use facial recognition technology for pain detection in real-time using a smart 
device;
have a strong scientific basis and are grounded in scientific research; and
their accuracy will be validated through clinical trials prior to release of the App.
4.4
Overview of the market for pain diagnosis in people with dementia
Globally, dementia is one of the major causes of disability and dependency among the aging 
population and has physical, psychological, social and economic impact on caregivers, families and 
society.
The deterioration in memory and thinking caused by dementia can lead to the inability to perform 
everyday activities. Middle stage dementia can cause difficulty with communication and late stage 
dementia can involve near total dependence. There is no cure for dementia and no current 
treatment to alter its progressive nature.
According to the World Health Organisation, there are 47.5 million people with dementia worldwide 
and there are 7.7 million new cases of dementia every year. 9 The World Health Organisation 
estimated that dementia affects between 5% to 8% of the general population over 60 years of age.
According to the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 342,800 Australians were estimated to 
have dementia in 2015.10 The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare also reports that in 2015, 
one in ten Australians age 65 and over, and three in ten Australians age 85 and over, had dementia, 
and also that over 50% of permanent residents in Australian government-funded aged care facilities 
in 2013-2014 had a diagnosis of dementia.11
7 Mularski, R.A., White-Chu, F., Overbay, D., Miller, L., Asch, S.M., Ganzini, L., ‘Measuring Pain as the 5th Vital Sign Does Not Improve 
Quality of Pain Management’ (2006) 21(6) Journal of General Internal Medicine 607. 
8 See http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3959919/ and its footnotes 34, 85, 86 and 87.  (The authors have not provided consent 
for this statement to appear in this Prospectus). 
9 WHO Dementia Fact Sheet April 2016. (The authors have not provided consent for this statement to appear in this Prospectus). 
10 See http://www.aihw.gov.au/dementia/. The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare is a national agency set up by the Australian 
government under the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare Act 1987 (Cth) to provide information and statistics on Australia’s health 
and welfare – see http://www.aihw.gov.au/about/. (The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare has not provided consent for this 
statement to appear in this Prospectus). 
11 See http://www.aihw.gov.au/dementia/.
40
The World Alzheimer Report 2015 estimates the total worldwide cost of dementia in 2015 at US$818 
billion.12 The Australian government estimates that dementia alone costs more than $4.9 billion per 
year to the Australian economy.13
The World Health Organisation expects the number of people with dementia and the associated 
spending on dementia to continue to grow at a significant rate.14 Alzheimer’s Australia estimates 
that 1.2 million people are involved in the care of a person with dementia in Australia.15
It is estimated up to 85% of persons with dementia suffer pain at some time and 50% experience 
pain regularly, according to one study published in the Journal of Clinical Interventions in Ageing.16 In 
many instances, this pain goes unreported due to the inability of those with dementia to 
communicate effectively.
There are a number of methodologies currently available to facilitate pain assessment in persons 
who are unable to communicate effectively. Research indicates that existing nonverbal pain 
assessment tools do not have the requisite reliability or validity for a broad uptake in clinical practice 
setting for persons with advanced dementia.17 Those methodologies lack standardisation and 
accordingly, are highly subjective, have issues of reproducibility and rely on the clinical expertise of 
the users. For these reasons they are often under-utilised.
These pain assessment tools have not been standardised to accurately assess pain felt by nonverbal 
patients.
The deficiencies in the currently available tools for the assessment of pain in people with dementia 
contribute to the following adverse outcomes:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
failure to detect and manage pain effectively;
behavioural disturbances as a result of unrecognised or poorly managed pain, which 
can lead to the inappropriate use of anti-psychotic agents;
poor quality of life for the person with dementia; and
increased carer burden and healthcare costs.
The ePAT App for Dementia is being designed with the objective of improving the quality of life of 
people with dementia and those who care for them. It is intended that the ePAT App for Dementia 
will provide a quick, accurate, objective and reliable means to detect and quantify the pain suffered 
by people with dementia, thus facilitating its effective management and treatment, while at the 
same time saving time and money.  
                                                           
 
12 See https://www.alz.co.uk/research/WorldAlzheimerReport2015.pdf. (The authors have not provided consent for this statement to appear 
in this Prospectus). 
13  See http://www.healthdirect.gov.au/dementia-statistics and https://www.alz.co.uk/research/WorldAlzheimerReport2015.pdf. (The authors 
have not provided consent for this statement to appear in this Prospectus). 
14 WHO Dementia Fact Sheet April 2016; see also https://fightdementia.org.au/about-dementia/statistics. (The World Health Organisation 
has not provided consent for this statement to appear in this Prospectus). 
15 See https://fightdementia.org.au/files/NATIONAL/documents/Key-facts-and-statistics.pdf.  (Alzheimer’s Australia has not provided 
consent for this statement to appear in this Prospectus). 
16 Achterberg, W.P., Pieper, M.J.C., van Dalen-Kok, A.H., de Waal, M.W.M., Husebo, B.S., Lautenbacher, S., Kunz, M., Scherder, E.J.A. 
and Corbett, A., ‘Pain Management in patients with dementia’ (2013) 8 (13 October) Journal of Clinical Interventions in Ageing 1471. 
17 Herr, K., Coyne, J.C., Key, T., Manworren, R., McCaffery, M., Merkel, S., Pelosi-Kelly, J. and Wild, L., ‘Pain Assessment in the 
Nonverbal Patient: Position Statement with Clinical Practice Recommendations’ (2006) 7(2) (June) Pain Management Nursing 44. (The 
authors have not provided consent for this statement to appear in this Prospectus).
41
4.5
Overview of the market for pain diagnosis in children
Research indicates that pain is one of the most misunderstood, under diagnosed, and 
undertreated/untreated medical problems, particularly in children.18  One of the most challenging 
roles of those caring for children is to appropriately assess and manage their pain. All children will 
experience pain at one time or another, for example, pain from acute events such as everyday 
bumps and bruises, or due to more chronic conditions such as headaches, gastrointestinal problems, 
or diabetes. Up to 40% of children and adolescents complain of pain that occurs at least once 
weekly, with at least 15%–20% of children suffering chronic pain, according to one study published 
in the Indian Journal of Palliative Care.19
As alluded to above, paediatric pain stems from a wide range of chronic conditions and it requires 
appropriate management. Unfortunately, the medical community has not placed the same emphasis 
on pain management for children as it has for adults and seniors. The same study reports that each 
year, 1.5 million children have surgery, of these many receive inadequate pain relief, resulting in 
pain becoming chronic in 20% of cases.20
Assessment of pain in children is not easy, and care-givers must tailor assessment strategies to the 
child’s developmental level. Pain perceptions may be modified by a number of factors including age, 
cognition, sex, previous pain experience, temperament, cultural and family factors, and situational 
factors. By age 4 years, children can generally report their pain symptom and severity. However, in 
preverbal children pain assessment is usually undertaken by a third person (e.g. parent, carer or 
health care professional) using global rating scales (GRS), behavioural observation scales (BOS) and 
indirect measures (e.g. heart rate and blood pressure). In the case of pre-verbal children assessment 
of pain is often based on the presence of pain related behaviours such as crying, wincing or 
screaming, or behavioural changes reflective of pain, such as remaining still and quiet or not wanting 
to play. None of these methods are objective and all are limited in their ability to quantify pain.
As a result, detection of pain in pre-verbal children remains suboptimal, with research indicating that 
pain often goes undertreated or untreated.21 However, facial expressions and vocalisations may be 
used as indicators of the presence of pain. ePAT is not aware of any apps using either facial 
recognition technology or vocalisation analysis as a means of identifying the presence of pain in 
preverbal children. In the case of the ePAT App for Children, it is intended to use both these 
technologies. The ePAT App for Children will include three pain scales to cover children 0-1 year, 1-3 
years and older than 3 years to deal with the issue of children’s physical development with time. This 
ePAT App for Children will be designed to be used by parents, carers and healthcare professionals 
alike. It is intended to address a significant unmet need and potentially positively impact on reducing 
the burden of chronic pain along the continuum of life.
18 Mathews, L., ‘Pain in Children: Neglected, Unaddressed and Mismanaged’, (2011) 17 (Suppl) Indian Journal of Palliative Care S70. 
(The author has not provided consent for this statement to appear in this Prospectus). 
19 Mathews, L., ‘Pain in Children: Neglected, Unaddressed and Mismanaged’, (2011) 17 (Suppl) Indian Journal of Palliative Care S70. 
20 Mathews, L., ‘Pain in Children: Neglected, Unaddressed and Mismanaged’, (2011) 17 (Suppl) Indian Journal of Palliative Care S70. 
21 Gerik, S.M., ‘Pain Management in Children: Developmental Considerations and Mind-body Therapies’ (2005) 98 Southern Medical 
Journal 295; Herr, K., Coyne, P.J., McCaffery, M., Manworren, R. and Merkel, S., ‘Pain assessment in the patient unable to self-report: 
Position statement with clinical practice recommendations’ (2011) 12 Pain Management Nursing 230. (The authors of these articles have 
not provided consent for this statement to appear in this Prospectus).
42
5
5.1
FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Introduction
This Section sets out the Historical Financial Information and Proforma Historical Financial 
Information (Financial Information). All financial information set out in this Section has been 
prepared by the Directors and should be read in conjunction with the other information 
contained in this Section, the Independent Limited Assurance Report included in Section 9, 
the risk factors included in Section 6 and other information contained in the Prospectus.  
Investors are urged to read all of this information in full.
The Financial Information has been prepared by management and adopted by the Directors 
of the Company. The Financial Information comprises the consolidated group of the 
Company and ePAT prepared on the basis set out in Section 5.2 of this Prospectus.
5.2
Basis of Preparation
The Historical Information and Proforma Historical Financial Information has been prepared 
for illustrative purposes and has been prepared in accordance with the measurement and 
recognition criteria of Australian Accounting Standards and the significant accounting 
policies of the Company and ePAT, on the assumption that the acquisition became effective 
on 31 December 2015.
The accounting policies comply with Australian Accounting Standards and interpretations 
issued by the Australian Accounting Standards Board. They also comply with International 
Financial Reporting Standards. The Historical and Proforma Historical Financial Information is 
presented in an abbreviated form insofar as it does not include all the disclosures, 
statements, comparative information and notes required in an annual financial report 
prepared in accordance with Australian Accounting Standards and the Corporations Act.
The Company’s financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 were audited by HLB 
Mann Judd (WA Partnership) who issued an unmodified audit opinion that contained an 
“emphasis of matter” paragraph in relation to the Company’s ability to continue as a going 
concern. The Company’s financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2015 were audited 
by HLB Mann Judd (WA Partnership) who issued an unmodified audit opinion. The 
Company’s financial statements for the half-year ended 31 December 2015 were reviewed 
by BDO Audit Pty Ltd who issued an unmodified review opinion that contained an ”emphasis 
of matter” paragraph in relation to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. 
ePAT’s financial statements for the period ended 30 June 2015 (3 July 2014 to 30 June 2015) 
and for the half-year ended 31 December 2015 were audited by RSM Australia Partners who 
issued unmodified audit opinions.
5.2.1  Historical financial information
The Historical Financial Information provided in this Prospectus comprises:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the audited consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive 
income for the year ended 30 June 2014 of the Company
the audited consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive 
income for the year ended 30 June 2015 of the Company;
the reviewed consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive 
income for the 6 months ended 31 December 2015 of the Company;
43
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
the audited consolidated statement of financial position as at 30 June 2014 of the 
Company;
the audited consolidated statement of financial position as at 30 June 2015 of the 
Company;
the reviewed consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 December 2015 
of the Company;
the audited statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the 
period ended 30 June 2015 (3 July 2014 to 30 June 2015);
the audited statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the 6 
months ended 31 December 2015 of ePAT;
the audited statements of financial position as at 30 June 2015 of ePAT; and
the audited statements of financial position as at 31 December 2015 of ePAT,
hereafter referred to as the Historical Financial Information.
ePAT was incorporated in Australia on 3 July 2014 and prior to this was run as a Curtin 
University research project.
5.2.2
Proforma Historical Financial Information
The Proforma Historical Financial Information provided in this Prospectus comprises:
(a)
(b)
the ProForma Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income for the 
6 months ended 31 December 2015 showing the impact of the proforma 
adjustments as if they had occurred at 31 December 2015; and
the ProForma Statement of Financial Position as at 31 December 2015 showing the 
impact of the proforma adjustments as if they had occurred at 31 December 2015,
hereafter referred to as the Proforma Historical Financial Information.
5.2.3  Proforma Historical Financial Information Adjustments
The Proforma Historical Financial Information set out below has been prepared to illustrate 
the financial position of the Company following completion of the Offer and the expenditure 
of funds associated with the Offer as if such events had occurred as at 31 December 2015. 
The Proforma Historical Financial Information is intended to be illustrative only and will not 
reflect the actual position and balances as at the date of this Prospectus or at the 
Completion of the Offer.
The Proforma Historical Financial Information has been prepared taking into consideration 
the Historical Financial Information adjusted for the following material transactions as if they 
had occurred as at 31 December 2015:
(a)
Magna Convertible Loan Facility
Subsequent to 31 December 2015, the Company undertook the following transactions in 
relation to the convertible loan facility with Magna Equities II LLC (Magna):
44
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
The Company received $250,064 in cash proceeds from drawing down 
additional convertible notes. On initial recognition of the convertible notes, 
the Company increased borrowings by $186,823 and increased financial 
liabilities at fair value through profit and loss by $63,241.
The Company issued 32,813,798 fully paid ordinary shares of the Company 
(on a post-consolidation basis) to Magna as settlement of convertible note 
liabilities totalling $377,277.
On 3 May 2016, the Company paid $279,371 in cash to repay, in full, the 
outstanding balance of the convertible notes. The settlements in shares and 
cash totalling $656,648 reduced borrowings by $610,591 and reduced 
financial liabilities at fair value through profit and loss by $46,057.
The Company recorded finance charges totalling $129,201 in the Pro Forma 
Statement of Profit and Loss and Other Comprehensive Income in relation to 
the Magna convertible loan facility. These finance charges include the 
amortisation of $30,242 of prepaid facility fees recorded in other current 
assets, $181,158 of finance charges on the borrowings, less the realisation 
of gains on financial liabilities at fair value through profit and loss of 
$81,999.
In addition, the proforma adjustments include an amount of $250,064 
charged to administrative and other expenses to reflect the utilisation of the 
cash proceeds from the drawdown of the additional Magna convertible 
notes to assist with funding the Company’s operating expenses.
(b)
Interim Raising Notes
On 21 April 2016 and 19 July 2016, the Company issued 750,000 and 300,000 convertible 
notes respectively, each with a face value of $1.00 to raise an aggregate amount of 
$1,050,000 before capital raising fees of 6% of the amount raised. If the conversion terms of 
the Interim Raising Notes are approved by the Company’s Shareholders, and the Acquisition 
of ePAT is Completed, the Interim Raising Notes will be converted into 52,500,000 fully paid 
ordinary Shares in the Company (on a post-Consolidation basis).
(c)
Surrender of exploration rights & impairment of property, plant & equipment
The Company has surrendered, or intends to surrender, its entire legal and beneficial 
interests in its mineral exploration projects in Australia and Canada. As at the date of this 
Prospectus, the Company has ceased to have any interests in the Fyre Lake and the Marg 
projects in Canada and intends to divest its interest in the Coober Pedy project prior to 
Completion of the Acquisition of ePAT. The Proforma Historical Financial Information 
assumes that the Company received no consideration for the surrender of its interests in the 
mineral exploration projects with the effect that capitalised exploration and evaluation 
expenditure totalling $3,036,594 as at 31 December 2015 has been derecognised in the 
Proforma Historical Financial Information, of which $221,557 had been accrued as at 31 
December 2015 and subsequently reversed through the accrual.
On 28 February 2016, the Company issued 3,232,444 fully paid ordinary Shares to Golden 
Predator Mining Corporation in satisfaction of a $50,910 obligation of the Company under 
the earn in joint venture agreement for the Marg Project. This payment was initially 
capitalised as exploration and evaluation expenditure by the Company and was 
subsequently expensed when the Company ceased to have an interest in the Marg Project.
45
Property, plant and equipment with a carrying value of $53,392 was also impaired as a result 
of the change in business.
(d)
ePAT Acquisition
On 25 July 2016, the Company, ePAT, Curtin University and the ePAT Vendors entered into 
the Acquisition Agreement. Subject to various conditions, the Company agreed to purchase 
100% of the ordinary shares in ePAT, and Curtin University and the ePAT Vendors agreed to 
sell all their ordinary shares in ePAT to the Company.
Subject to the satisfaction (or waiver) of the conditions precedent, the total consideration 
for the purchase of the ePAT Shares comprises:
(i)
(ii)
373,134,328 fully paid ordinary Shares to ePAT shareholders (on a pre-
consolidation basis) (213,219,616 shares on a post-consolidation basis)
(“Consideration Shares”) for 100% of their shares; and
in addition,, the ePAT Vendors shall be entitled to receive ordinary shares in
the Company to the value of $1,000,000 if the Milestone is achieved
(Deferred Consideration Shares).
No accounting has been recognised for the Deferred consideration Shares as the Milestone 
is not expected to be achieved until after Completion of the Acquisition and will ultimately 
only result in a dilution of capital for nil consideration.
Transaction costs totalling $343,750 are estimated to be incurred in relation to the 
Acquisition of ePAT.
Further information regarding the SPAA is provided in Section 2.4 of the Prospectus. The 
Acquisition has been accounted for in the Financial Information in accordance with the 
requirements of AASB2 Share Based Payments. Further information on how the Acquisition 
has been accounted for in the Financial Information is presented in Section 5.5.2.
(e)
Prospectus Offer & Capital Raising
A Capital Raising in the range of a minimum of 200,000,000 Shares to raise $4,000,000 to a 
maximum of 287,500,000 Shares to raise $5,750,000 in the Company is being undertaken by 
the Company in accordance with this Prospectus.
(f)
Costs of Capital Raising
Costs of the Capital Raising comprising cash fees in the range $340,000 to $445,000 and the 
granting of up to 45,000,000 Underwriter Options to the Underwriters as consideration for 
underwriting the Capital Raising. The Underwriter Options have been valued on the basis set 
out in Section 5.5.15 of this Prospectus.
46
5.3
Statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income
5.3.1
Historical statements of profit or loss and other comprehensive income
The historical statements of profit or loss and other comprehensive income reflect the reviewed / audited financial results unadjusted for the proforma adjustments described in Section 5.5 
of this Prospectus. ePAT was incorporated on 3 July 2014. Consequently, ePAT did not prepare a statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the year ended 30 June 2014.  
Past performance is not a guide to future performance.
47
5.3.2
Proforma statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income
Company                                   
reviewed
ePAT                                   
audited
for the half year ended 31
for the half-year ended
December 2015
31 December 2015
Subsequent Events
Minimum
Proforma Adjustments
Proforma Adjustments         
Maximum
Proforma                   
Minimum 
$
3,222
Proforma Maximum
$
3,222
Other revenue
$                              359
$
2,863
$                               
-
$                           
-
$                            
-
Remuneration of directors and employee benefits
Impairment of exploration assets
Impairment of other assets
Other exploration related expense
Depreciation
Consultants and professional fees
Finance charges
Fair value adjustment on financial liabilities at fair value through profit or  loss
Foreign exchange losses
Transaction costs incurred prior to listing
Cost to ePAT of acquiring the Company's ASX Listing
Research expenes
Administration and other expenses
Total expenses
Loss before income tax
Income tax expense
(219,205)
$
(2,865,947)
(53,392)
$                     
(21,362)
 $                     (213,895)  $                                           -   
 $                                 -     $                                           -   
 $                     (186,766)  $                                           -   
 $                       (14,668)  $                                           -   
 $                     (134,058)  $                                           -   
 $                       (79,371)  $                                           -   
 $                        17,984 
 $                                           -   
 $                       (14,315)  $                                           -   
 $                                 -     $                                           -   
 $                                 -     $                                           -   
-
$                               
(42,193)
$                     
(250,064)
(18,370)
 $                 (1,132,285)  $                     (81,925)  $                 (7,403,010)
$                               
-
$                 
$                       
$                               
-
-
$                               
$                               
-
$                     
$                               
-
$                               
-
$                     
$                 
-
$                               
$
$                               
$
(343,750)
(3,760,456)
(129,401)
(287,991)
$                           
-
$                           
-
$                           
-
$                           
-
-
$                           
$                           
-
$                           
-
$                           
-
$                           
-
$                           
-
-
$                           
-
$                           
$                           
-
 $                             -
(240,567)
$                            
-
(3,079,842)
$                            
-
(53,392)
$                            
-
(186,766)
$                            
-
(14,668)
-
$                            
(134,058)
$                            
-
(208,772)
$                            
-
17,984
$                            
-
(14,315)
$                            
-
(343,750)
$                            
-
(3,760,456)
-
$                            
(42,193)
-
$                            
$                            
(556,425)
-
 $                              -    $                   (8,617,220)  $                     (8,617,220)
$                         
$                      
$                           
$                         
$                           
$                         
$                         
$                             
$                           
$                         
$                      
$                           
$
$                       
$                   
$                         
$                       
$                         
$                       
$                       
$                          
$                         
$                       
$                   
$                         
$
(240,567)
(3,079,842)
(53,392)
(186,766)
(14,668)
(134,058)
(208,772)
17,984
(14,315)
(343,750)
(3,760,456)
(42,193)
(556,425)
$                 (1,131,926)  $                     (79,062)  $                 (7,403,010)
 -
-
-
$                             -   
 -
$                              -    $                   (8,613,998)  $                     (8,613,998)
 -
-
-
Loss for the half-year from continuing operations
$                 (1,131,926)  $                     (79,062)  $                 (7,403,010)
$                             -
$                              -    $                   (8,613,998)  $                     (8,613,998)
Other comprehensive income
Total comprehensive loss
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
$                 (1,131,926)  $                     (79,062)  $                 (7,403,010)
$                             -
$                              -    $                   (8,613,998)  $                     (8,613,998)
This proforma statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income reflects the reviewed / audited financial results adjusted for the proforma adjustments described in Section 5.2 of 
this Prospectus. The statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income is to be read in conjunction with the notes to and forming part of the Historical Financial Information and 
Proforma Historical Financial Information set out in Section 5.5 of this Prospectus.
Past performance is not a guide to future performance.
48
5.4
Statement of financial position
5.4.1
Historical statements of financial position
This statement of financial position reflects the reviewed / audited financial unadjusted for the proforma adjustments described in Section 5.2 of this Prospectus. The statement of financial 
position is to be read in conjunction with the notes to and forming part of the historical information set out in Section 5.5 of this Prospectus.
49
5.4.2
Proforma statement of financial position
MNQ
Reviewed
ePAT                                                 
audited
Subsequent Events
Proforma Adjustments         
Minimum
Proforma Adjustments         
Maximum
Proforma                   
Minimum
Proforma Maximum
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade and other receivables
Other current assets
TOTAL CURRENT ASSETS
NON-CURRENT ASSETS
Property, plant and equipment
Exploration and evaluation expenditure
TOTAL NON-CURRENT ASSETS
TOTAL ASSETS
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Trade and other payables
Borrowings
Financial liabilities at fair value
TOTAL CURRENT LIABILITIES
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS
EQUITY
Issued capital 
Accumulated losses  
Reserves
TOTAL EQUITY
Notes
5.5.5
5.5.6
5.5.7
as at 31 December 2015
as at 31 December 2015
$                         
$                         
$
44,527
25,643
61,076
$                       
$                       
-
$
90,063
63,576
363,879
$                      
$                               
-
$
(30,242)
3,660,000
$               
-
$                           
-
$
5,305,000
$                
-
$                            
-
$
$                     
$                          
$
4,158,469
89,219
30,834
$                       
$                             
$
5,803,469
89,219
30,834
$
131,246
$
153,639
$
333,637
$
3,660,000
$
5,305,000
$
4,278,522
$
5,923,522
5.5.8
5.5.9
$                         
$
53,392
3,036,594
$                             
-
-
$
$                       
$
(53,392)
(3,036,594)
-
$                           
-
$
-
$                            
-
$
$                                 
-
-
$
$                                   
-
-
$
$
3,089,986
$                             
-
$
(3,089,986)
-
$
-
$
$                                 
-
$                                   
-
$
3,221,232
$
153,639
$
(2,756,349)
$
3,660,000
$
5,305,000
$
4,278,522
$
5,923,522
5.5.10
5.5.11
5.5.12
$                       
$                       
$
340,547
242,610
64,815
6,707
$                         
-
$                             
$                             
-
$                     
$                     
$
(221,557)
(242,610)
(64,815)
-
$                           
-
$                           
-
$
-
$                            
-
$                            
-
$
125,697
$                        
-
$                                 
$                                 
-
125,697
$                          
-
$                                   
$                                   
-
$
647,972
$
6,707
$
(528,982)
-
$
-
$
$
125,697
$
125,697
$
647,972
$
6,707
$
(528,982)
-
$
-
$
$
125,697
$
125,697
$
2,573,260
$
146,932
$
(2,227,367)
$
3,660,000
$
5,305,000
$
4,152,825
$
5,797,825
5.5.13
5.5.14
5.5.15
$                   
$                  
$
7,714,812
(5,167,663)
26,111
$                     
$                   
-
$
357,143
(210,211)
$                 
$                   
$
(3,608,463)
1,407,207
(26,111)
3,138,000
$               
$                           
-
$
522,000
4,783,000
$                
$                            
-
$
522,000
$                     
$                   
$
7,601,492
(3,970,667)
522,000
$                       
$                      
$
9,246,492
(3,970,667)
522,000
$
2,573,260
$
146,932
$
(2,227,367)
$
3,660,000
$
5,305,000
$
4,152,825
$
5,797,825
This statement of financial position reflects the reviewed / audited financial results adjusted for the proforma adjustments described in Section 5.2 of this Prospectus. The statement of 
financial position is to be read in conjunction with the notes to and forming part of the historical information set out in Section 5.5 of this Prospectus.
50
5.5
Significant accounting policies of the merged group
The financial information in this Section should be read in conjunction with all of the 
significant accounting policies outlined in Section 5.5. The significant accounting policies have 
been included to assist in a general understanding of the Historical Financial Information and 
Proforma Historical Financial Information presented in Section 5.3 and Section 5.4 of this 
Prospectus.
Except as disclosed in the Proforma Adjustments, no adjustments have been made in the 
Proforma Historical Financial Information for any one-off or non-recurring costs.
The functional and presentation currency of the Company (the reporting entity) is Australian 
dollars. All amounts disclosed in the tables are presented in Australian dollars.
5.5.1  Going concern
The Historical Financial Information and the Proforma Historical Financial Information has 
been prepared on the going concern basis, which contemplates the continuity of normal 
business activity and the realisation of assets and the settlement of liabilities in the normal 
course of business.
Whilst the review opinion in relation to the Company’s financial statements for the half-year 
ended 31 December 2015 and audit opinion on ePAT’s financial statements for the half-year 
ended 31 December 2015 were unmodified, the Company’s review report contains an 
“emphasis of matter” paragraph in relation to its ability to continue as a going concern.
For the half year ended 31 December 2015, the Company generated losses from operations, 
had cash of $44,527 and had net current liabilities of $516,726. These conditions give rise to a 
material uncertainty which may cast significant doubt over the Company’s ability to continue 
as a going concern.
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the success of the 
Capital Raising under the Prospectus and the completion of the Acquisition.
Notwithstanding the above, the Directors believe that the Company will continue as a going 
concern after having regard to the proforma adjustments outlined in Section 5.2 of this 
Prospectus. As a result, the Historical Financial Information and the Proforma Historical 
Financial Information have been prepared on the going concern basis.
Should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern, it may be required to realise its 
assets and liabilities other than in the ordinary course of business, and at amounts that differ 
from those stated in the Historical Financial Information and Proforma Historical Financial 
Information.
The Historical Financial Information and the Proforma Historical Financial Information do not 
include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset 
amounts, or to the amount and classification of liabilities that might be required should the 
Company not be able to continue as a going concern.
5.5.2  Accounting for the Acquisition
The Company is the legal acquirer (ie the parent company) and will be the reporting entity of 
the combined group.
51
Under the Acquisition, the Company intends to acquire all the shares in ePAT by issuing a total 
of 213,219,616 million post-Consolidation Shares. In addition, Deferred Consideration Shares 
will be issued with a value of $1,000,000 if the Milestone is achieved (as disclosed in the 
Prospectus).
After the Acquisition, ePAT nominees will hold three of the four Director positions on the 
Board, including positions of the Chairman and the Managing Director.
Taking into consideration the matters noted above, the shareholders of ePAT will obtain a 
controlling interest in the Company, equating to a controlling interest in the combined entity 
following the Acquisition. ePAT has thus been deemed the acquirer for accounting purposes. 
The Acquisition of the Company by ePAT is not deemed to be a business combination as, at 
the time the Acquisition is Completed, the Company will not be considered to be a business 
under AASB 3 Business Combinations.
As such, the consolidation of these two companies is on the basis of the continuation of ePAT 
with no fair value adjustments, whereby ePAT is deemed to be the accounting parent. 
Therefore, the most appropriate treatment for the transaction is to account for it under AASB 
2 Share Based Payments, whereby ePAT is deemed to have issued shares to the Shareholders 
in exchange for the net assets held by the Company.
In this instance, the value of the Company Shares provided has been determined as the 
notional number of equity instruments that the shareholders of ePAT would have had to issue 
to the Company to give the owners of ePAT the same percentage ownership in the combined 
entity.
This has been deemed to be $4,106,349 based on ePAT notionally issuing 205,317,454 post-
Consolidation Shares at an assumed issue price of $0.02 per Share. The pre-Acquisition equity 
balances of the Company are eliminated against this increase in Share capital upon 
consolidation and the balance is deemed to be the amount paid for the ASX listing status of 
the Company, being $3,760,456, and is treated as a Share-based payment. The net assets 
acquired are $345,893.
5.5.3  New accounting policies for the merged group
Upon completion of the Acquisition, the business of the Company will have changed to that of 
the consolidated group resulting in the need to consider and / or adopt new accounting 
policies. Significant new accounting policies to be adopted by the consolidated group are 
outlined below.
(a)
Revenue and other income
Revenue is recognised when it is probable that the economic benefit will flow to the company 
and the revenue can be reliably measured. Revenue is measured at the fair value of the 
consideration received or receivable.
Sale of goods revenue is recognised at the point of sale, which is where the customer has 
taken delivery of the goods, the risks and rewards are transferred to the customer and there is 
a valid sales contract. Amounts disclosed as revenue are net of sales returns and trade 
discounts.
Interest revenue is recognised as interest accrues using the effective interest method. This is a 
method of calculating the amortised cost of a financial asset and allocating the interest 
income over the relevant period using the effective interest rate, which is the rate that exactly
52
discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the financial asset to the 
net carrying amount of the financial asset.
Other revenue is recognised when it is received or when the right to receive payment is 
established.
(b)
Intangible assets
Intellectual property rights are recognised at cost of acquisition less accumulated amortisation 
and any impairment losses. For intellectual property rights not yet in use, they are tested for 
impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that 
they might be impaired, and are carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Expenditure during the research phase of a project is recognised as an expense when incurred. 
Development costs are capitalised only when technical feasibility studies identify that the 
project is expected to deliver future economic benefits and these benefits can be measured 
reliably.
Intangible assets have a finite useful life and are amortised on a systematic basis based on the 
future economic benefits over the useful life of the project following commercialisation of the 
assets.
5.5.4  Significant accounting policies of the Company and ePAT
Set out below are the significant accounting policies that have been applied in the preparation 
of the Historical Financial Information and Proforma Historical Financial Information:
(a)
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements comprise the financial statements of all subsidiaries of 
the Company and the results of all subsidiaries from the date that control was obtained. The 
Company controls another entity when the Company is exposed to, or has the rights to, 
variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns 
through its power to direct the activities of the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is fully transferred. They are 
deconsolidated from the date control ceases.
The financial statement of the subsidiary is prepared for the same reporting period as the 
parent company, using consistent accounting policies.
In preparing the consolidated financial statements, all intercompany balances and 
transactions, income and expenses and profit and losses resulting from intra-group 
transactions have been eliminated in full.
The acquisition of subsidiaries is accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. A 
change in ownership interest without a loss of control is accounted for as an equity 
transaction.
Non-controlling interests in the results and equity of subsidiaries are shown separately in the 
financial statements. Losses incurred by the consolidated entity are attributed to the non-
controlling interests in full, even if that results in a deficit balance.
Where the consolidated entity loses control over a subsidiary, it derecognises the assets 
including goodwill, liabilities and non-controlling interest in the subsidiary, together with any
53
cumulative translation differences in equity. The consolidated entity recognises the fair value 
of the consideration received and the fair value of any investment retained together with any 
gains or losses in profit or loss.
(b)
Income Tax
Current tax assets and liabilities for the current and prior periods are measured at the amount 
expected to be recovered from or paid to the taxation authorities. The tax rates and tax laws 
used to compute the amount are those that are enacted or substantively enacted by the 
balance date.
Deferred income tax is provided on all temporary differences at the balance date between the 
tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes. 
Deferred income tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary differences except:
(i)
(ii)
when the deferred income tax liability arises from the initial recognition of 
goodwill or of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business 
combination and that, at the time of the transaction, affects neither the 
accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss; or
when the taxable temporary difference is associated with investments in 
subsidiaries, associates or interests in joint ventures, and the timing of the 
reversal of the temporary difference can be controlled and it is probable that 
the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised for all deductible temporary differences, carry-
forward of unused tax assets and unused tax losses, to the extent that it is probable that 
taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences and the 
carry-forward of unused tax credits and unused tax losses can be utilised, except:
(iii)
(iv)
when the deferred income tax asset relating to the deductible temporary 
difference arises from the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a 
transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of the 
transaction, affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss; or
when the deductible temporary difference is associated with investments in 
subsidiaries, associates or interests in joint ventures, in which case a deferred 
tax asset is only recognised to the extent that it is probable that the 
temporary difference will reverse in the foreseeable future and taxable profit 
will be available against which the temporary difference can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred income tax assets is reviewed at each balance date and 
reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be 
available to allow all or part of the deferred income tax asset to be utilised. Unrecognised 
deferred income tax assets are reassessed at each balance date and are recognised to the 
extent that it has become probable that future taxable profit will allow the deferred tax asset 
to be recovered.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to 
apply to the year when the asset is realised or the liability is settled, based on tax rates (and 
tax laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance date.
Income taxes relating to items recognised directly in equity are recognised in equity and not in 
profit or loss.
54
Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are offset only if a legally enforceable right 
exists to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and the deferred tax assets and 
liabilities relate to the same taxable entity and the same taxation authority.
(c)
Exploration and evaluation expenditure
Exploration, evaluation and development expenditure incurred is accumulated in respect of 
each identifiable area of interest. These costs are carried forward only if they relate to an area 
of interest for which rights of tenure are current and in respect of which:
(i)
(ii)
such costs are expected to be recouped through successful development and 
exploitation or from sale of the area; or
exploration and evaluation activities in the area have not, at balance date, 
resulted in booking economically recoverable reserves, and active operations 
in, or relating to, this area are continuing.
Exploration and evaluation assets are initially measured at cost and include acquisition of 
rights to explore, studies, exploratory drilling, trenching and sampling and associated activities 
and an allocation of depreciation and amortisation of assets used in exploration and 
evaluation activities. General and administrative costs are only included in the measurement 
of exploration and evaluation costs where they are related directly to operational activities in 
a particular area of interest.
Exploration and evaluation assets are assessed for impairment when facts and circumstances 
suggest that the carrying amount of an exploration and evaluation asset may exceed its 
recoverable amount. The recoverable amount of the exploration and evaluation asset (for the 
cash generating unit(s) to which it has been allocated being no larger than the relevant area of 
interest) is estimated to determine the extent of the impairment loss (if any).
Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses, the carrying amount of the asset is 
increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount, but only to the extent that the 
increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been 
determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in previous years.
Where a decision has been made to proceed with development in respect of a particular area 
of interest, the relevant exploration and evaluation asset is tested for impairment and the 
balance is then reclassified to development.
Accumulated costs in respect of areas of interest which are abandoned are written off in full 
against the income statement in the year in which the decision to abandon the area is made.
A regular review is undertaken of each area of interest to determine the appropriateness of 
continuing to carry forward costs in relation to that area of interest.
(d)
Impairment of assets
The group assesses at each balance date whether there is an indication that an asset may be 
impaired.
If any such indication exists, or when annual impairment testing for an asset is required, the 
Company makes an estimate of the asset’s recoverable amount. An asset’s recoverable 
amount is the higher of its fair value less costs to sell and its value in use and is determined for 
an individual asset, unless the asset does not generate cash inflows that are largely 
independent of those from other assets or groups of assets and the asset's value in use cannot
55
be estimated to be close to its fair value. In such cases the asset is tested for impairment as 
part of the cash generating unit to which it belongs. When the carrying amount of an asset or 
cash-generating unit exceeds its recoverable amount, the asset or cash-generating unit is 
considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
In assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value 
using a pre-tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of 
money and the risks specific to the asset. Impairment losses relating to continuing operations 
are recognised in those expense categories consistent with the function of the impaired asset 
unless the asset is carried at revalued amount (in which case the impairment loss is treated as 
a revaluation decrease).
An assessment is also made at each balance date as to whether there is any indication that 
previously recognised impairment losses may no longer exist or may have decreased. If such 
indication exists, the recoverable amount is estimated. A previously recognised impairment 
loss is reversed only if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the asset’s 
recoverable amount since the last impairment loss was recognised. If that is the case the 
carrying amount of the asset is increased to its recoverable amount. That increased amount 
cannot exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined, net of depreciation, 
had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years. Such reversal is 
recognised in profit or loss unless the asset is carried at revalued amount, in which case the 
reversal is treated as a revaluation increase.
After such a reversal the depreciation charge is adjusted in future periods to allocate the 
asset’s revised carrying amount, less any residual value, on a systematic basis over its 
remaining useful life.
(e)
Share-based payment transactions
The cost of equity-settled transactions with employees is measured by reference to the fair 
value of the equity instruments at the date at which they are granted. The fair value is 
determined by using a suitable option pricing model.
In valuing equity-settled transactions, no account is taken of any performance conditions, 
other than conditions linked to the price of the shares of the Company.
The cost of equity-settled transactions is recognised, together with a corresponding increase 
in equity, over the period in which the performance and/or service conditions are fulfilled, 
ending on the date on which the relevant recipient of the equity becomes fully entitled to the 
award (the vesting period).
The cumulative expense recognised for equity-settled transactions at each reporting date until 
vesting date reflects (i) the extent to which the vesting period has expired and (ii) the 
Company’s best estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest. No 
adjustment is made for the likelihood of market performance conditions being met as the 
effect of these conditions is included in the determination of fair value at grant date. The 
income statement charge or credit for a period represents the movement in cumulative 
expense recognised as at the beginning and end of that period.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest, except for awards where 
vesting is only conditional upon a market condition.
If the terms of an equity-settled award are modified, as a minimum an expense is recognised 
as if the terms had not been modified. In addition, an expense is recognised for any
56
modification that increases the total fair value of the share-based payment arrangement, or is 
otherwise beneficial to the employee, as measured at the date of modification.
If an equity-settled award is cancelled, it is treated as if it had vested on the date of 
cancellation, and any expense not yet recognised for the award is recognised immediately. 
However, if a new award is substituted for the cancelled award and designated as a 
replacement award on the date that it is granted, the cancelled and new award are treated as 
if they were a modification of the original award, as described in the previous paragraph.
(f)
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash comprises cash at bank and in hand. Cash equivalents are short term, highly liquid 
investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and which are subject to 
an insignificant risk of changes in value. Bank overdrafts are shown within borrowings in 
current liabilities in the statement of financial position.
For the purpose of the Statement of Cash Flows, cash includes on hand and other funds held 
at call net of bank overdrafts.
(g)
Interest-bearing loans and borrowings
The component of convertible notes that exhibits characteristics of debt is recognised as a 
liability in the Statement of Financial Position, net of transaction costs. On the issue of 
convertible notes, the fair value of the liability component is determined using a market rate 
for an equivalent non-convertible bond and this amount is carried as a liability on the 
amortised cost basis until extinguished on conversion or redemption. The increase in the 
liability due to the passage of time is recognised as a finance cost. The remainder of the 
proceeds is allocated to the equity component and is recognised in shareholders’ equity. The 
carrying amount of the equity component is not remeasured in subsequent years.
57
5.5.5
Cash and cash equivalents
58
5.5.6
Trade and other receivables
59
5.5.7
Other current assets
60
5.5.8
Property, plant and equipment
61
5.5.9
Exploration and evaluation expenditure
62
5.5.10
Trade and other payables
63
5.5.11
Borrowings
64
5.5.12
Financial liabilities at fair value
65
5.5.13
Issued capital
66
5.5.14
Accumulated losses
67
5.5.15
Reserves
68
The proforma adjustments includes the value of Underwriter Options to be issued to 
Patersons Securities Limited (Patersons) or their nominees as partial consideration for 
Patersons underwriting the Capital Raising in the amount of $4,500,000. In accordance with 
the requirements of AASB2 Share Based Payments the value attached to the Underwriter 
Options is required to be accounted for immediately as the Underwriter Options vest 
immediately.
The cash fee of 6% is deemed to be the fair value of these services. Therefore the value of the 
Underwriter Options was determined based on the following assumptions:
Variable
Assumption
Assumed spot price (being the Capital Raising Price)
Exercise price
Term
Assumed volatility (Note 1)
Risk free rate
Valuation per Option
Number of Options
Total value of Underwriter Options to be issued
$0.02
$0.025
3 years from date of issue
100%
1.54%
$0.0116
45,000,000
$522,000
Note  1  -  The  Company  will  be  changing  its  focus  and  company  operations.  It  was  therefore considered more 
relevant to review the volatility of comparable technology companies than to review the historical volatility of the 
Company’s equity securities.
Based on a review of the one year and two year volatility of comparable companies in the medical technology 
sector, an estimated volatility level of 100% was utilised in the valuation of the Underwriter Options.
5.6
ePAT’s financial background
Since incorporation on 3 July 2015 to 31 December 2015, ePAT has raised $500,000 by issuing 
equity securities. The funds have been spent on the following primary purposes:
Expense
Research expenses
Employee related expenses
Other operating expenses
Repurchase of equity securities
Working Capital
TOTAL
Amount
$197,585
$33,515
$51,396
$171,428
$46,076
$500,000
The above table has been prepared to illustrate the use of funds by ePAT from 3 July 2014 to 
31 December 2015 and will not reflect the sources and uses of funds from 1 January 2016 to 
the date of this Prospectus.
69
5.7
Forecast financial information
There are significant uncertainties associated with forecasting future revenues and expenses 
of the Company. In light of uncertainty as to timing and outcome of the Company's growth 
strategies and the general nature of the industry in which the Company will operate, as well as 
uncertain macro market and economic conditions in the Company's markets, the Company's 
performance in any future period cannot be reliably estimated. On this basis and after 
considering ASIC Regulatory Guide 170, the Directors do not believe that they have a 
reasonable basis to reliably forecast future earnings and accordingly forecast financials are not 
included in this Prospectus.
5.8
Dividend policy
The Company does not expect to pay dividends in the near future as its focus will primarily be 
on using cash reserves to grow and develop the ePAT business.
Any future determination as to the payment of dividends by the Company will be at the 
discretion of the Directors and will depend upon matters such as the availability of 
distributable earnings, the operating results and financial condition of the Company, future 
capital requirements, general business and other factors considered relevant by the Directors. 
No assurances are given in relation to the payment of dividends, or that any dividends may 
attach franking credits.
70
6
6.1
RISK FACTORS
Introduction
The future performance of the Company and the future investment performance of Shares 
may be influenced by a range of factors, many of which are outside the control of the 
Company, the Directors and its senior management. This Section 6 describes what the 
Company believes to be the key risks associated with the business of the Company, the 
industry in which it intends on operating and the general risks associated with an investment 
in the Company. It does not purport to list every risk that may be associated with the 
Company’s business or the industry in which it intends on operating in or an investment in the 
Company now or in the future. The occurrence or consequence of some of the risks described 
in this Section 6 are partially or completely outside the control of the Company and its 
Directors.
The selection of risks has been based on an assessment of a combination of the probability of 
the risk occurring, the ability to mitigate the risk and the impact of the risk if it did occur. The 
assessment is based on the knowledge of the Directors and senior management as at the 
Prospectus Date, but there is no guarantee or assurance that the importance of different risks 
will not change or other risks will not emerge. Any of these risks, and any other risks that may 
emerge, may in isolation or in combination, if they eventuate, have a material adverse effect 
on the Company’s business, future financial position and future financial performance and 
cash flows. There can be no guarantee that the Company will achieve its stated objectives or 
that the Forecast Financial Information or any forward looking statements contained in this 
Prospectus will be achieved or realised. Investors should note that past performance is not a 
reliable indicator of future performance.
Before applying for Shares, you should satisfy yourself that you have a sufficient 
understanding of the risks described in this Section 6 and all of the other information set out 
in this Prospectus, and consider whether the Shares are a suitable investment for you, having 
regard to your own investment objectives, financial circumstances and particular needs 
(including financial and taxation issues). If you do not understand any part of this Prospectus, 
or have any questions about whether to invest in the Company, you should consult your 
accountant, financial advisor, stockbroker, lawyer or other professional advisor prior to 
deciding whether to invest in the Company.
6.2
Risks relating to the Change in Nature and Scale of Activities
(a)
Reinstatement of securities to quotation on ASX
The acquisition of ePAT constitutes a significant change in the nature and scale of the 
Company’s activities and the Company needs to re-comply with Chapters 1 and 2 of 
the ASX Listing Rules as if it were seeking admission to the official list of ASX.
There is a risk that there will be a delay in the Company being able to meet the 
requirements of ASX for re-quotation of its Securities. Should this occur, the Shares 
and quoted Options will not be able to be traded on the ASX until such time as those 
requirements are met. Shareholders may be prevented from trading their Shares and 
quoted Options should the Company be suspended until such time as it does re-
comply with the Listing Rules.
If the Company is unable to meet the requirements of ASX for re-quotation of its 
Shares by 30 September 2016 (or such later date as the parties agree in writing) the
71
Company will not have satisfied the Conditions Precedent under the SSPA and the 
acquisition of ePAT may not be completed.
(b)
Contractual risk
Pursuant to the SSPA (summarised in Section 2.4 and Section 12.2 the Company has 
agreed to acquire 100% of the issued capital of ePAT subject to the fulfilment of 
certain conditions precedent.
The ability of the Company to achieve its stated objectives will depend on the 
performance by the parties of their obligations under the SSPA. If any party defaults in 
the performance of its obligations, or any conditions precedent are unable to be 
satisfied for any other reason, the Acquisition may not complete. It may be necessary 
for the Company to approach a court to seek a legal remedy or to defend a legal 
action commenced against the Company, which may be costly.
(c)
Dilution risk
The Company currently has 296,805,545 pre-Consolidation Shares on issue, which 
equates to approximately 169,603,169 post-Consolidation Shares.
If all the Shares are issued pursuant to the Offer, then the total number of post- 
Consolidation Shares on issue following Completion of the Acquisition and re-
compliance will be approximately 689,947,735 Shares if a $4,000,000 Capital Raising is 
completed and 777,447,735 Shares if a $5,750,000 Capital Raising is completed. This 
assumes that no Options, Noteholder Options or Underwriter Options are exercised 
and no further Shares are issued.
If all of the Options, Noteholder Options and Underwriter Options are also exercised 
then the total number of post-Consolidation Shares will be approximately 837,982,890 
Shares on issue if a $4,000,000 Capital Raising is completed and 925,482,890 Shares if 
a $5,750,000 Capital Raising is completed (assuming no further Shares are issued).
(d)
Liquidity risk
Upon re-quotation of the Company’s Securities, a significant portion of the Shares on 
issue (including the Consideration Shares issued to the ePAT shareholders in 
accordance with the SSPA and Shares issued on conversion of the Interim Raising 
Notes) will be subject to escrow restrictions imposed by the Listing Rules. Some 
investors may consider that there is an increased liquidity risk as a large portion of the 
issued capital may not be able to be traded freely for a period of up to 24 months.
6.3
Risks specific to the Acquisition of ePAT
(a)
Competition and new technologies
The industry in which ePAT is involved is subject to increasing domestic and global 
competition which is fast-paced and fast-changing.
The medical device industry is highly competitive and other corporations may 
commercialise products that may compete with the ePAT Apps or which may reach 
the market before any ePAT Apps or any products derived from them are launched.
While ePAT will undertake all reasonable due diligence in its business decisions and 
operations, ePAT will have no influence or control over the activities or actions of its
72
competitors, whose activities or actions may positively, or negatively affect the 
operating and financial performance of ePAT’s business. For instance, new 
technologies could overtake the advancements made by ePAT’s products. In that case, 
ePAT’s revenues and profitability could be adversely affected.
(b)
Reliance on key researchers and Curtin University
The research and development of the intellectual property has been in large part due
to the knowledge, skills and expertise of Professor Jeff Hughes, Mr Mustafa Atee and
Dr Kreshnik Hoti. Their work for ePAT will continue, pursuant to a consultancy
agreement (in the case of Dr Hoti) and pursuant to the Research Services Agreement
with Curtin University, subject to Completion of the Acquisition.
However, there is no assurance that these researchers will continue to be employees
or consultants to ePAT, or employees of Curtin University. In addition, there is no
assurance that they will remain physically and mentally able to continue in their
current or future roles.
If either contract were terminated or breached, ePAT would need to find alternative
means of performing the development work, and ePAT’s operations and business may
be adversely affected.
(c)
Reliance on key senior management
The responsibility of overseeing the day-to-day operations and the strategic
management of the Company will depend substantially on its senior management,
including the proposed directors. There can be no guarantee of the continued
engagement of the senior management personnel, and there may be a detrimental
impact on the Company if one or more of the proposed directors or other senior
management ceases their engagement with the Company. The Company has been
advised that it is intended that the post-acquisition Board will, subject to obtaining all
required Shareholder approvals, issue Options to each of the proposed directors as
part of their equity incentive package. There is a significant risk that should these
Options not be granted for any reason, including a failure to obtain all necessary
shareholder approvals, one or more of the proposed directors may cease their
engagement with the Company. Should such an engagement be terminated, the
Company would be required to engage further suitable management personnel. There
is no guarantee that the Company will be able to attract and retain suitably qualified
personnel.
(d)
Reliance on key material contracts with, and support of, nViso
The ePAT Apps are partially based on technology which is under licence from, and is
supported by, nViso. While the licence does not expire until 26 September 2019, the
Company is currently renegotiating its licence with nViso. There is a risk that the
Company will not be able to negotiate renewal of this licence on terms acceptable to
the Company, in which case the Company will need to consider whether it can obtain
alternative facial recognition software to work with the ePAT App, and if so, the costs
of altering the ePAT App to work with any new software. nViso is an emerging
technology vendor and there is a risk that it will not be successful and continue to be
able to support its technology.
The nViso agreements are all governed by the law of Switzerland with the venue of
the court being Lausanne, Switzerland for any disputes arising out of the agreements.
73
This may pose a financial risk if any disputes or litigation were to arise between ePAT 
and nViso in relation to any nViso Agreement.
(e)
Validation and implementation studies
The ePAT Apps must still undergo further implementation and validation studies.
These studies may show that the Apps do not work in a safe and effective manner.
The Company intends to conduct validation and implementation studies of the ePAT
Apps in the future, but there can be no guarantee that relevant regulatory agencies
such as the TGA (Therapeutic Goods Administration in Australia) or the FDA (Food and
Drug Administration in the U.S.A.) or other regulatory agencies will allow the Company
to undertake such studies. Additionally, the development and approval process may
take longer, cost more than expected and may result in the ePAT Apps not becoming
an approved medical device.
(f)
Commercialisation risk
There is a risk that ePAT will not be able to successfully commercialise or sell its
products, or will be unable to attract sufficient customers to be sufficiently profitable
to fund future operations.
(g)
Limited trading history
ePAT is a start-up company with a limited trading history and there is therefore
uncertainty in relation to the business of ePAT. Investors should consider ePAT’s
prospects in light of its limited financial history. In addition, there is no guarantee that
ePAT will be able to successfully develop or commercialise its products and if it is
unable to do so it may not be able to realise significant revenues in the future and may
not achieve commercial viability.
(h)
Intellectual property protection
ePAT’s patent claim has been accepted (see Section 8 for more information).
However, the possible future commercial success of the ePAT Apps may rely upon the
ability to obtain and maintain patent protection and there is no guarantee that the
claims and applications in respect of the ePAT apps will be enforceable. The defence
and prosecution of intellectual property rights are costly and time consuming and
their outcome is uncertain.
Even granted patent protection can be partially or wholly invalidated following
challenges by third parties. The grant of a patent does not guarantee validity of that
patent since it may be revoked on the ground of invalidity at any time during its life. If
none of the claims of a granted patent are valid, the patent is unenforceable.
(i)
Infringement of third-party intellectual property
If a third-party accuses ePAT of infringing its intellectual property or if a third-party
commences litigation against ePAT for infringement of patent or other intellectual
property rights, ePAT may incur significant costs in defending such action, whether or
not it ultimately prevails. Costs that ePAT incurs in defending third party infringement
actions would also include diversion of management’s and technical personnel’s time.
In addition, parties making claims against ePAT may be able to obtain injunctive or
other equitable relief that could prevent ePAT from further developing discoveries or
74
commercialising its products. In the event of a successful claim for infringement 
against ePAT, it may be required to pay damages and obtain one or more licenses 
from the prevailing third party. If it is not able to obtain these licenses at a reasonable 
cost, or at all, it could encounter delays in product introductions and loss of 
substantial resources while it attempts to develop alternative products. Defence of 
any lawsuit or failure to obtain any of these licenses could prevent ePAT from 
commercialising available products and could cause it to incur substantial 
expenditure.
(j)
Trade secrets
ePAT has licensed, acquired and developed (and will continue to develop) trade
secrets in the form of specialised processes and software (including certain
algorithms) which are used by ePAT for its business. ePAT takes a number of
precautions to protect such trade secrets.
While the steps taken and the laws relating to trade secrets assist to protect
proprietary rights, there can be no guarantee that unauthorised use or copying of that
specialised technology or algorithms will be prevented, or that those employees that
have access to the trade secrets will adhere to their confidentiality obligations.
Any significant failure or inability to adequately protect and control these proprietary
trade secrets (which may be held by third-parties such as Curtin University) may harm
the Company’s business, reduce its ability to compete, result in an immediate lack of
capability in relation to core systems, as well as a loss of competitive advantage.
(k)
Risks associated with the regulatory environment
ePAT is based in Australia and is subject to Australian laws and regulations. For
example, ePAT is required to comply with Therapeutic Goods Act 1989 (Cth). If ePAT
expands into other markets, for example the United States of America, then ePAT will
be subject to United States laws and regulations. Users, competitors, members of the
general public or regulators could allege breaches of the legislation. This could result
in remedial action or litigation, which could potentially lead to ePAT being required to
pay compensation or fines. ePAT’s operations may become subject to regulatory
requirements, such as licensing and reporting obligations, which would increase the
costs and resources associated with its regulatory compliance. Any such increase in
the costs and resources associated with regulatory compliance could impact upon
ePAT’s profitability. In addition, if regulators took the view that ePAT had failed to
comply with regulatory requirements, this could lead to enforcement action resulting
in public warnings, infringement notices or the imposition of a pecuniary penalty. This
could lead to significant reputational damage to ePAT and consequent impact upon its
revenue.
(l)
Medical health app market risks
If the medical health app market grows in size as medical health Apps become more
available, there is no guarantee that the ePAT Apps will take advantage of this growth.
There is a risk that the ePAT will not be discovered and downloaded. There is also a
risk that ePAT does not gain traction due to the size and expertise of its operations.
75
(m)
Outsourcing
The Company and ePAT outsource to consultants for expert advice and contract
organisations (including Curtin University) for research, clinical and programming and
coding services. There is no guarantee that such experts or organisations will be
available as required or will meet expectations.
(n)
Liability claims
ePAT may be exposed to liability claims if its products or services are provided in fault
and/or cause harm to its customers. As a result, ePAT may have to expend significant
financial and managerial resources to defend against such claims. If a successful claim
is made against ePAT, ePAT may be fined or sanctioned and its reputation and brand
may be negatively impacted, which could materially and adversely affect its
reputation, business prospects, financial condition and results of operation.
(o)
Customer service risk
Customers may need to engage with ePAT’s customer service personnel in certain
circumstances, such as if they have a question about the services or if there is a
dispute between a customer and ePAT. ePAT needs to recruit and retain staff or
engage external service providers with interpersonal skills sufficient to respond
appropriately to customer services requests. Poor customer service experiences may
result in the loss of customers. If ePAT loses key customer service personnel, fails to
provide adequate training and resources for customer service personnel, this could
lead to adverse publicity, litigation, regulatory inquiries and/or a decrease in
customers, all of which may negatively impact on ePAT’s revenue.
(p)
Special reputational risks
ePAT operates in a fast-changing environment, and negative publicity can spread
quickly, whether true or false. Negative comments about ePAT may have a
disproportionate effect on ePAT’s reputation and its ability to earn revenues and
profits. Additionally, complaints by such customers can lead to additional regulatory
scrutiny and a consequential increase compliance burden in responding to regulatory
inquiries. This could negatively impact on ePAT’s profitability.
(q)
Foreign exchange risks
If ePAT has costs and expenses in other jurisdictions, such as the United States of
America or Europe, then they will likely be denominated in foreign currency.
Accordingly, the depreciation and/or the appreciation of the relevant foreign currency
relative to the Australian currency would result in a translation loss on consolidation
which is taken directly to shareholder equity. Any depreciation of the foreign currency
relative to the Australian currency may result in lower than anticipated revenue, profit
and earning. ePAT could be affected on an ongoing basis by foreign exchange risks
between the Australian dollar and the relevant foreign currency, and will have to
monitor this risk on an ongoing basis.
(r)
Insurance coverage
ePAT faces various risks in connection with its business and may lack adequate
insurance coverage or may not have the relevant insurance coverage. ePAT will
maintain insurance coverage for its employees (as required by law in Australia) as well
76
as insurance coverage for management liability, corporate liability, product liability, 
employment practices liability, crime protection and statutory liability. However, ePAT 
does not maintain insurance against various other liabilities. If ePAT incurs substantial 
losses or liabilities and its insurance coverage is unavailable or inadequate to cover 
such losses or liabilities, its financial position may be adversely affected.
(s)
Partnerships
The commercial strategy for products which may be derived from the ePAT Apps
potentially includes forming partnerships with other companies that have the ability
to effectively commercialise the Apps in key economic markets and there is no
assurance that suitable partnerships will be secured, or that products can be
commercialised.
(t)
Reliance on third-party vendors
ePAT plans to utilise third-party hardware (smartphones and tablets), software
(mobile operating systems and integrated healthcare software systems) and
distribution platforms (such as app stores) for commercialisation of the ePAT Apps. If
access to these platforms were terminated or reduced, ePAT’s operations and
business would be adversely affected.
6.4
General risks
(a)
Additional requirements for capital
The funds raised under the Offer are considered sufficient to meet the immediate
commercialisation objectives of the Company over a 2 year period. However,
additional funding is expected be required to fully commercialise the ePAT Apps and
achieve sustainable profitability. In the event costs exceed the Company's estimates,
or to take advantage of opportunities for acquisitions, joint ventures or other business
opportunities; additional financing may be required sooner than planned.
The Company may seek to raise further funds through equity or debt financing, joint
ventures, licensing arrangements, production sharing arrangements or other means.
Failure to obtain sufficient financing for the Company's activities and future projects
may result in delay and indefinite postponement of its activities and potential
research and development programs. There can be no assurance that additional
finance will be available when needed or, if available, the terms of the financing might
not be favourable to the Company and might involve substantial dilution to
Shareholders.
(b)
Economic risks
General economic conditions, introduction of tax reform, new legislation, movements
in interest and inflation rates and currency exchange rates may have an adverse effect
on the Company's business activities and potential research and development
programs, as well as on their ability to fund those activities.
(c)
Force majeure
The Company's projects now or in the future may be adversely affected by risks
outside the control of the Company, including labour unrest, civil disorder, war,
subversive activities or sabotage, fires, floods, explosions or other catastrophes,
epidemics or quarantine restrictions.
77
(d)
Market conditions
Share market conditions may affect the value of the Company's Securities regardless
of the Company's operating performance. Share market conditions are affected by
many factors such as:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
general economic outlook;
introduction of tax reform or other new legislation;
interest rates and inflation rates;
changes in investor sentiment toward particular market sectors;
the demand for, and supply of, capital; and
terrorism or other hostilities.
The market price of securities can fall as well as rise and may be subject to varied and 
unpredictable influences on the market for equities in general and in particular 
technology stocks. Neither the Company nor the Directors warrant the future 
performance of the Company or any return to Shareholders arising from the 
transactions the subject of this Prospectus or otherwise.
(e)
Taxation
The acquisition and disposal of Shares will have tax consequences, which will differ
depending on the individual financial affairs of each investor. All potential investors in
the Company are urged to obtain independent financial advice about the
consequences of acquiring Shares from a taxation point of view and generally.
To the maximum extent permitted by law, the Company, its officers and each of their
respective advisers accept no liability and responsibility with respect to the taxation
consequences of applying for Shares under this Prospectus.
(f)
Due diligence
The Company has undertaken due diligence in relation to the Acquisition. However,
there is a risk that due diligence has not identified issues that would have been
material to the decision to acquire all of the issued share capital of ePAT.
78
7
REGULATORY REPORT
79
REPORT FOR GRT LAWYERS ON
REGULATORY ASPECTS OF THE
EPAT APPLICATION
JUNE 2016
CONFIDENTIAL
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
PURPOSE OF DOCUMENT 
The purpose of this document is to provide Minquest Limited, through GRT Lawyers, with an overview of 
the  Regulatory  requirements  that  will  need  to  be  fulfilled  in  order  to  obtain  market  clearances  for  the 
ePAT application, in the major markets of Australia, the EC and the US.
SCOPE OF DOCUMENT 
This document examines the regulatory issues related to the ePAT application when seeking marketing 
clearance  from  the  Therapeutic  Goods  Administration  (TGA)  of  Australia  and  the  Food  and  Drug 
Administration (FDA) of the US, and for obtaining the CE Mark to allow marketing of the devices in the 
EU.
ASSUMPTIONS 
The following assumptions have been made in the preparation of this document:
1. The ePAT  application is manufactured by Electronic Pain Assessment Technologies (ePAT)
Pty Ltd (“ePAT”).
2. The key markets that the ePAT application will target in the first instance will be Australia, the
EU and the US.
3. Relevant  clinical  trial  data  is  available  or  is  being  gathered  for  the  product  and  has  been
collected according to GCP principles.
4. The application does not deliver any energy to the patient.
5. The application does not deliver any therapy to the patient.
6. The application is not used exclusively as a diagnostic device.
Confidential
Page 2 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
CONTENTS
Page 
PURPOSE OF DOCUMENT ...................................................................................................................................... 2 
SCOPE OF DOCUMENT ........................................................................................................................................... 2 
ASSUMPTIONS ........................................................................................................................................................... 2 
CONTENTS .................................................................................................................................................................. 3 
ABBREVIATIONS ...................................................................................................................................................... 5 
DEFINITIONS .............................................................................................................................................................. 6 
THERAPEUTIC GOODS ADMINISTRATION (TGA) .................................................................................. 9 
1 
1.1  MARKETING OF THERAPEUTIC GOODS IN AUSTRALIA .................................................................................... 9 
1.2  CLINICAL EVIDENCE ...................................................................................................................................... 9 
1.3  CLINICAL TRIALS ......................................................................................................................................... 10 
1.4  CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT .......................................................................................................................... 10 
1.5  EPAT DEVICE .............................................................................................................................................. 10 
1.5.1  TGA Classification ........................................................................................................................... 10 
1.5.2  Conformity Assessment .................................................................................................................... 11 
1.5.3  ARTG Inclusion Process .................................................................................................................. 11 
1.6  EXPECTED TIMELINES .................................................................................................................................. 11 
1.6.1  Validation of Software ...................................................................................................................... 11 
1.6.2  Writing of Technical Documentation ............................................................................................... 11 
1.6.3  Inclusion on ARTG ........................................................................................................................... 12 
2  CE MARK .......................................................................................................................................................... 13 
2.1  MUTUAL RECOGNITION AGREEMENT BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY ................. 13 
2.2  EUROPEAN MEDICAL DEVICE DIRECTIVE, 93/42/EEC ................................................................................. 13 
2.2.1  Device Classification ........................................................................................................................ 13 
2.2.2  Conformity Assessment .................................................................................................................... 13 
2.3  EPAT DEVICE .............................................................................................................................................. 14 
2.3.1  CE Mark Classification .................................................................................................................... 14 
2.3.2  Conformity Assessment .................................................................................................................... 14 
2.3.3  Process for Granting of CE Mark .................................................................................................... 14 
2.4  EUROPEAN REPRESENTATIVE ....................................................................................................................... 14 
2.5  EXPECTED TIMELINES .................................................................................................................................. 14 
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) OF THE USA .................................................................. 15 
3.1  DEVICE CLASSIFICATION .............................................................................................................................. 15 
3.1.1  Class I Devices ................................................................................................................................. 15 
3.1.2  Class II Devices ................................................................................................................................ 15 
3.1.3  Class III Devices .............................................................................................................................. 15 
3.1.4  Software Application Devices .......................................................................................................... 16 
3.2  PREMARKET NOTIFICATION 510(K) - 21 CFR PART 807 SUBPART E ............................................................ 16 
3.3  PREMARKET APPROVAL (PMA) - 21 CFR PART 814 .................................................................................... 17 
3.4  INDICATION(S) FOR USE ............................................................................................................................... 17 
3.5  DEVICE LISTING ........................................................................................................................................... 18
3
Confidential
Page 3 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
3.6  CLINICAL EVIDENCE .................................................................................................................................... 18 
3.7  GMP REQUIREMENTS .................................................................................................................................. 18 
3.8  US AGENT .................................................................................................................................................... 19 
4  ABOUT THE AUTHOR ................................................................................................................................... 20 
4.1  DR JANET PREUSS ........................................................................................................................................ 20 
4.2  QRC SOLUTIONS .......................................................................................................................................... 20
Confidential
Page 4 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
ABBREVIATIONS
Premarket Notification
Australian Institute of Company Directors 
Australian Institute of Management 
Active Implantable Medical Device 
Australian Regulatory Guidelines for Medical Devices 
Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods 
Conformity Assessment Body
Code of Federal Regulations 
Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use 
Clinical Trial Notification 
Clinical Trial Exemption 
European Community (the forerunner of the EU) 
European Union
Food and Drug Administration (of the US) 
Good Clinical Practice 
Good Manufacturing Practice 
International  Conference  on  Harmonisation  of  Technical  Requirements 
Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use 
Investigative Device Exemption 
Masters in Business Administration 
Mutual Recognition Agreement 
Doctor of Philosophy 
Quality Management System 
Quality Systems Regulation (FDA) 
Substantial Equivalence
Therapeutic Goods Administration 
United States of America
for
510(k)
AICD 
AIM 
AIMD 
ARGMD 
ARTG 
CAB
CFR 
CHMP 
CTN 
CTX 
EC 
EU
FDA 
GCP 
GMP 
ICH
IDE 
MBA 
MRA 
PhD 
QMS 
QSR 
SE
TGA 
US
Confidential
Page 5 of 21
Authorised Representative 
(EU)
Intended Purpose (TGA)
Intended Purpose (EU)
Manufacturer (TGA)
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
DEFINITIONS
‘Authorised representative’ means any natural or legal person established in the 
Community who, explicitly designated by the manufacturer, acts and may be addressed 
by authorities and bodies in the Community instead of the manufacturer with regard to 
the latter's obligations under this Directive;
Intended purpose means the intended use according to the data supplied by the 
manufacturer on the labelling, in the Instructions for Use and/or in advertising 
materials. 
‘Intended purpose’ means the use for which the device is intended according to the data 
supplied by the manufacturer on the labelling, in the instructions and/or in promotional 
materials. 
From the Therapeutic Goods Act 1989: 
41BG Manufacturers of medical devices
1. The manufacturer of a medical device is the person who is responsible for the
design, production, packaging and labeling of the device before it is supplied
under the person’s name, whether or not it is the person, or another person
acting on the person’s behalf, who carries out those operations.
2. If subsection (1) does not apply to a medical device, the manufacturer of the
device is the person who, with a view to supplying the device under the
person’s name, does one or more of the following using ready made products:
assembles the device;
(a)
(b) packages the device;
processes the device;
(c)
(d)
fully refurbishes the device;
labels the device;
(e)
assigns to the device its purpose by means of information supplied, by the
(f)
person, on or in any one or more of the following:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
the labeling of the device;
the instructions for using the device;
any advertising material relating to the device;
technical documentation describing the mechanism of the device.
3. However, a person is not the manufacturer of a medical device if:
(a) The person assembles or adapts the device for an individual patient; and
(b) The device has already been supplied by another person; and
(c) The assembly or adaptation does not change the purpose intended for the
device by means of information supplied by that other person, on or in any
one or more of the following:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
the labeling on the device;
the instructions for using the device;
any advertising material relating to the device;
technical documentation describing the mechanism of action of the
device.
Confidential
Page 6 of 21
Manufacturer (EU)
Medical Device (TGA)
Medical Device (EU)
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
4. A person is not the manufacturer of a medical device if the person is included in
a class of persons prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
subsection.
‘Manufacturer’ means the natural or legal person with responsibility for the design, 
manufacture, packaging and labelling of a device before it is placed on the market 
under his own name, regardless of whether these operations are carried out by that 
person himself or on his behalf by a third party. 
The obligations of this Directive to be met by manufacturers also apply to the natural or 
legal person who assembles, packages, processes, fully refurbishes and/or labels one or 
more ready-made products and/or assigns to them their intended purpose as a device 
with a view to their being placed on the market under his own name. 
This subparagraph does not apply to the person who, while not a manufacturer within 
the meaning of the first subparagraph, assembles or adapts devices already on the 
market to their intended purpose for an individual patient. 
A medical device is defined in the legislation as “any instrument, apparatus, appliance, 
material or other article (whether used alone or in combination, and including the 
software necessary for its proper application) intended by the person under whose name 
it is to be supplied, to be used for human beings for the purposes of one or more of the 
following:
 diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation of disease;
 diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, alleviation of or compensation for an injury or
handicap;
investigation, replacement or modification of the anatomy or of a physiological
process;
control of conception,


and does not achieve its principal intended action in or on the human body by 
pharmacological, immunological or metabolic means, but which may be assisted in its 
function by such means; or
an accessory to such an instrument, apparatus, appliance, material or 
other article.”
It should be noted that a key part of this definition is the intended purpose specified by 
the manufacturer of the medical device. 
An accessory, to a medical device, is an article, or articles intended specifically by its 
manufacturer to be used together with the medical device to enable the medical device 
to be used as intended by its manufacturer.
‘Medical device’ means any instrument, apparatus, appliance, software, material or 
other article, whether used alone or in combination, including the software intended by 
its manufacturer to be used specifically for diagnostic and/or therapeutic purposes and 
necessary for its proper application, intended by the manufacturer to be used for human 
beings for the purpose of:  
—  diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation of disease, 
—  diagnosis, monitoring, treatment, alleviation of or compensation for an injury or
handicap,
—  investigation, replacement or modification of the anatomy or of a physiological
process,
—  control of conception, 
and which does not achieve its principal intended action in or on the human body by 
pharmacological, immunological or metabolic means, but which may be assisted in its
Confidential
Page 7 of 21
Medical device (US FDA)  A device is:
function by such means.
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report

"an instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, contrivance, implant, in vitro
reagent, or other similar or related article, including a component part, or
accessory which is:
o recognized in the official National Formulary, or the United States
Pharmacopoeia, or any supplement to them,
o intended for use in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or in the
cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, in man or other
animals, or
o intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or
other animals, and which does not achieve any of it's primary intended
purposes through chemical action within or on the body of man or other
animals and which is not dependent upon being metabolized for the
achievement of any of its primary intended purposes."
Therapeutic Good (TGA)
"Therapeutic goods" means goods:
a.
that are represented in any way to be, or that are, whether because of the way in
which the goods are presented or for any other reason, likely to be taken to be:
i. for therapeutic use; or
ii. for use as an ingredient or component in the manufacture of
therapeutic goods; or
iii. for use as a container or part of a container for goods of the kind
referred to in subparagraph (i) or (ii); or
b.
included in a class of goods the sole or principal use of which is, or ordinarily
is, a therapeutic use or a use of a kind referred to in subparagraph (a) (ii) or (iii);
and includes goods declared to be therapeutic goods under an order in force under 
section 7, but does not include:
c. goods declared not to be therapeutic goods under an order in force under section
7; or
d. goods in respect of which such an order is in force, being an order that declares
the goods not to be therapeutic goods when used, advertised, or presented for
supply in the way specified in the order where the goods are used, advertised, or
presented for supply in that way; or
foods.
e.
Therapeutic Use (TGA)
"Therapeutic use" means use in or in connection with:
a. preventing, diagnosing, curing or alleviating a disease, ailment, defect or injury
in persons or animals; or
influencing, inhibiting or modifying a physiological process in persons or
animals; or
testing the susceptibility of persons or animals to a disease or ailment; or
influencing, controlling or preventing conception in persons; or
testing for pregnancy in persons; or
the replacement or modification of parts of the anatomy in persons or animals.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
Confidential
Page 8 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
1  THERAPEUTIC GOODS ADMINISTRATION (TGA)
1.1  Marketing of Therapeutic Goods in Australia 
In order for a therapeutic good to be marketed in Australia, it must first be entered onto the Australian 
Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG), which is maintained by the Therapeutic Goods Administration 
(TGA) of Australia.  Entry onto the ARTG is determined according to the classification of a device, with 
the classification being determined based on:
 the manufacturer’s intended use;
 the level of risk to patients, users and other persons;
 the degree of invasiveness in the human body; and
 duration of use.
There are five classes of medical devices (in order of increasing risk):
 Class I (including sterile and measuring devices).
 Class IIa.
 Class IIb.
 Class III.
 Active Implantable Medical Devices (AIMD).
1.2  Clinical Evidence 
In  order  to  be  included  on  the  TGA’s  ARTG,  a  medical  device  must  have  relevant  clinical  evidence 
related to the safety and performance of the device. 
According  to  the  TGA’s  Australian  Regulatory  Guidelines  for  Medical  Devices  (ARGMD),  a 
manufacturer or sponsor of a medical device is required to:
 have clinical evidence that is appropriate for the device’s use and classification;
 demonstrate compliance with Essential Principles of performance and safety; and
 have undergone a clinical evaluation by the manufacturer as part of the conformity assessment
procedure.
Clinical evidence of conformity with the Essential Principles is generated through an evaluation procedure 
that is applied by the manufacturer to clinical and other data pertinent to the device.  
Clinical data may comprise either or both of the following:
 data generated during a clinical investigation program for the device; and
 data  obtained  from  a  review  of  the  literature,  which  may  include  clinical  experience  with  the
same or similar devices.
Importantly, the clinical data should demonstrate performance under normal conditions of use and allow 
evaluation of any undesirable side-effects.
Confidential
Page 9 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
1.3  Clinical Trials 
Clinical  trials  of  medical  devices  conducted  in  Australia  are  subject  to  Commonwealth  Government 
regulation as administered by the TGA. 
There are two schemes under which clinical trials involving therapeutic goods can be conducted:
 Clinical Trial Notification (CTN); and
 Clinical Trial Exemption (CTX).
A notification to the TGA under either the CTN or CTX Scheme is required for all clinical investigational 
use of a product in Australia, where that use involves:
 a  product  not  entered  on  the  Australian  Register  of  Therapeutic  Goods,  including  any  new
formulation of an existing product or any new route of administration; or
 use of a registered or listed product outside the conditions of its marketing approval.
All clinical trials conducted in Australia  must be in compliance  with the National Statement of Ethical 
Conduct  in  Research  Involving  Humans,  as  published  by  the  National  Health  and  Medical  Research 
Council, and Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice, as published by ICH and CHMP.
1.4  Conformity Assessment 
In  addition  to  demonstrating  the  safety  and  performance  of  the  device  through  clinical  evidence,  the 
manufacturer must also demonstrate that a medical device conforms to the Essential Principles of safety 
and performance for that classification of medical device.  This conformity assessment may take a number 
of  forms,  dependent  on  the  classification  of  the  device  and  the  manufacturer’s  choice.    The  types  of 
conformity assessment available are:
 Part 1 – Full quality assurance procedure for Class AIMD, III, IIb or IIa medical devices.
 Part 2 – Type examination for Class AIMD, III or IIb medical devices.
 Part 3 – Verification Procedures for Class I, IIa, IIb, III or AIMD medical devices.
 Part 4 - Production quality assurance for Class I (measuring or sterile), Class IIa, IIb, III and
AIMD medical devices.
 Part 5 – Product quality management system for Class I (measuring), IIa and IIb medical
devices.
 Part 6 – Declaration of conformity (not requiring assessment by Secretary) procedures for
Class I, Class I (Measuring and Sterile) and IIa medical devices.
 Part 7 – Conformity Assessment Procedures for devices used for a Special Purpose.
1.5  ePAT Device
1.5.1  TGA Classification 
According to the TGA’s ARGMD, and using the relevant flowcharts, the ePAT device can be classified 
thus:
1. The device is classified as a medical device, according to the relevant definitions.
2. The Special Rules under Classification Rule 5 do not apply.
Confidential
Page 10 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
3. The Classification Rule 2 (non-invasive medical devices) applies – Rule 2.1 – General Rule:
Devices that either do not touch patient or contact only intact skin. 
4. Under Rule 2.1, the ePAT device is classified as a Class I medical device.
Thus,  the  ePAT  is  classified  as  a  Class  I  medical  device  under  Schedule  2,  Part  2,  Section  2.1  of  the 
Therapeutic Goods (Medical Devices) Regulations 2002 (Cwlth). 
It should be noted that the ePAT device is also an active medical device, which comes under Classification 
Rule 4 – Rule 4.1, but this would also give it a Class I classification. 
In the event that the device is not to be supplied in Australia and is to be exported only, it will be classed 
as a Class I medical device, irrespective of any other classification.
1.5.2  Conformity Assessment 
To  demonstrate  that  the  devices  are  designed  and  manufactured  in  conformance  with  the  Essential 
Principles,  ePAT  will  need  to  determine  the  most  appropriate  conformity  assessment  pathway  for  the 
device. 
As  per  Section  1.4  above,  Class  I  medical  devices  that  are  non-sterile  and  non-measuring  need  only 
comply with Part 6, which requires the completion of a Declaration of Conformity for the device.
1.5.3  ARTG Inclusion Process 
The process for inclusion on the ARTG of the ePAT device will be:
1. Obtain Client ID and login details for access to the online portal (known as eBS) from the TGA
2.
3.
4. Lodge online application to include the device on the ARTG via the TGA’s eBS.
Prepare technical document for device, including preparation of the Essential Principles.
Prepare the Declaration of Conformity for the device.
1.6  Expected Timelines 
As  an  indication,  the  timelines  for  the  various  aspects  related  to  inclusion  of  a  medical  device  on  the 
TGA’s ARTG are discussed below.  It should be noted that these timelines are indicative only and are 
based  on  previous  experience.    The  TGA  timeframes  may  be  more  than  suggested,  dependent  on  the 
workload of the TGA at the time.  It is also important to note that some of the activities may overlap in 
timeframes.
1.6.1  Validation of Software 
As  the  ePAT  device  is  a  software  application,  there  is  a  requirement  to  validate  the  software  –  i.e.  to 
demonstrate  that  it  does  what  it  says  it  does,  both  accurately  and  reproducibly.    As  the  software  is 
custom-written, the validation process will cover an extensive validation process of all aspects of the code, 
included algorithms, interfaces, etc. 
The full validation, including all testing, is likely to take 3-6 months.
1.6.2  Writing of Technical Documentation 
Irrespective of the Class of device, it must have a full Technical File written that describes in great detail 
the device, its design, purpose, an assessment of its risk, and its compliance with the Essential Principles 
(for the TGA) and Essential Requirements (for the CE Mark, EU).  Dependent on the complexity of the
Confidential
Page 11 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
device (e.g. the number of components and the manufacturing process), the availability of resources to 
assist in the technical writing and the availability of already-documented technical aspects, this may take 
1-3 months.
1.6.3  Inclusion on ARTG 
Once the necessary conformity assessment certificates are obtained, inclusion of a device on the ARTG of 
a Class I medical device should take less than a month.
Confidential
Page 12 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
2  CE MARK 
The CE Mark is a mark added to the packaging of a medical device that has been cleared for marketing in 
the EU.  No medical device may be marketed in the EU without the CE Mark.
2.1  Mutual Recognition Agreement between Australia and the European Community 
In  1998,  a  Mutual  Recognition  Agreement  (MRA)  on  standards  and  conformity  assessment  between 
Australia and the European Community (EC) was signed.  This MRA came into effect on 1 January 1999 
and  covers  eight  industry  sectors,  including  the  medical  devices  conformity  assessment,  for  which  the 
TGA has responsibility in Australia. 
The EC-MRA applies to medical devices manufactured in the European Community (now EU), Australia 
and  New  Zealand.    The  MRA  recognises  the  competence  of  designated  conformity  assessment  bodies 
(CABs)  in  the  EU  to  undertake  conformity  assessment  of  medical  devices  to  Australian  regulatory 
requirements.    Conversely,  the  EU  recognises  the  competence  of  the  TGA  to  undertake  assessment  of 
medical devices for compliance with the requirements for certification ('CE Marking') for entry onto the 
EC market. 
The relevance of this MRA to Australian companies is that the TGA can now also examine the conformity 
assessment of a medical device to the EU requirements, which are documented in the European Medical 
Device Directive, 93/42/EEC.
2.2  European Medical Device Directive, 93/42/EEC 
The TGA has modelled its medical device conformity assessment process along similar lines to that of the 
European Medical Device Directive, 93/42/EEC, with only a few differences.  For this reason, there is 
much overlap between the two systems, although each must be treated separately.
2.2.1  Device Classification 
Under  the  European  Medical  Device  Directive,  93/42/EEC,  medical  devices  are  classified  as  either 
Class I, IIa, IIb or III, based on the risk of the device.
2.2.2  Conformity Assessment 
In  addition  to  demonstrating  the  safety  and  performance  of  the  device  through  clinical  evidence,  the 
manufacturer  must  also  demonstrate  that  a  medical  device  conforms  to  the  Essential  Requirements  of 
safety and performance for that classification of medical device.  This conformity assessment may take a 
number of forms, dependent on the classification of the device and the manufacturer’s choice.  The types 
of conformity assessment available are:
 Annex II – Full quality assurance procedure for Class IIa, IIb and III medical devices.
 Annex III – EC Type examination for Class IIb and III medical devices.
 Annex IV – EC Verification Procedures for Class IIa, IIb and III medical devices.
 Annex V - Production quality assurance for IIa, IIb and III medical devices.
 Annex VI – Product quality management system for IIa and IIb medical devices.
 Annex VII – EC Declaration of conformity (not requiring assessment by Secretary) procedures
for Class I medical devices.
Confidential
Page 13 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
 Annex VIII – Statement Concerning Devices for Special Purposes for custom-made devices or
those intended only for clinical investigations.
2.3  ePAT Device
2.3.1  CE Mark Classification 
As with the TGA process, it is important to firstly determine the classification of the device.  This can be 
done  by  simply  following  the  classification  rules  and/or  checking  the  classification  of  similar  devices 
already on the market. 
It  is  clear,  from  the  classification  rules,  that  the  ePAT  device  would  be  classified  as  a  Class I  medical 
device,  under  the  European  Medical  Devices  Directive,  93/42/EEC,  Annex  IX,  Part  III,  Clause  3.3, 
Rule 12.
2.3.2  Conformity Assessment 
To  demonstrate  that  the  device  is  designed  and  manufactured  in  conformance  with  the  Essential 
Requirements, ePAT will need to determine the most appropriate conformity assessment pathway for the 
devices. 
For a Class I  medical device, Annex VII of the European Medical Device Directive, 93/42/EEC is the 
most  suitable  conformity  assessment  pathway  (refer  to  Section  2.2.2).    This  pathway  requires  the 
preparation of an EC Declaration of Conformity for the device.
2.3.3  Process for Granting of CE Mark 
When the submission is made to the TGA for conformity assessment and inclusion of the devices on the 
ARTG,  the  application  documentation  provides  for  the  additional  assessment  against  the  EC  Medical 
Devices Directive, 93/42/EEC.  Whilst a further fee will be incurred, no additional material, other than that 
specifically required in the technical documentation (e.g. assessment against the Essential Requirements, 
and EU-specific Declaration of Conformity) is required.
2.4  European Representative 
All non-EU based manufacturers of medical devices must appoint an EU-based European Representative 
to:
 Act as the primary point of contact for the company.
 Assist European Authorities in communications with foreign establishments.
 Assist European Authorities in scheduling inspections of the foreign establishment.
 Assist customers and other interested parties in providing general information about the device.
 Handle reports concerning vigilance activities, incident reporting, or recall of products.
2.5  Expected Timelines 
The timelines will be the same as those for the TGA (Section 1.6) as the TGA and CE Mark assessments 
will be conducted by the TGA at the same time.
Confidential
Page 14 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
3  FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) OF THE USA
3.1  Device Classification 
The Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) establishes three classes of devices:
 Class I – General controls.
 Class II – Special controls in addition to general controls.
 Class III – Premarket approval in addition to general controls.
3.1.1  Class I Devices 
Class I devices are subject to the least regulatory control.  These devices present minimal potential for 
harm to the user and are often simpler in design than Class II or Class III devices. 
Class I devices are required to meet certain baseline regulatory controls, i.e. “General Controls” such as 
conformance with GMP.  (Class II and Class III devices are also subject to “General Controls”.) 
Since 1997, most Class I devices are exempt from premarket review and thus as a rule, they do not require 
FDA premarket notification (510(K)) prior to being placed on the market. 
A few Class I devices are also exempt from GMP regulation.
3.1.2  Class II Devices 
Most  Class  II  devices  require  premarket  notification  (510(k))  to  be  submitted  and  cleared  by  the  FDA 
prior  to  marketing.    Some  are  exempt  from  510(k)  requirements,  and  some  may  require  a  Premarket 
Approval (PMA). 
The 510(K) documentation is needed in order to establish "substantial equivalence" (SE) to another device 
that is legally marketed in the United States. 
Class  II  devices  are  those  for  which  general  controls  alone  are  insufficient  to  assure  safety  and 
effectiveness, and existing methods are available to provide such assurances.  
Class  II  devices  are  generally  considered  to  represent  a  moderate  risk  and  require  "special  controls"  in 
addition  to  general  controls.    Special  Controls  include  items  such  as  specific  labeling  requirements, 
mandatory performance standards and postmarket surveillance. 
Class II devices may also require clinical data to support an SE determination.
3.1.3  Class III Devices 
Class  III  devices  carry  the  highest  risk  to  patients.    Class  III  devices  are  those  for  which  insufficient 
information exists to assure safety and effectiveness solely through general or special controls. 
A premarket approval application (PMA), must be submitted to the agency for review and evaluation of 
safety and effectiveness before marketing.  The PMA is typically the culmination of a clinical trial for a 
device.  
Class  III  devices  are  usually  those  that  support  or  sustain  human  life,  are  of  substantial  importance  in 
preventing  impairment  of  human  health,  or  which  present  a  potential,  unreasonable  risk  of  illness  or 
injury. 
Some Class III devices may be marketed through 510(k).
Confidential
Page 15 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
3.1.4  Software Application Devices 
Software application devices of the kind being developed by ePAT may be classified as a medical device 
under the FD&C Act, dependent on the intended use of the application. 
For  those  applications  that  do  meet  the  definition  of  a  medical  device,  the  FDA  exercises  discretion 
regarding enforcement if the application poses a lower risk to the public.  For those applications that are 
considered  to  pose  a  risk  to  a  patient’s  safety,  then  the  normal  regulatory  rules  will  be  applied  (i.e. 
classification as Class I, II or III). 
As the ePAT application is a new and novel type of application, with no existing predicates (as at the time 
of  writing  this  report),  it  is  unclear  whether  the  application  would  be  considered  a  medical  device  that 
requires regulatory oversight. 
In this instance, the FDA provides a means by which a manufacturer can ask the FDA to provide feedback 
concerning classification and the regulatory requirements that may be application.  The process is known 
as the 513(g) process and requires the manufacturer to submit the following:
 user fee (currently US$1765 for small business);
 cover letter;
 description of the mobile app;
 description of what the mobile app is to be used for; and
 any proposed labelling or promotional material of the mobile app and of similar, marketed devices,
if available.
In  response,  the  FDA  will  provide  a  confidential  response  in  the  form  of  a  letter  to  the  manufacturer, 
within 60 days of receipt of the request for information.
3.2  Premarket Notification 510(k) - 21 CFR Part 807 Subpart E 
If  a  device  requires  the  submission  of  a  Premarket  Notification  510(k)  it  cannot  be  commercially 
distributed until a letter of substantial equivalence is received from the FDA authorising the company to 
do so. 
A 510(k) is a premarketing submission made to the FDA to demonstrate that the device to be marketed is 
as safe and effective, that is, substantially equivalent (SE), to a legally marketed device that is not subject 
to premarket approval (PMA).  A 510(k) must demonstrate that the device is substantially equivalent to 
one legally in commercial distribution in the United States. 
The legally marketed device(s) to which equivalence is drawn is known as the "predicate" device(s). 
A  510(k)  submission  includes  descriptive  data  and,  when  necessary,  performance  data  to  establish  that 
their device is SE to a predicate device.
Substantial Equivalence 
Unlike  PMA,  which  requires  demonstration  of  reasonable  safety  and  effectiveness,  510(k)  requires 
demonstration of substantial equivalence.  SE means that the new device is as safe and effective as the 
predicate device(s).  
A device is SE if, in comparison to a predicate device it:
 has the same intended use as the predicate device; and
Confidential
Page 16 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
 has the same technological characteristics as the predicate device; or
 has  different  technological  characteristics,  that  do  not  raise  new  questions  of  safety  and
effectiveness, and the sponsor demonstrates that the device is as safe and effective as the legally
marketed device.
A  claim  of  substantial  equivalence  does  not  mean  the  new  and  predicate  devices  must  be  identical. 
Substantial  equivalence  is  established  with  respect  to  intended  use,  design,  energy  used  or  delivered, 
materials, performance, safety, effectiveness, labelling, biocompatibility, standards, and other applicable 
characteristics.
3.3  Premarket Approval (PMA) - 21 CFR Part 814 
The  Premarket  Approval  (PMA)  process  is  more  involved  than  the  510(k)  process  and  includes  the 
submission of clinical data to support claims made for the device.  The PMA is an actual approval of the 
device by FDA (whereas 510(k) is not an approval, but a clearance). 
Premarket approval (PMA) is the FDA process of scientific and regulatory review to evaluate the safety 
and effectiveness of Class III medical devices.  Due to the level of risk associated with Class III devices, 
FDA  has  determined  that  general  and  special  controls  alone  are  insufficient  to  assure  the  safety  and 
effectiveness of class III devices. 
Medical devices of other classifications that have no predicate device, will also be subject to the PMA 
process. 
PMA is the most stringent type of device marketing application required by FDA.  The applicant must 
receive FDA approval of its PMA application prior to marketing the device.  PMA approval is based on a 
determination  by  the  FDA  that  the  PMA  contains  sufficient  valid  scientific  evidence  to  assure  that  the 
device  is  safe  and  effective  for  its  intended  use(s).    An  approved  PMA  is,  in  effect,  a  private  license 
granting  the  applicant  (or  owner)  permission  to  market  the  device.    The  PMA  owner,  however,  can 
authorise use of its data by another. 
FDA regulations provide 180 days to review the PMA and make a determination.  In reality, the review 
time is normally longer.  Before approving or denying a PMA, the appropriate FDA advisory committee 
may review the PMA at a public meeting and provide the FDA with the committee's recommendation on 
whether the FDA should approve the submission.  After the FDA notifies the applicant that the PMA has 
been  approved  or  denied,  a  notice  is  published  on  the  Internet:    (1)  announcing  the  data  on  which  the 
decision is based; and (2) providing interested persons an opportunity to petition FDA within 30 days for 
reconsideration of the decision.
Indication(s) for Use
3.4 
The  stated  indication(s)  for  use  for  a  device  will  determine  its  classification,  risk  assessment,  type  of 
clinical evidence required, and the predicate device used for comparison in a 510(k) submission. 
Clinicians,  however,  are  at  liberty  to  use  a  device  for  purposes  other  than  the  manufacturer-stated 
indication(s) – a practice known as “off-label usage”.  This is perfectly legal as the FDA do not presume to 
tell  a  clinician  how  to  treat  a  patient.    It  is  extremely  common  for  off-label  usage  to  occur,  although 
clinicians do so with the risk of liability should something go wrong, as they are using the device outside 
of the manufacturer’s recommendations and will therefore not be covered by insurance.  It is therefore 
common for a physician to obtain patient informed consent prior to doing so.
Confidential
Page 17 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
Whilst off-label usage is very common and many manufacturers depend on it for more widespread use of 
their device, it must be noted that manufacturers can only market, advertise or recommend use of their 
device within the limits of the stated indication(s).  To market, advertise or recommend off-label usage is 
against the FDA regulations and there are heavy fines for doing so, as well as the risk of losing the device 
listing. 
Thus,  the  indication  for  use  for  a  device  is  extremely  important  and  should  be  considered  within  the 
company’s future marketing, clinical and regulatory strategies.
3.5  Device Listing 
In  the  event  that  the  ePAT  device  is  considered  to  be  exempt  from  the  pre-market  notifications 
(i.e. Class I), then no 510(k) submission will be required.  GMP requirements, however, will still need to 
be met. 
In the event that the ePAT device is classified as Class II and not exempt from the pre-market notification 
(510(k)) requirements, then the procedure for listing the devices with the FDA will be:
1. Identify a suitable predicate device (if available).
2. Prepare a 510(k) submission based on a comparison with the predicate device.
3. Appoint US Agent.
4. Submit the 510(k) documentation to the FDA for review (via the US Agent).
5. Complete a Device Establishment Registration.
6. Apply for listing of the device.
If no suitable predicate device can be found, then a PMA may be required instead of a 510(k) submission.
3.6  Clinical Evidence 
Regardless of the classification of the device, the manufacturer must have clinical data for the device that 
demonstrates its safety and efficacy for the stated indication(s).  This information must be available to the 
FDA  on  request  and  a  summary  of  this  information  is  usually  (but  not  always)  included  in  the  510(k) 
submission. 
In many cases, particularly where the device is a completely new technology or the design of the clinical 
study is very complex, a pre-IDE meeting may be sought with the FDA to determine the proper regulatory 
pathway for the device and/or to simplify or finalise the clinical trial protocol. 
These  meetings  are  generally  conducted  under  the  Investigative  Device  Exemption  (IDE)  process, 
whereby clinical studies are proposed and discussed with the FDA to ascertain whether the data produced 
by such a clinical study would sufficiently demonstrate safety and efficacy.
3.7  GMP Requirements 
Regardless of the classification of the device, the device is not exempt from GMP (Good Manufacturing 
Practice)  regulation,  which  requires  the  establishment  of  at  least  minimal  documented  procedures  for 
post-market surveillance and other post-market activities. 
This  requirement  is  independent  of  whether  ePAT  decides  to  manufacture  the  product(s)  itself,  or 
outsource the production, as basic GMP requirements such as, but not limited to, post-market surveillance, 
customer complaints, risk analysis and product release procedures must be documented.
Confidential
Page 18 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
If the FDA considers the ePAT device to be more high risk, a full QMS will need to be established that is 
compliant with the FDA’s Quality System Regulations (QSR).
3.8  US Agent 
All non-US based manufacturers of medical devices must appoint a US Agent.  The US Agent is based in 
the USA and provides the following services:
 Acts  as  a  liaison  between  the  company  and  the FDA,  responding  to  questions  concerning  the
company’s products.
 Assists in the scheduling of inspections by the FDA.
 Acts as an independent third party representative to look after the company’s interests.
Confidential
Page 19 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
4  ABOUT THE AUTHOR
4.1  Dr Janet Preuss 
Dr Janet Preuss is the Founder and Managing Director of QRC Solutions, and has an extensive business, 
biomedical and biotechnology background.  Her qualifications include a Bachelor degree in Science (BSc, 
majoring in Biochemistry and Pharmacology), a PhD in Pharmacology, business qualifications obtained 
through an MBA (Advanced), and she is also a graduate member of the Australian Institute of Corporate 
Directors (AICD). 
Janet is also the Founder and Managing Director of Biotech Recruitment Consultants Pty Ltd (Australia 
and Hong Kong) and Managing Director of Exemplar Recruitment Pty Ltd.  She is actively involved with 
a number of industry-relevant member associations, including as an Associate Member of the Australian 
Institute of Management (AIM). 
Janet  also  has  non-executive  Director  experience  through  various  Board  appointments  to  private 
companies operating in the biotechnology sector and to not-for-profit organisations. 
Through these activities, she has developed associations with a network of stakeholders worldwide, and 
from a range of different environments, including academia, government and industry, putting her at the 
forefront  of  discussion  relating  to  issues  arising  within  the  biotechnology  arena  and  for  the  challenges 
facing small business in general.
4.2  QRC Solutions 
QRC Solutions specialises in assisting companies commercialise their products through providing advice 
or hands-on expertise in:
 Quality  Assurance  -  Quality  Management  Systems  to  a  range  of  international  standards  and
guidelines.
 Regulatory Affairs for marketing clearance/approval in a number of regulatory jurisdictions.
 Reimbursement.
 Clinical Trials.
 Business Writing – including business plans, information memoranda, strategic plans, policies,
grant applications, etc.
 Medical and Scientific Writing – including papers for publication, abstracts and posters, etc.
More specifically, we provide consulting solutions through:
 Developing
tailored  Quality  Management,  Regulatory,  Reimbursement  and/or  Clinical
strategies.
 Establishing  Quality  Management  Systems
to  a
range  of  different
international
standards/guidelines.
 Writing  submissions  for  regulatory  bodies  with  the  aim  of  gaining  marketing  clearance  for  a
therapeutic product.
 Writing submissions to public and private health insurance providers to obtain reimbursement
for a therapeutic product.
 Designing and managing clinical trials.
 Writing a range of business documents, grant applications, scientific papers and abstracts.
Confidential
Page 20 of 21
ePAT Regulatory Issues Report
QRC Solutions works with a network of independent consultants from all over the world with expertise in 
a range of areas.  Our philosophy is based on offering a personalised service, tailored to your company’s 
needs and working with your staff, to achieve your company’s goals. 
QRC Solutions’ clients have included manufacturers of:
 Medical devices including:
sterile implantable devices (Class IIb and Class III);
software-driven medical devices;
device/biologic combination products;
o
o
o
o measuring devices;
o
o
active medical devices; and
a range of Class I medical devices.
 Biologics.
 Pharmaceuticals.
 Over-the-counter (OTC) medications.
 Complementary medicines.
 Blood and tissue products.
 Biofuels.
Confidential
Page 21 of 21
8
PATENT REPORT
101
Board of Directors 
MinQuest Limited 
1/47 Park Road 
Milton QLD 4064
9 August 2016
Dear Sirs
Electronic Pain Assessment Technologies (EPAT) Pty Ltd 
Patent Report 
Our Ref: G111011
1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
We provide below our report (the Report) detailing the current status of the International Patent 
Application No. PCT/AU2015/000501 (the PCT Application) handled by Griffith Hack on behalf 
Electronic Pain Assessment Technologies (EPAT) Pty Ltd (EPAT) for inclusion in a Prospectus 
to be lodged at the Australian Securities & Investments Commission.
The Report sets out details of the PCT Application including its current status as at the date of 
the Report. The Report is correct to the best of our knowledge as at the date of the Report, 
subject to the limitations and qualifications set out in Section 5 of the Report.
2.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
2.1. Meaning of Intellectual Property
The term “intellectual property” refers to the collection of registrable and non-registrable rights, 
including rights in patents, designs, trade marks, plant varieties, copyright, confidential 
information and trade secrets. Intellectual property shares many of the characteristics 
associated with real and personal property. For example, intellectual property is an asset, and 
as such it can be bought, sold, licensed, exchanged, or gratuitously given away like any other 
form of property. Further, an intellectual property owner has the right to prevent the 
unauthorised use or sale of the property.
This Report deals only with intellectual property in the form of patents and patent applications.
7886237_1 (GHMatters) G111011
2.2. Patents
Patent rights constitute an important component of intellectual property. Patents cover 
inventions and provide a monopoly in exchange for an inventor’s full disclosure of the invention 
to the public. A patent provides protection for novel (new), inventive (non-obvious) and useful 
inventions for a limited period, typically 20 years (subject to payment of renewal fees). In some 
countries it is possible to obtain utility model patents, such as innovation patents in Australia 
(see Section 2.7), with different (usually lower or no) requirements for inventiveness. Patents 
may be granted in respect of new or improved products and methods in almost all areas of 
scientific, commercial and industrial activities. However, patents must be obtained in each 
country in which protection is required, and in many countries the test for patentability is 
different from that in Australia.
As a consequence of obtaining patent rights, any party other than the patent owner wishing to 
commercialise a patented product or process may be required to obtain a licence and pay 
royalties.
2.3. Inventorship and Ownership
Typically, a patent for an invention may only be granted to the inventor(s), or to a person who 
has entitlement to the invention by way of assignment or other means. We understand that 
rights in the invention covered by the PCT Application were transferred initially from the 
inventors to Curtin University of Technology (ABN 99 143 842 569) by virtue of an assignment 
dated 4 June 2013, and subsequently from Curtin University of Technology to EPAT by virtue of 
an assignment dated 17 October 2014.
Our records indicate that the applicant of the PCT Application currently on record at the World 
Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) is EPAT.
2.4. Third Party Rights
It is important to note is that there are legal mechanisms by which third parties can bring 
evidence that they have sole or joint entitlement to an invention and any patent application or 
patent obtained for the invention. However, we are unaware of the existence of any such third 
party in relation to the PCT Application.
In addition, it is possible that the technology in respect of which the PCT Application has been 
filed falls within the scope of, and may thus infringe, a patent of a third party. We have not 
conducted any searches or taken any further steps to identify any patents which may be 
infringed by exploitation of the inventions described in the PCT Application.
MinQuest Limited
- 2 -
9 August 2016
To the best of our knowledge, to date, there has been no third party challenge to the validity or 
ownership of the PCT Application.
2.5. Process for Obtaining Patent Protection
In most countries, the process of obtaining patent rights begins with the submission of an initial 
patent application that includes a patent specification describing the invention. The date of filing 
of the first patent application for an invention is referred to as the “priority date”.
A fundamental requirement of the patent system is that the invention covered by a patent 
application is novel and inventive (or, in the case of an Australian innovation patent application, 
has an ‘innovative step’ requirement) at the priority date, compared to what was publicly known 
or used at the priority date. The specification must also contain a disclosure of the invention that 
is sufficient for a person skilled in the field to reproduce the invention, and several so-called 
“claim(s)”, which define the scope of protection sought.
After the initial application has been filed, in order to claim the filing date of the first application 
as the effective date, further applications in other countries must be filed within 12 months of the 
first application, pursuant to an International Treaty called the Paris Convention. Otherwise 
rights to the invention may be lost in these countries. Most countries are signatories of the Paris 
Convention, including the United States, Japan and Australia, as well as regions including 
Europe and Eurasia. Filing further patent applications in other countries may be pursued 
individually or in some instances by filing an application with a regional patent office, such as 
the European Patent Office (EPO) and the African Regional Industrial Property Organisation 
(ARIPO).
Instead of filing separate national/regional applications within 12 months of filing the first 
application, an applicant may choose to file an international application according to the Patent 
Cooperation Treaty (“PCT”). The PCT process is administered by the World Intellectual Property 
Organisation (WIPO). A PCT application covers several member countries, has the same effect 
as filing national applications in the member countries, and provides provisional protection in the 
member countries while providing an applicant with more time to decide the countries/regions in 
which protection is ultimately desired.
At present, 149 countries are party to the PCT and, accordingly, if patent protection is required 
in a country that is not party to the PCT then individual applications must be filed in these 
countries by the 12 month anniversary of the initially filed application.  Countries that are not 
party to the PCT include Taiwan and Argentina.
MinQuest Limited
- 3 -
9 August 2016
After filing a PCT application, the invention defined by the claims of the application is subjected 
to an international search that provides an indication as to whether, in the view of an authorised 
officer of the International Searching Authority (ISA), the defined invention is novel and inventive 
in view of the documents revealed by the search. The ISA then issues an International Search 
Report (ISR) and Written Opinion of the authorised officer.
During the PCT process, the applicant has the option to request international preliminary 
examination (IPE), which will provide an opportunity to respond to the opinion expressed in the 
international search report. At the conclusion of IPE, a report called an International Preliminary 
Report on Patentability (IPRP) issues that gives a preliminary and non-binding opinion in 
relation to the patentability of the claimed invention.
Separate national/regional applications based on a PCT application are due 30 months (some 
countries 31) from the priority date, and an applicant may choose to file applications in one or 
more of the countries covered by the PCT application. This referred to as “entering the national 
phase”. For most countries, failure to enter the national phase within the 30 month (or 31 month) 
period will result in abandonment of the ability to secure patent protection in the country.
The national or regional applications then progress under the jurisprudence and legislation of 
each country or region. In most jurisdictions, such as Australia, Europe, United States and 
Japan, examination by the relevant Patent Office comprises an examination to establish 
whether, among other things, the defined invention was novel and inventive at the priority date. 
The time required to complete the examination process differs according to country and the 
scope of protection may differ depending on the law of each country. In general, it takes several 
years from the national phase filing date until a patent is actually granted.
2.6. Granted Patents: Renewal fees, validity, exploitation and enforcement
After grant of a patent, renewal fees will need to be paid (usually annually), otherwise the patent 
will lapse.
However, it should also be noted that grant of a patent does not guarantee that the patent is 
valid or enforceable, and Griffith Hack provides no assurance that national and/or regional 
patent applications based on the PCT Application will be granted or will ultimately be held valid 
and enforceable.
Notwithstanding that no guarantee exists in relation to enforceability, after a patent has been 
granted and throughout the lifetime of the patent, the proprietor has the exclusive rights to use 
the patented technology. This means that the proprietor can decide to exclusively use it (for 
instance by means of application in their own products) and/or prevent others from using it.
MinQuest Limited
- 4 -
9 August 2016
Alternatively, the proprietor can allow others to use the patented invention under the terms of a 
licence agreement.
Enforcement of patent rights varies between jurisdictions. The remedies for unauthorised use 
(patent infringement) available to a patent owner often include an injunction, which effectively 
stops further infringement of the patent; damages or account of profits; and costs. In some 
countries the patent owner can also file a criminal complaint against an infringer.
2.7. Standard and innovation Patents
Australia currently has 2 types of patent applications that can be filed by an applicant: a 
standard patent application and an innovation patent application.
A standard patent application has a maximum term of 20 years, can include an unlimited 
number of claims and is subjected to substantive examination prior to grant. Substantive 
examination involves, among other things, an assessment as to whether the claimed invention 
is new and inventive (non-obvious) compared to information publicly available at the relevant 
priority date of the application.
In contrast, an innovation patent application has a maximum term of 8 years, may only include 
up to 5 claims, and is granted without substantive examination. Substantive examination occurs 
post-grant, and at the option of the patentee, but the patentee must request examination and 
overcome all objections in order to commence litigation.  Substantive examination involves, 
among other things, an assessment as to whether the claimed invention is new and involves an 
‘innovative step’. Innovative step is a lower inventive threshold than ‘inventive step’ that is 
applied to standard patent applications and, therefore, innovation patents are in general more 
likely to be valid and are harder to invalidate than standard patents.
3. THE PCT APPLICATION AS AT 24 JUNE 2016
The PCT Application was filed on 18 August 2015 and claims an earliest priority date of 18 
August 2014 from Australian Provisional Patent Application No. 2014903226.
The PCT Application includes claims directed to a method for determining an effect of a drug on 
pain experienced by a patient, a related system and software application.
An ISR and Written Opinion has issued on 22 September 2015 in respect of the PCT 
Application. In the Written Opinion, an authorised officer of the ISA provided an indication of 
whether in her view the invention defined by the claims of PCT Application was novel and 
inventive in light of documents revealed in the ISR.
MinQuest Limited
- 5 -
9 August 2016
A request for IPE was filed together with claim amendments and written submissions in 
response to the Written Opinion. A further Written Opinion issued and in response further 
written submission and claim amendments were lodged. A final IPE report has issued on 8 
August 2016 in which the Authorized Officer testifies that in her view all claims of the PCT 
application as presently pending define subject matter that is both novel and inventive in light of 
prior art.
4. FURTHER ISSUES
4.1. Validity
The ultimate validity of the claims of a patent or patent application cannot be guaranteed and 
can be challenged by a third party:
(a) during examination;
(b) in opposition proceedings once the application has been examined and found allowable;
(c) in Court during revocation proceedings brought by a third party; or
(d) during infringement proceedings initiated against an alleged infringer by the patentee.
5. LIMITATIONS AND QUALIFICATIONS
5.1. Information sources
In preparing this Report, in addition to reviewing our internal databases, we have relied upon 
information contained in relevant publicly available databases. Griffith Hack is not responsible 
for the accuracy of the information available in public databases and accordingly cannot 
guarantee the accuracy of this information.
5.2. Patentability search limitations
A patentability search, such as carried out by national/regional Patent Offices and/or as part of 
the PCT procedure, cannot be guaranteed to locate all prior art that may exist which is 
potentially relevant to the assessment of novelty and inventive step of a claimed invention. Such 
searches are generally computer-based searches and are dependent on the database search 
strategy and the coverage provided by the databases used. For example, the databases may 
not cover older published documents and/or certain jurisdictions. Further, all patentability 
searches are subject to the accuracy of records, as well as the indexing and classification of the 
subject matter comprising the records. The scope of each search is also dependent on the 
search strategy utilised and, for example, the keyword(s) selected for the search. Accordingly,
MinQuest Limited
- 6 -
9 August 2016
although patentability searches provide a reasonable indication of patentability, it is not possible 
to guarantee that every relevant prior art record has been located and considered. As a result, 
any conclusions regarding the validity of the claims of a particular patent based on patent office 
searches should be regarded as indicative rather than conclusive.
Further, non-provisional patent applications are not normally published until at least 18 months 
from the earliest applicable priority date. Accordingly, a patentability search would not normally 
identify any third party patent application that is potentially relevant to the assessment of 
patentability and that has a priority date which is earlier than 18 months prior to the date of the 
patentability search. Delays between official publication and the incorporation of information into 
the relevant database can also occur, which can result in some documents not being identified 
in a patentability search.
5.3. Patentability of an invention
Besides documentary prior art, public use of an invention and non-confidential oral disclosures 
before the priority date of a patent application may also be relevant to the assessment of 
patentability of an invention to which the patent application relates. As patentability searches are 
conducted for published documents, they would not locate such other forms of prior art 
disclosures.
Commercialisation or secret use of an invention in a jurisdiction by, or with the authority of, a 
patent applicant (or their predecessor in title) before the priority date of a patent application that 
has been filed in the jurisdiction by the applicant in respect of the invention, can also be relevant 
to the patentability of an invention and the validity of any patents that may ultimately be granted 
on the application. Such commercial exploitation or secret use would not normally be identified 
by documentary patentability searches of publicly accessible databases.
5.4. Opposition Proceedings
Some jurisdictions, such as Australia, allow for accepted patent applications to be opposed by a 
third party. Others, for example Europe, have post-grant opposition. Successful opposition 
proceedings may result in some or all of the claims of an application being refused. Successful 
opposition proceedings to a granted patent may result in some or all of the claims being held 
invalid or restricted in breadth.
5.5. Qualifications & Independence
Griffith Hack is a firm of patent and trade mark attorneys and lawyers that provide advice in 
relation to all aspects of intellectual property. Griffith Hack has extensive experience protecting
MinQuest Limited
- 7 -
9 August 2016
and defending intellectual property rights and commercialising products and services. Griffith 
Hack provides a comprehensive intellectual property service through its patent and trade mark 
attorney practices, law firm, consultancy arm and through its partnership with a major 
international renewal service.
Griffith Hack has no interest in EPAT, other than fees for professional work done. Griffith Hack 
has no involvement in the preparation of the Prospectus other than the preparation of this 
Report. Griffith Hack is therefore considered independent of EPAT for the purpose of preparing 
this Report and gives its consent for inclusion of this Report in the Prospectus.
The person responsible for preparing this Report is Dr Andreas Hartmann, Principal of Griffith 
Hack Patent & Trade Mark Attorneys.
Yours faithfully
Dr Andreas Hartmann 
Principal 
andreas.hartmann@griffithhack.com
MinQuest Limited
- 8 -
9 August 2016
9
INDEPENDENT LIMITED ASSURANCE REPORT
110
Tel: +61 7 3237 5999 
Fax: +61 7 3221 9227
www.bdo.com.au
Level 10, 12 Creek St 
Brisbane QLD 4000 
GPO Box 457 Brisbane QLD 4001 
Australia
To The Directors 
MinQuest Limited 
1/47 Park Road 
MILTON QLD 4064
24 August 2016
Dear Directors
INDEPENDENT LIMITED ASSURANCE REPORT ON MINQUEST LIMITED HISTORICAL AND PROFORMA 
HISTORICAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Introduction
We have been engaged by MinQuest Limited (“MNQ”) to report on the historical financial information 
and proforma historical financial information of MNQ and Electronic Pain Assessment Technology Pty 
Ltd (“ePAT”) as at 31 December 2015 for inclusion in the Prospectus dated on or about 24 August 2016 
and relating to the issue of between 200,000,000 and 287,500,000 shares in MNQ to raise between 
$4,000,000 and $5,750,000 and the acquisition of ePAT by MinQuest (“the Prospectus”). The historical 
financial information and proforma historical financial information to which this report relates is set 
out in Section 5.1 to Section 5.5.15 inclusive of the Prospectus.
Expressions and terms defined in the Prospectus have the same meaning in this report unless 
specifically defined in this report.
Scope
Historical financial information
You have requested BDO Audit Pty Ltd to review the following historical financial information included 
in Section 5.3.1 and Section 5.4.1 of the Prospectus:
•
•
•
•
•
•
The audited consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the year
ended 30 June 2015 of MNQ;
The reviewed consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the six
months ended 31 December 2015 of MNQ;
The audited consolidated statement of financial position as at 30 June 2015 of MNQ;
The reviewed consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 December 2015 of MNQ;
The audited statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the period ended 30
June 2015 (3 July 2014 to 30 June 2015) and the 6 months ended 31 December 2015 of ePAT; and
The audited statement of financial position as at 30 June 2015 and 31 December 2015 of ePAT.
Hereafter referred to as “the historical financial information”.
BDO Audit Pty Ltd ABN 33 134 022 870 is a member of a national association of independent entities which are all members of BDO Australia Ltd ABN 77 050 
 
110 275, an Australian company limited by guarantee. BDO Audit Pty Ltd and BDO Australia Ltd are members of BDO International Ltd, a UK company limited 
by guarantee, and form part of the international BDO network of independent member firms. Liability limited by a scheme approved under Professional 
Standards Legislation, other than for the acts or omissions of financial services licensees.
In addition to the above historical financial information, the audited consolidated statement of profit 
or loss and other comprehensive income for the year ended and audited consolidated statement of 
financial position as at 30 June 2014 of MNQ has been included in the Prospectus. The historical 
financial information of MNQ has been extracted from the audited financial report of MNQ as at and for 
the year ended 30 June 2014, however BDO Audit Pty Ltd has not performed any review of the 
historical financial information of MNQ for the year ended and as at 30 June 2014.
The historical financial information has been prepared in accordance with the stated basis of 
preparation, being the recognition and measurement principles contained in Australian Accounting 
Standards and MNQ’s adopted accounting policies.
The historical financial information of MNQ has been extracted from the audited financial report of 
MNQ as at and for the year ended 30 June 2015, and from the reviewed interim financial report for the 
six month period ended 31 December 2015. The audit opinion for the year ended 30 June 2015 was 
issued by HLB Mann Judd (WA Partnership) and was not modified. The MNQ interim financial report for 
the six month period ended 31 December 2015 has been subject to review by BDO Audit Pty Ltd which 
included an emphasis of matter in relation to the MNQ’s ability to continue as a going concern without 
raising additional capital.
The historical financial information of EPAT has been extracted from the audited financial reports of 
EPAT as at and for the period ended 30 June 2015 (3 July 2014 to 30 June 2015) and for the six month 
period ended 31 December 2015. The audit opinions for the period ended 30 June 2015 and the six 
month period ended 31 December 2015 were issued by RSM Australia Partners and were not modified.
The historical financial information is presented in the Prospectus in an abbreviated form, insofar as it 
does not include all of the presentation and disclosures required by Australian Accounting Standards 
and other mandatory professional reporting requirements applicable to general purpose financial 
reports prepared in accordance with the Corporations Act 2001.
Proforma historical financial information
You have requested BDO Audit Pty Ltd to review the following proforma historical financial information 
of MNQ (the merged group) included in the Prospectus:
•
•
The Proforma Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income for the six months
ended 31 December 2015 presented in Section 5.3.2 of the Prospectus showing the impact of the
proforma adjustments as if they had occurred at 31 December 2015; and
The Proforma Statement of Financial Position as at 31 December 2015 presented in Section 5.4.2
of the Prospectus showing the impact of the proforma adjustments as if they had occurred at 31
December 2015.
Hereafter referred to as “the proforma historical financial information”.
The proforma historical financial information has been derived from the historical financial information 
of MNQ and the historical financial information of ePAT, after adjusting for the effects of proforma 
adjustments described in Section 5.2.3 of the Prospectus.  The stated basis of preparation is the 
recognition and measurement principles contained in Australian Accounting Standards applied to the 
historical financial information and the event(s) or transaction(s) to which the proforma adjustments 
relate, as described in Section 5.2.3 of the Prospectus, as if those event(s) or transaction(s) had 
occurred as at the date of the historical financial information.  Due to its nature, the proforma 
historical financial information does not represent MNQ’s actual or prospective financial position.
2
Directors’ responsibility
The directors of MNQ are responsible for the preparation of the historical financial information and 
proforma historical financial information, including the selection and determination of proforma 
adjustments made to the historical financial information and included in the proforma historical 
financial information.  This includes responsibility for such internal controls as the directors determine 
are necessary to enable the preparation of historical financial information and proforma historical 
financial information that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
Our responsibility
Our responsibility is to express a limited assurance conclusion on the financial information based on the 
procedures performed and the evidence we have obtained.  We have conducted our engagement in 
accordance with the Standard on Assurance Engagement ASAE 3450 Assurance Engagements involving 
Corporate Fundraisings and/or Prospective Financial Information.
A review consists of making enquiries, primarily of persons responsible for financial and accounting 
matters, and applying analytical and other review procedures.  A review is substantially less in scope 
than an audit conducted in accordance with Australian Auditing Standards and consequently does not 
enable us to obtain reasonable assurance that we would become aware of all significant matters that 
might be identified in an audit.  Accordingly, we do not express an audit opinion.
Our engagement did not involve updating or re-issuing any previously issued audit or review report on 
any financial information used as a source of the financial information.
Conclusions
Historical financial information
Based on our review, which is not an audit, nothing has come to our attention that causes us to believe 
that the historical financial information, as described in Section 5.2.1 of the Prospectus, and 
comprising:
•
•
•
•
•
•
The audited consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the year
ended 30 June 2015 of MNQ;
The reviewed consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the six
months ended 31 December 2015 of MNQ;
The audited consolidated statement of financial position as at 30 June 2015 of MNQ;
The reviewed consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 December 2015 of MNQ;
The audited statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the period ended 30
June 2015 (3 July 2014 to 30 June 2015) and the 6 months ended 31 December 2015 of ePAT; and
The audited statement of financial position as at 30 June 2015 and 31 December 2015 of ePAT
is not presented fairly, in all material respects, in accordance with the stated basis of preparation, as 
described in Section 5.5 of the Prospectus.
3
Proforma historical financial information
Based on our review, which is not an audit, nothing has come to our attention that causes us to believe 
that the proforma historical financial information, as described in Section 5.2.2 of the Prospectus, and 
comprising:
•
The Proforma Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income for the six months
ended 31 December 2015 showing the impact of the proforma adjustments as if they had occurred
at 31 December 2015;
•
The Proforma Statement of Financial Position as at 31 December 2015 showing the impact of the
proforma adjustments as if they had occurred at 31 December 2015;
are not presented fairly in all material respects, in accordance with the stated basis of preparation as 
described in Section 5.5 of the Prospectus.
Restriction on use
Without modifying our conclusions, we draw attention to Section 5.2 of the Prospectus, which 
describes the purpose of the financial information, being for inclusion in the Prospectus.  As a result, 
the financial information may not be suitable for use for another purpose.
Consent
BDO Audit Pty Ltd has consented to the inclusion of this independent limited assurance report in the 
Prospectus in the form and context in which it is included.
Liability
The liability of BDO Audit Pty Ltd is limited to the inclusion of this report in the Prospectus.  BDO Audit 
Pty Ltd makes no representation regarding, and takes no responsibility for, any other statements, or 
material in, or omissions from, the Prospectus.
General advice warning
The report has been prepared, and included the Prospectus to provide investors with general 
information only and does not take into account the objectives, financial situation or needs of any 
specific investor.  It is not intended to take the place of professional advice and investors should not 
make specific investment decisions in reliance on information contained in this report.  Before acting 
or relying on any information, an investor should consider whether it is appropriate for their 
circumstances having regard to their objectives, financial situation or needs.
Independence
BDO Audit Pty Ltd does not have any interest in the outcome of the acquisition and raising, or any 
other interest that could reasonably be regarded as being capable of affecting its ability to give an 
unbiased conclusion in this matter.  BDO Audit Pty Ltd will receive normal professional fees for the 
preparation of this report.
4
BDO Audit Pty Ltd are auditors of MNQ and from time to time BDO Audit Pty Ltd also provides MNQ with 
certain other professional services for which normal professional fees are received.
Yours faithfully,
BDO Audit Pty Ltd
Craig Jenkins
Director
5
10
10.1
KEY PEOPLE, INTERESTS AND BENEFITS
Changes to the Board and senior executives upon Completion
At Completion of the Acquisition:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Messrs Frank Terranova, Jeremy Read and Paul Niardone will retire as Directors of the
Company;
three nominees of ePAT, being Messrs John Murray, Philip Daffas and Ross Harricks,
will be appointed to the Board;
for clarification, Mr Adam Davey will remain as a Non-Executive Director;
Mr Stephen Kelly will resign as Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary; and
Mr Ian Hobson will be appointed as Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary.
Accordingly, after Completion of the Acquisition, the new Board will be:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
John Murray  Non-Executive Chairman
Philip Daffas  Managing Director
Ross Harricks  Non-Executive Director
Adam Davey   Non-Executive Director
10.2
Current Company officers
Mr Jeremy Read, Managing Director (to resign on Completion of the Acquisition)
Mr Read has 28 years minerals exploration experience, both in Australia and internationally, 
and was previously the Manager of BHP’s Australian Exploration Team. He has extensive 
exploration experience for copper, nickel and gold mineral deposits.
Mr Read was the founding managing director of Discovery Metals Limited (Discovery) from its 
incorporation in May 2003, until his appointment as a non-executive director on 1 February 
2008. Mr Read secured the Boseto Copper Project for the Discovery Metals Limited and was 
responsible for Discovery Metals Limited’s fund raising activities and for listing it on the 
Australian Securities Exchange, Botswana Stock Exchange and the Alternative Investment 
Market in London.
Mr Read was also the founding managing director of Meridian Minerals Limited, obtained the 
Lennard Shelf Zn-Pb Project for Meridian and led the company until its takeover by the 
Chinese mining company NWME.
In the past three years Mr Read has served as a Director of Discovery Metals Limited, Avalon 
Minerals Limited and Oresearch Limited.
Mr Adam Davey, Non-Executive Director
Mr Davey’s expertise spans over 25 years and includes capital raising (both private and public), 
mergers and acquisition, ASX listings, asset sales and purchases, transaction due diligence and 
director duties. Mr Davey has been involved in significantly growing businesses in both the 
industrial and mining sector. This has been achieved through holding various roles within
116
different organisations, including chairman, managing director, non-executive director, major 
shareholder and corporate adviser to the board.
Mr Davey is a non-executive chairman of Ensurance Limited and an employee of Patersons 
Securities Limited.
Mr Frank Terranova (to resign on Completion of the Acquisition)
Mr. Terranova is a senior executive with extensive experience in corporate finance and 
company management across sectors including mining, agriculture and manufacturing. Mr. 
Terranova is a chartered accountant and his most recent position was as Managing Director 
and CEO of Polymetals Mining Limited (“Polymetals”) (ASX:PLY) where he was instrumental in 
the successful merger of Polymetals and Southern Cross Goldfields Limited (ASX:SXG). In 
addition, Mr. Terranova was formerly the Managing Director and CEO of Allied Gold Mining 
PLC, where he presided over its successful +$500 million M & A transaction with St Barbara 
Mines (ASX:SBM). Mr. Terranova had a major role in the strategic and operational 
development of Allied Gold.
Mr Paul Niardone (to resign on Completion of the Acquisition)
Mr Paul Niardone was the Executive Director and founder of Professional Public Relations 
(WA), the largest PR and communications firm in Western Australia. He was the founding 
Chairman of Bellevue Resources Limited and has experience in marketing, investor relations 
and strategic planning in both the Government and private sectors. He has been a member of 
the Australian Marketing Institute, the Institute of Management Consultants and the Institute 
of Company Directors. Currently Mr Niardone is the CEO of the Ausnet Group, a real estate 
and financial services group of companies with AU$2 billion of property sales and a AU$1 
billion loan book.
Mr Ian Hobson, Company Secretary
Mr Hobson is the company secretary of ePAT.
Mr Hobson is a chartered accountant and chartered secretary who acts as non-executive 
director and company secretary to ASX listed companies, trustee corporations, charitable 
trusts and private organisations. Prior to commencing his own practice, Ian had in excess of 20 
years professional accounting experience working for large chartered accounting firms 
together with commercial experience in Australia, UK and Canada.
As an experienced finance and corporate governance professional, Ian brings a wealth of 
experience to boards contributing to financial management, corporate governance, capital 
raising strategies and transaction and due diligence capabilities drawn from exposure to a 
variety of industries.
Ian is a facilitator with the AICD and presents the finance units for the Company Director 
Course.
117
10.3  Other Key People
Mr John Murray, Non-Executive Director and Non-Executive Chairman of the Board (to be 
appointed on Completion of the Acquisition)
Mr Murray has over 20 years’ experience in private equity and venture capital, and was a co-
founder and Managing Partner of Technology Venture Partners; one of the original and 
leading venture capital firms in Australia. Mr Murray is a past chairman of the Australian 
Venture Capital Association. Mr Murray has considerable experience as a director of high 
growth, technology-based companies. He possesses a broad understanding of global trends in 
technology and its impact on a variety of industries.  He is currently Chairman of a private 
aged care business (IBIS Care Group) and a non-executive director of Maestrano (cloud 
software technology). Mr Murray also brings 12 years’ experience in executive roles in 
corporate banking (Bank America Vice President), accounting and IT services industries.
Mr Murray has been on the Board of a number of successful technology rollouts and exits 
including online travel play Viator, which was acquired by TripAdvisor for approximately 
US$200 million in 2014. He is a chartered accountant with an Honour degree in Law, and is a 
member of the Australian Institute of Company Directors.
Philip Daffas (Managing Director after the Acquisition)
Upon Completion of the Acquisition, Mr Philip Daffas will be appointed as the Managing 
Director of the Company.
Mr Daffas is a highly accomplished global business leader and people manager with an 
international career spanning more than 25 years with leading blue-chip healthcare 
corporates and novel technology start-up companies.
Mr Daffas has held senior global business leadership positions in Europe, US and Australia. He 
has been instrumental in building businesses, growing market share and developing extensive 
high-level customer relationships in each sector.
Mr Daffas’ roles in Australia have included VP Global Marketing at Cochlear and General 
Management with Roche Diagnostics and Bio-Rad Laboratories, and CEO of Applied 
Physiology, an Australian start up software company in the intensive care monitoring sector.
Mr Daffas’ earlier experience was gained in Europe with market leaders such as IVAC infusion 
systems and Shiley cardiopulmonary products. He subsequently joined Boehringer Mannheim, 
initially in the UK managing their diagnostics business and subsequently was promoted to 
Global Marketing Director in the Diabetes Care business based in Mannheim, Germany.
In 1997 Mr Daffas joined Cochlear in the UK as the European Sales and Marketing Manager 
and subsequently was promoted to the VP Global Marketing role based in Sydney, Australia.
118
Ross Harricks, Non-Executive Director, BSc, BEng(Hons), MBA (Distinction) (to be appointed on 
Completion of the Acquisition)
Mr Harricks’ experience in the commercialisation of medical products spans over thirty years 
and over three continents.
He began in the medical industry in the UK, marketing CT scanners and then moving to 
Australia to set up his company’s regional sales operation. In 1983, Mr Harricks joined the 
Nucleus Group as Group Marketing Executive and became President of Group subsidiaries in 
United States in marketing medical equipment and scientific computing products.
In 1989, Mr Harricks was the CEO of a US-based start-up company developing specialist 
medical lasers. He then returned to Australia and has been a director of ResMed Limited and 
cofounder of AtCor Medical where he completed an Australian initial public offering in 2005 
leading the company until 2007.
Mr Harricks now works with early stage Australian medical technology companies on their 
business development and expansion into the US and EU markets.
Professor Jeff Hughes (BPharm, GradDipPharm, MPharm, PhD, MAICD, MPS, PSHPA, AACPA)
Professor Jeff Hughes is a professor in the School of Pharmacy, Curtin University in Western 
Australia. Professor Hughes served as the Head of the School of Pharmacy of Curtin University, 
from March 2009 to May 2014. Professor Hughes is one of the team who invented the ePAT 
App and since March 2015 has been the CEO of ePAT.
He is recognised as a leader in clinical pharmacy research, education and practice in Australia. 
He was the recipient of the 1998 Society of Hospital Pharmacists of Australia’s (SHPA) Glaxo 
Medal of Merit and in 2001 received SHPA’s Clinical Pharmacy award. Further, in 2004 his 
efforts in the areas of clinical pharmacy education and pharmacy research were acknowledged 
when he was named the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia’s (PSA) Pharmacist of the Year. 
More recently he received the 2008 Eric Kirk Memorial Award from the Pharmaceutical 
Society of Western Australia, the 2009 AACP-Pfizer Consultant Pharmacist Award and the 2014 
Australasian Pharmaceutical Sciences Association Medal.
Professor Hughes is currently a Director of the Pharmaceutical Society of Western Australia 
and the Pharmaceutical Society of Australia of which he is the National Vice President and the 
Chair of the Financial, Audit and Risk Management Committee. Professor Hughes is also a 
community pharmacy proprietor and a practising accredited pharmacist.
Professor Hughes has contributed significantly to clinical pharmacy education and practice 
through his role as the Consultant Editor of the “Australian Pharmacy” and editorial 
membership of the “Journal of Pharmacy Practice and Research”. He has also supervised 
numerous PhD, Masters and Honours candidates to completion and acted as a mentor for 
early career researchers. Professor Hughes has an extensive publication record contributing to 
a large number of books (as an author/editor) and articles in peer review and professional 
journals.
Following the Acquisition, Professor Hughes will continue lead ePAT’s research and 
development work on the ePAT Apps, pursuant to the terms of the Research Services 
Agreement between ePAT and Curtin University.
119
Mr Mustafa Atee
Mr Mustafa Atee is a clinical, community and academic pharmacist. Throughout his 11-year 
career in pharmacy, he has managed a number of community pharmacies in Western 
Australia. Mr Atee holds a postgraduate diploma and master degrees in clinical pharmacy.
Mr Atee is currently studying a PhD with the School of Pharmacy at Curtin University which 
focuses on improving pain management amongst people with dementia. The ePAT concept 
was born out of his PhD research. His PhD research has been supported by both a grant and an 
academic scholarship from Alzheimer's Australia. Mr Atee’s project was a finalist in the Incite 
Awards, OzApp and LESANZ Awards. Mr Atee is also an academic mentor and lecturer with 
Curtin University and Curtin College.
ePAT has entered into contractual arrangements with Curtin University for the continued 
provision of Mr Atee’s research services relating to the development of the ePAT Apps, 
pursuant to the terms of the Research Services Agreement.
Dr Kreshnik Hoti
Dr Kreshnik Hoti is a registered community and consultant pharmacist with a PhD in Pharmacy 
and an accreditation from the Australian Association of Consultant Pharmacy. Dr Hoti has 
extensive practice experience in reviewing the use and safety of medicines in community and 
aged care settings, especially in geriatric people with chronic conditions. Ensuring adequate 
pain management was a key focus in Dr Hoti’s extensive experience with medication reviews 
in the elderly, including those with dementia.
Dr Hoti has established inter-professional education and practice programs in specialised 
dementia aged care facilities and has developed dementia focused workshops. Dr Hoti has 
served as an expert witness for Western Australia’s clinical senate and has facilitated training 
of Western Australian general practitioners and registrars on collaborative practice through 
WAGPET.
Dr Hoti has participated in a number of collaborative research projects contributing to 
research design, data analysis, interpretation of findings and report/publication writing. He is 
a recipient of competitive funding from Alzheimer’s Australia and is one of the co-inventors of 
the ePAT App. Dr Hoti currently holds an Adjunct Senior Lecturer position at the School of 
Pharmacy, Curtin University and has been recently elected Vice-Dean for Academic Affairs at 
the Faculty of Medicine, University of Prishtina, Kosovo.
Following the Acquisition, Dr Hoti has agreed in a Consultancy Agreement with ePAT to 
continue his research services relating to the development of the ePAT Apps. This agreement 
is summarised in Section 12.2.
10.4  Directors' security holdings
Directors are not required to hold any Shares under the Constitution of the Company.
Set out in the table below are details of the anticipated relevant interests of the existing and 
proposed Directors in the Shares of the Company upon completion of the Offers.
120
Director
Current Shares
Shares after 
Completion of 
Offers
Current 
Options
Options 
after 
Completion
Frank Terranova
Nil
750,000
Jeremy Read
12,592,434
15,717,384
Paul Niardone
13,687,903
14,062,903
Adam Davey
6,196,336
6,571,336
John Murray
Philip Daffas
Ross Harricks 
Notes:
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
i. Mr Read holds 10,592,434 Shares directly and 2,000,000 shares through the Read Family
Superannuation Fund of which Mr Read is a trustee and a beneficiary.
ii. Mr Niardone holds 13,687,903 Shares through Trindis Pty Ltd in which Mr Niardone is a
shareholder and a director.
iii. Mr Davey holds 6,196,336 Shares directly.
10.5  Directors' remuneration
The Company’s Constitution provides that each Director is entitled to such remuneration from 
the Company as the Directors decide, but the total amount provided to all non-executive 
Directors must not exceed in aggregate the amount fixed by the Company in a general 
meeting. The current maximum amount of remuneration that may be paid to all non-
executive Directors has been set at $160,000 per annum as detailed below:
Name
Position
Cash Remuneration
inclusive of
superannuation
Mr John Murray 
Mr Adam Davey 
Mr Ross Harricks 
Mr Philip Daffas
Non- Executive Chairman 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director
Managing Director
$80,000 
$40,000 
$40,000 
$225,000
The remuneration of the executive Directors will be determined by the Board.
10.6
Proposed terms of proposed director equity compensation
The Directors propose to ask Shareholders at the next annual general meeting of the Company 
to approve the grant to each Director of Options determined as a percentage of the fully 
diluted equity securities of the Company immediately following Completion of the Acquisition 
and the reinstatement to quotation of the Company’s Shares on the ASX.
121
The following table sets out the proposed Options to be granted to each Director (subject to 
Shareholder approval) in circumstances where the minimum $4,000,000 and the maximum 
$5,750,000 is raised under the Offer):
Position
% of fully diluted 
equity securities 
to be granted
Number of Options 
to be granted if 
$4,000,000 raised
Number of Options 
to be granted if 
$5,750,000 raised
Non-executive chairman 
Non-Executive Director
Managing Director
3% 
1.5% 
5%
25,139,487 
12,569,743 
41,889,145
27,764,487 
13,882,243 
46,274,145
The proposed terms of the Options are as follows:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the exercise price of the Options will be equivalent to the price at which Shares are
issued pursuant to the Capital Raising;
the expiry date will be 3 years from the date of issue;
all of the Options will immediately vest upon a change in the control of the Company;
otherwise, one-third of the Options will vest after one year of service; one third upon
the Company generating cumulative revenue of $1,000,000; and one-third will vest
after the Company makes an announcement that Regulatory Approval to enable
commercial use of the ePAT App in Australia, the United States or Europe is received,
or the Company has announced the execution of a binding licence agreement to
licence the ePAT App to:
(i)
(ii)
one or more residential aged care facilities facility owners managing in total in
excess of 150 beds; or
one or more medical clinics which service in total in excess of 2,000 patients
per year; or
(iii)
a metropolitan hospital with in excess of 200 beds;
(each an “End User”); or
(iv)
a global distribution partner with multiple End Users as existing customers.
The Options will also vest upon a change in the control of the Company.
(d)
if a Director is terminated other than with cause:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
within one year of the date on which the Company’s Shares are reinstated to
quotation on the ASX, the total vested Options will be adjusted to equal one
third of the total number of Options to be issued;
between one and two years from the date on which the Company’s Shares are
reinstated to quotation on the ASX, the total vested Options is to be adjusted
to equal two thirds of the total number of Options to be issued; and
more than two years from the date on which the Company’s Shares are
reinstated to quotation on the ASX, the total vested Options is to be adjusted
to equal the total number of Options to be issued.
122
10.7  Directors' interests
Other than as disclosed in this Prospectus, no existing or proposed Director holds at the date 
of this Prospectus or held at any time during the last 2 years, any interest in:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in connection with its
formation or promotion, or the Offers; or
the Offers.
Further, other than as disclosed in this Prospectus, the Company has not paid any amount or 
provided any benefit, or agreed to do so, to any Existing Director or Proposed Director, either 
to induce that Existing Director or Proposed Director to become, or to qualify them as a 
Director, or otherwise, for services rendered by them in connection with the formation or 
promotion of the Company or the Offers.
123
11
OFFER DETAILS
11.1  Offer
By this Prospectus, pursuant to the Offer the Company offers up to 287,500,000 Shares at an 
offer price of $0.02 per Share to raise funds of up to $5,750,000.
The Shares to be issued pursuant to the Offer are fully paid ordinary Shares in the Company 
and will rank equally in all respects with the existing Shares in the Company. The rights and 
liabilities to the Shares are further described in Section 11.19.
11.2  Minimum subscription
The minimum level of subscription under the Offer is 200,000,000 Shares, to raise $4,000,000. 
No Shares will be issued until the minimum subscription has been received.
11.3  Underwriter Options Offer
The Prospectus also includes the Underwriter Options Offer, under which the Company offers 
45,000,000 Underwriter Options, each with an exercise price of $0.025 per Share and an 
expiry date 3 years after the date of issue, to the Lead Manager and/or its nominees. The 
Underwriter Options shall have an issue price of $0.00, with further summary of their terms 
set out in Section 13.20.
Applications for Underwriter Options under the Underwriter Options Offer may only be made 
by the Lead Manager and/or its nominees.
11.4
Conditional Offers
The Offers under this Prospectus are conditional upon the following events occurring:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the Company raising a minimum of $4,000,000, under the Offer;
Shareholders approving the Acquisition Resolutions to be put to them at the Meeting
to be held on 31 August 2016;
Completion of the Acquisition occurring; and
the Company receiving ASX’s conditional approval for the reinstatement of the
Company’s shares to quotation on ASX and those conditions being acceptable to ePAT
and the Company, acting reasonably.
If these conditions are not satisfied then the Offers will not proceed and the Company will 
repay all Application Monies in accordance with the Corporations Act.
11.5
Purpose of the Offer
The purpose of the Offer is to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
meet the requirement that the Company re-complies with the ASX's admission
requirements in accordance with Chapters 1 and 2 of the Listing Rules;
provide funding for the purposes outlined in Section 2;
provide the Company with access to equity capital markets for future funding needs;
and
124
(d)
enhance the public and financial profile of ePAT and the Company.
11.6
Funding
It is intended that the funds raised pursuant to the Offer will be sufficient to fund the 
Company’s activities for the two years following reinstatement of the Company’s Shares to 
quotation on the ASX.
However, additional funding is expected to be required to fully commercialise the ePAT Apps 
and achieve sustainable profitability. In the event costs exceed the Company’s estimates or to 
take advantage of opportunities for acquisitions, joint ventures or other business 
opportunities, additional finance may be required sooner than planned.
As and when further funds are required, either for existing or future developments, the 
Company will consider both raising additional capital from the issue of securities and/or from 
debt funding.
11.7
Proposed use of funds
The Company intends to use the funds raised under the Offer in the next two years following 
the reinstatement of the Company's Securities to quotation on the Official List of ASX as 
follows:
Minimum Subscription
Maximum Subscription
Lead Manager and 
Underwriter fees 
Research and 
development
Amount
$340,000
$973,000
Sales and marketing
$511,000
%
9%
24%
13%
6%
Amount
$445,000
%
7%
$1,187,000
21%
$1,254,000
22%
$260,000
5%
Intellectual property 
and regulatory 
Corporate and 
administration1
$225,000
$1,671,000
42%
$1,819,000
32%
Working capital
$280,000
6%
$800,000
13%
TOTAL
$4,000,000
100%
$5,750,000
100%
Notes:
1.
2.
The corporate and administration expenses include wages, board fees, accounting, legal,
audit, ASX and ASIC fees, insurance, rent and other general corporate and administration
expenses.
The proposed application of funds includes $374,425 worth of research and development tax
incentives. The Company expects that the eligibility criteria for such tax incentives will be met
and that this estimated incentive can be reliably estimated. The Directors have cause to
expect that the Company will undertake eligible activities throughout the forecast period.
125
With the expenditure of the minimum subscription funds, the Company’s objectives are:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
to successfully complete validation and implementation studies for ePAT App for
Dementia;
to obtain regulatory approvals for the ePAT Apps for Dementia;
to complete development and commercially launch the ePAT App for Dementia;
to complete development of the ePAT App for Children;
to successfully complete validation and implementation studies for the ePAT App for
Children;
to obtain regulatory approvals for the ePAT App for Children;
to complete development of the ePAT App for Children; and
to develop the management team and operational capability of the Company.
If the maximum Capital Raising is achieved the Company will be able to accelerate 
development and commercialisation plans for the ePAT App for Children, as well as accelerate 
development of the operational capabilities of the Company.
The above expenditure table and objectives is a statement of current intentions as at the date 
of this Prospectus.
Investors should note that, as with any budget, the allocation of funds set out in the above 
table may change depending on a number of factors, including the outcome of operational 
and development activities, regulatory developments and market and general economic 
conditions. In light of this, the Board reserves the right to alter the way the funds are applied 
and the commercial objectives and priorities of the Company.
The Board is satisfied that upon completion of the Offers, the Company will have sufficient 
working capital to meet its stated objectives.
The use of further equity funding will be considered by the Board, where it is appropriate to 
accelerate a specific project.
It is also possible that future acquisitions may be contemplated that may exceed the current 
or projected financial resources of the Company and it is expected that these acquisitions 
would be funded by equity issues (subject to any required Shareholder approvals).
126
11.8
Shareholding structure
The proposed pro forma capital structure of the Company following completion of the Offers 
and the Acquisition is as follows:
Shares
Pre- 
Consolidation 
Shares
Post Consolidation Shares
$4,000,000 
Capital Raising
$5,750,000 
Capital Raising
Shares on issue prior to the Offer
296,805,545
169,603,169
169,603,169
Share to be issued on conversion of 
the Interim Raising Notes
87,500,0000
52,500,000
52,500,000
Consideration Shares to be issued
373,134,328
213,219,616
213,219,616
Deferred Consideration Shares to 
be issued on achievement of 
Milestone1 
Shares to be issued pursuant to the 
Capital Raising
Director Shares to be issued2
Total Shares on issue following 
Completion and re-compliance
N/A
N/A
N/A
50,000,000
50,000,000
200,000,000
287,500,000
4,624,950
4,624,950
757,439,873
689,947,735
777,447,735
1 Assuming a 5 day volume weighted average price of the Shares of $0.02. A maximum of 100,000,000 
Deferred Consideration Shares may be issued based on the minimum price of $0.01. The number of 
Deferred Consideration Shares to be issued will depend on whether the Milestone is achieved, and if 
so, the Company’s share price at that time.  
2 To preserve the Company’s cash reserves until completion of the Acquisition, the Directors are 
considering forgoing a portion of their cash remuneration in return for an equivalent value of Shares 
as an issue price equivalent to the Capital Raising price (Director Shares). At the date of this 
Prospectus, there has been no agreement to issue any Director Shares.
127
Pre- Consolidation Options
Post Consolidation Options1
Exercise Price  Number
$0.07875
41,609,524
$0.07875
$0.045
$0.045
$0.10
1,696,756
$0.07875
6,000,000
7,923,097
$0.045
72,816,669
Exercise Price  Number
Options 
Listed Options expiring 11 
May 2017 
Unlisted Options expiring 11 
February 2017 
Unlisted Options expiring 23 
July 2017 
Unlisted Options expiring 10 
August 2018 
Unlisted Noteholder 
Options expiring 3 years 
from date of issue 
Unlisted Underwriter 
Options to be issued 
pursuant to the Capital 
Raising expiring 3 years 
from date of issue 
Total Options on issue 
following Completion and 
re-compliance 
1 The number of post-Consolidation Options is the same for both a $4,000,000 and a 
$5,750,000 Capital Raising.
N/A  175,936,522
$0.015
87,500,000
$0.175
N/A
N/A
$0.025
45,000,000
4,527,484
3,428,572
969,575
$0.02
52,500,000
N/A  148,035,155
The Company has an employee incentive scheme which was approved by Shareholders at the 
2015 annual general meeting of the Company, but the Company has not yet issued any equity 
securities under that scheme to any employee or Director of the Company.
The Company’s employee incentive scheme allows it to offer unlisted ‘awards’ to full-time or 
part-time employees, directors, consultants and/or contractors of the Company or any 
subsidiary of the Company. Each ‘award’ is a conditional right, received by the recipient free of 
charge, and is a right, once vested, to be issued or transferred one or more Shares upon 
payment of an exercise price determined by the Board at the time the ‘award’ is granted. 
These rights expire upon the expiry date decided by the Board at the time of granting, and 
cannot be transferred without Board consent.
11.9  Underwriting of the Offer
The Offer is being underwritten by Patersons Securities Limited and RM Corporate Finance 
Pty Ltd, each of whom are severally underwriting the Offer to a maximum of $2,225,000 
each, sharing any shortfall equally between them. The Company has also entered into a Lead 
Manager Agreement with Patersons Securities Limited appointing Patersons Securities 
Limited as Lead Manager of the Offer. More details of the Underwriting Agreement and 
Lead Manager Agreement are set out in Sections 12.10, 12.11 and 13.20.
128
11.10  Applications
Applications for Shares under the Offer can only be made using the Application Form attached 
to or accompanying this Prospectus. The Application Form must be completed in accordance 
with the instructions set out on the back of the form.
Applications under the Offer must be for a minimum of 100,000 Shares ($2000) and then in 
increments of 25,000 Shares ($500). No brokerage, stamp duty or other costs are payable by 
the Applicants. Cheques must be made payable to "MinQuest Limited" and should be crossed 
"Not Negotiable". All Application Monies will be paid into the bank account named on the 
Application Form.
Completed Application Forms and accompanying cheques or bank transfer or deposit of 
Application Monies must be received by the Company before 5.00pm on the Closing Date by 
either being delivered to, or posted to, the following address:
By hand
By post
1/47 Park Road, Milton, QLD 4064
1/47 Park Road, Milton, QLD 4064
Applicants are urged to lodge their Application Forms as soon as possible as the Offer may 
close early without notice.
An original, completed and lodged Application Form for Shares together with a cheque for the 
Application Monies or bank transfer or deposit of Application Monies, constitutes a binding 
and irrevocable offer to subscribe for the number of Shares specified in the Application Form. 
The Application Form does not need to be signed to be valid. If the Application Form is not 
completed correctly or if the accompanying payment is for the wrong amount, it may be 
treated by the Company as valid. The Directors' decision as to whether to treat such an 
application as valid and how to construe amend or complete the Application Form is final, 
however, an Applicant will not be treated as having applied for more Shares than is indicated 
by the amount of the cheque or bank transfer or deposit for the Application Monies.
It is the responsibility of Applicants outside Australia to obtain all necessary approvals for the 
allotment and issue of Shares pursuant to this Prospectus. The return of a completed 
Application Form will be taken by the Company to constitute a representation and warranty 
by the Applicant that all relevant approvals have been obtained.
11.11  Allocation and allotment of Shares
The Directors reserve the right to reject any application or to allot a lesser number of Shares 
than that applied for. If the number of Shares allocated is less than that applied for, or no 
allotment is made, the surplus Application Monies will be promptly refunded without interest.
Subject to the ASX providing its conditional approval for re-quotation of the Company’s Shares 
on the ASX, the allotment of Shares will occur as soon as practicable after the Offer closes. 
Holding statements will be dispatched as required by the ASX. It is the responsibility of the 
Applicants to determine their allocation prior to trading in the Shares. Applicants who sell the 
Shares before they receive their holding statement will do so at their own risk.
129
11.12  Application Monies to be held in trust
The Application Monies for Shares to be issued pursuant to the Offer will be held in a separate 
bank account on behalf of the Applicants until the Shares are allotted. If the Shares to be 
issued under this Prospectus are not admitted to quotation within a period of 3 months from 
the date of this Prospectus, the Application Monies will be refunded in full without interest, 
and any Shares issued will be deemed to be void. All interest earned on Application Monies 
(including those which do not result in the issue of Shares) will be retained by the Company.
11.13  Escrow arrangements
The Shares offered under the Offer will not be subject to any escrow restrictions.
The Shares issued to the ePAT shareholders under the SSPA will be subject to escrow 
restrictions. Prior to the Company's Shares being reinstated to trading on the ASX, the 
Company will enter into escrow agreements with the recipients of the restricted securities, in 
accordance with Chapter 9 of the Listing Rules, and the Company will announce to the ASX full 
details (quantity and duration) of the Shares to be held in escrow.
The Underwriter Options will be classified as restricted securities and will be required to be 
held in escrow for up to 24 months from the date the Company’s Shares are reinstated to 
quotation on the ASX.
11.14  Chess and issuer sponsorship
The Company participates in CHESS. All trading on the ASX in existing Shares is, and in new 
Shares will be, settled through CHESS. ASX Settlement, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the ASX, 
operates CHESS in accordance with the Listing Rules and the ASX Settlement Operating Rules. 
On behalf of the Company, the Share Registry operates an electronic issuer sponsored sub-
register and an electronic CHESS sub-register. The two sub-registers together make up the 
Company's principal register of securities.
Under CHESS, the Company does not issue certificates to Shareholders. Rather, holding 
statements (similar to bank statements) will be sent to Shareholders as soon as practicable 
after allotment. Holding statements will be sent either by CHESS (for Shareholders who elect 
to hold Shares on the CHESS sub-register) or by the Company's Share Registry (for 
Shareholders who elect to hold their Shares on the issuer sponsored sub-register). The 
statements will set out the number of existing Shares (where applicable) and the number of 
new Shares allotted under this Prospectus and provide details of a Shareholder's Holder 
Identification Number (for Shareholders who elect to hold Shares on the CHESS sub-register) 
or Shareholder Reference Number (for Shareholders who elect to hold their Shares on the 
issuer sponsored sub-register). Updated holding statements will also be sent to each 
Shareholder at the end of each month in which there is a transaction on their holding, as 
required by the Listing Rules.
11.15  Risks
As with any share investment, there are risks associated with investing in the Company. The 
principal risks that could affect the financial and market performance of the Company are 
detailed in Section 6.
The securities on offer under this Prospectus should be considered speculative. Accordingly, 
before deciding to invest in the Company, Applicants should read this Prospectus in its entirety 
and should consider all factors in light of their individual circumstances and seek appropriate
130
professional advice. If you require assistance or have any questions in relation to the Offer, or 
you are uncertain as to whether obtaining Shares in the Company is a suitable investment for 
you, you should seek professional advice from your stockbroker, lawyer, accountant or other 
professional adviser.
11.16  Overseas investors
An Offer made pursuant to this Prospectus is not made to persons or in places which would 
not be lawful to make the Offer. No action has been taken to register the Offer or otherwise 
permit the Offer to be made in any jurisdiction outside Australia.
The distribution of this Prospectus in jurisdictions outside Australia may be restricted by law in 
those jurisdictions and therefore persons who come into possession of this Prospectus should 
seek advice on and observe any such restrictions. Failure to comply with such restrictions may 
constitute a violation of applicable securities laws.
Applicants who are resident in countries other than Australia should consult their professional 
advisers as to whether any governmental or other consents are required or whether any other 
formalities need to be considered and followed in respect of the Offer.
11.17  Privacy disclosure
Persons who apply for Shares pursuant to this Prospectus are asked to provide personal 
information to the Company, either directly or through the Share Registry. The Company and 
the Share Registry collect, hold and use that personal information to assess applications for 
Shares, to provide facilities and services to Security holders, and to carry out various 
administrative functions. Access to the information collected may be provided to the 
Company's agents and service providers and to ASX, ASIC and other regulatory bodies on the 
basis that they deal with such information in accordance with the relevant privacy laws. If the 
information requested is not supplied, applications for Shares will not be processed. In 
accordance with privacy laws, information collected in relation to specific Security holders can 
be obtained by that Security holder through contacting the Company or the Share Registry.
11.18  Taxation
It is the responsibility of all persons to satisfy themselves of the particular taxation treatment 
that applies to them in relation to the Offers, by consulting their own professional tax 
advisers. Neither the Company nor any of its Directors or officers accepts any liability or 
responsibility in respect of the taxation consequences of the matters referred to above.
11.19  Description of Shares
(a)
Introduction
The rights and liabilities attaching to ownership of Shares are detailed in the Constitution and, 
in certain circumstances, regulated by the Corporations Act, the ASX Listing Rules, the ASX 
Settlement Operating Rules and general law. A summary of the significant rights, liabilities and 
obligations attaching to Shares and a description of other material provisions of the 
Constitution are set out below. This summary is not exhaustive and is qualified by the full 
terms of the Constitution. This summary does not constitute a definitive statement of the 
rights and liabilities of Shareholders. The summary assumes that the Company is re-admitted 
to the Official List.
131
(b)
Voting at a general meeting
At a general meeting of the Company, every Shareholder present in person or by proxy, 
representative or attorney has one vote on a show of hands and, on a poll, one vote for each 
Share held (with adjusted voting rights for partly paid shares). The chairman of the meeting is 
not entitled to a casting vote.
(c)
Meetings of Shareholders
Each Shareholder is entitled to receive notice of, attend and vote at general meetings of the 
Company and to receive all notices, accounts and other documents required to be sent to 
Shareholders under the Constitution, the Corporations Act and the ASX Listing Rules. The 
Company must give at least 28 days’ written notice of a general meeting.
(d)
Dividends
Subject to the Corporations Act, the Constitution and the terms of issue or rights of any shares 
with special rights to dividends, the Board may from time to time determine that a dividend is 
payable, fix the amount of the dividend, the timing of payment of the dividend and method of 
payment of the dividend. A dividend may only be paid in accordance with the Corporations 
Act. For further information in respect of the Company’s proposed dividend policy, see Section 
12.
(e)
Transfer of Shares
Subject to the Constitution and the ASX Listing Rules, Shares may be transferred by: – a proper 
transfer effected in accordance with the ASX Settlement Operating Rules; or – any other 
method required or permitted by the Corporations Act and ASX. The Board may refuse to 
register a transfer of Shares where permitted to do so under the Corporations Act, the ASX 
Listing Rules or the ASX Settlement Operating Rules. The Board must refuse to register a 
transfer of Shares when required by the Corporations Act, the ASX Listing Rules or the ASX 
Settlement Operating Rules.
(f)
Issue of further Shares
Subject to the Corporations Act, the ASX Listing Rules and any rights and restrictions attached 
to Shares, the Board has full discretion to issue, allot and cancel or otherwise dispose of 
Shares, grant Options over unissued Shares and settle the manner in which fractions of a 
Share are to be dealt with.
(g)
Winding up
If the Company is wound up, the liquidator may, with the sanction of a special resolution of 
Shareholders, divide among Shareholders in kind the whole or any part of the Company’s 
property, set the value of that property that the liquidator considers fair and determine how 
the division is to be carried out between Shareholders or different classes of Shareholders.
(h)
Unmarketable parcels
Subject to the Corporations Act, the ASX Listing Rules and the ASX Settlement Operating Rules, 
the Board may sell the Shares of a Shareholder who holds less than a marketable parcel by 
following the procedures set out in the Constitution.
132
(i)
Share buy-backs
Subject to the Corporations Act and the ASX Listing Rules, the Company may buy back Shares 
in itself on terms and at times determined by the Board.
(j)
Variation of class rights
At present, the Company’s only class of shares on issue is Shares. Subject to the Corporations 
Act and the terms of issue of a class of shares, wherever the capital of the Company is divided 
into different class of shares, the rights attaching to any class of shares may be varied or 
cancelled: – with the consent in writing of the holders of three quarters of the issued shares 
included in that class; or – by a special resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders 
of those shares. In either case, the holders of not less than 10% of the votes in the class of 
shares, the rights of which have been varied or cancelled, may apply to a court of competent 
jurisdiction to exercise its discretion to set aside such a variation or cancellation.
(k)
Conversion or reduction of share capital
Subject to the Corporations Act, the Company may convert all or any of its shares into a larger 
or smaller number of shares by resolution passed at a general meeting or with the written 
consent of all members entitled to vote on the matter. The Company may reduce its share 
capital in any way permissible by the Corporations Act.
(l)
Preference shares
The Company currently has no preference shares on issue. The Company may in the future 
issue preference shares including preference shares which are, or at the option of the 
Company or holder are, liable to be redeemed or convertible to Shares. The rights attaching to 
preference shares are those set out in the Constitution, unless other rights have been 
approved by special resolution of the Company.
(m)
Dividend reinvestment plans
Subject to the ASX Listing Rules, the Constitution authorises the Directors, on any terms and 
conditions they think fit, to establish a dividend reinvestment plan (under which any 
Shareholder or any class of Shareholders may elect that the dividends payable by the 
Company be reinvested by a subscription for Shares in the Company).
11.20  No brokerage fees, commissions or stamp duty
There are no brokerage fees, commission or stamp duty payable by Applicants under the 
Offer.
11.21  Timetable
All dates are subject to change and indicative only. The Company with the consent of the Lead 
Manager, reserves the right to vary these dates and times without prior notice, including the 
right to close the offer early, to withdraw the offer, or to accept late applications.
133
12
MATERIAL AGREEMENTS
The Directors consider that certain contracts entered into by the Company and ePAT are 
material to the Company or are of such a nature that an investor may wish to have particulars 
of these agreements when making an assessment of whether to apply for Shares under the 
Offers. The provisions of such material contracts are summarised in this Section.
12.1
Research Services Agreement between ePAT and Curtin University dated 29 July 2016
The Research Agreement between Curtin University and ePAT provides for the provision of 
Curtin University’s research services to ePAT, to assist in the further development of the ePAT 
Apps. Curtin University will provide support and key personnel to continue the development 
of both ePAT App for Dementia and ePAT App for Children. The key personnel provided are 
Professor Jeff Hughes and Mr Mustafa Atee, two of the three inventors of the ePAT 
technology. As part of the agreement, ePAT will provide the services of Dr Kreshnik Hoti, the 
third inventor of the ePAT technology.
The Curtin University services include validation and implementation studies for the ePAT 
Apps, monthly and half annually reviews, and research findings presented in a format that will 
be suitable for applications for registration with the regulatory bodies of the TGA, FDA and 
relevant authority for the CE Mark. The intellectual property related to the agreement will be 
owned by ePAT. Curtin University through the agreement have assigned to ePAT all its right, 
title and interest in the project’s intellectual; property.
The pre-existing or independently developed intellectual property which ePAT and Curtin 
University makes available will remain with the party making that intellectual property 
available.
The agreement may be terminated by both parties with mutual agreement. ePAT may 
terminate the agreement at any time if either Mr Mustafa Atee or Professor Jeff Hughes 
ceases to be employed by Curtin University.
The cost of the Agreement to ePAT over the 24 month term is $950,489.
12.2
Consultancy Agreement with Dr Hoti dated 19 August 2016
ePAT has entered into a Consultancy Agreement with Dr Hoti pursuant to which, in return for 
an annual fee of $45,000 (paid quarterly in arrears), Dr Hoti will provide consultancy services 
to the Company as an independent contractor.
The services to be provided to ePAT by Dr Hoti under the Consultancy Agreement include 
experimental design, ethics applications, participant recruitment, data analysis and 
interpretation, report and manuscript writing; literature research and review in relation to 
pain assessment (and specifically facial recognition technology and audio analysis) and clinical 
and technical input into the design, development and testing of ePAT’s pain assessment 
applications. It also lays out a detailed schedule for development of the ePAT Apps.
The Consultancy Agreement provides for ePAT to own intellectual property developed during 
the course of the agreement, and for Dr Hoti to retain ownership of any background 
intellectual property owned by him prior to the agreement. During the term of the 
Consultancy Agreement and for defined periods thereafter, any sale of the background 
intellectual property must to be first offered for sale to ePAT before any third party is offered 
the same or better terms.
134
The Consultancy Agreement includes standard clauses, including as to confidentiality and non-
disclosure obligations, and a specific restraint clause. Either party is entitled to terminate the 
agreement upon 30 days’ written notice or immediately by mutual agreement or upon non-
rectification of breach within 14 days.
12.3
Share Sale and Purchase Agreement dated 25 July 2016
The Company, Curtin University and the ePAT shareholders have entered into a share sale and 
purchase agreement for the Company’s acquisition of 100% of the issued capital of ePAT. The 
terms of the SSPA are summarised in Section 2.4 of this Prospectus.
12.4
nViso Agreements
The nViso Agreements comprise the following interrelated agreements between ePAT and 
nViso:
(a)
Master Services Agreement dated 12 September 2014
This agreement annexes the Statement of Works discussed in paragraph (b) below, and 
obliges ePAT to pay the fees set out in the Statement of Works, on the terms and conditions 
set out in this master services agreement.
These terms and conditions in this master services agreement provide ePAT a non-exclusive, 
non-transferable, royalty free licence to use nViso’s software, media and data and imposes 
confidentiality obligations on nViso. All development work performed by nViso in the ePAT 
product is owned by ePAT.
ePAT may terminate this agreement on 30 days’ written notice, but will lose the current 
benefit of exclusivity of the nViso licence (see below) if it does so.
(b)
Statement of Work
This agreement, an annexure to the Master Services Agreement, governed the work done by 
nViso embedding nViso’s 3D facial imaging technology into the prototype ePAT App, in return 
for a $150,000 development fee and licence fees of 10% of net revenue from sales on the 
Google Play Store, the Apple Store and other commercialisations of the ePAT App.
nViso agrees not to provide the same services or develop a similar commercial application in 
the field of pain assessment application until 26 September 2019, provided ePAT maintains its 
obligations and does not terminate the Support and Maintenance Agreement, and either 
undertakes reasonable commercial efforts to sell the ePAT App on the Apple store and Google 
Play stores by 26 September 2017, or generates revenue from the App in excess of $120,000 
by this date.   
The agreement may be terminated on 60 days’ notice prior to the anniversary of the 
agreement, or by either party after a breach upon 30 days’ prior written notice.
(c)
3D Facial Imaging Mobile SDK for Action unit Detection – Licence Agreement dated
15 October 2014
Under this agreement, nViso SA grants ePAT a worldwide non-exclusive licence to use its 3D 
facial imaging technology software. The current licence ends on 26 September 2019. There is 
provision for renegotiation in good faith of a further 5 year term and the Company has
135
commenced this process. There is a risk that the new licence fee in any new licence may be 
substantially higher than the fee in the current agreement.
The Agreement can be terminated by ePAT with 60 days’ notice prior to the end of the annual 
term or with 30 days prior written notice for a breach of contract.
(d)
Support and Maintenance Agreement dated 26 June 2015
This agreement obliges ePAT to pay an annual fee of $22,550, commencing 12 months after 
completion of the work in the Statement of Work, in return for support and maintenance 
services in connection with the SDK and Statement of Works products.
12.5  Option Agreement between ePAT and Professor Jeff Hughes, Dr Kreshnik Hoti and Mr
Mustafa Atee dated 22 August 2016
ePAT has a acquired the option (but not the obligation) to purchase from Professor Hughes, Dr 
Hoti and Mr Atee, the intellectual property and technology acquired by them from nViso in 
their preliminary work on an algorithm to differentiate child cries which are, and which are 
not, associated with pain.  Exercise of the option will cost ePAT $36,000 and the option expires 
two years after execution.
12.6
ePAT Application Development Contract between ePAT and Darwin Digital Sàrl dated 01 
December 2015
Under this agreement, Darwin Digital Sàrl agreed to design and build the ePAT Android and 
iOS (Apple) Apps for Dementia and related software, in return for a fee of $50,365.  The 
applications are being designed to be downloadable for use by residential aged care facilities, 
software vendors and healthcare providers in the Australian market.  Darwin Digital agreed to 
provide the services as an independent contractor.    The resulting intellectual property will 
become the exclusive property of ePAT on payment of the final invoice.
As part of the agreement, Darwin Digital will also provide perpetual royalty free non-exclusive 
rights to the background intellectual property required to commercially develop the ePAT 
Apps.  Either party may terminate the agreement at any time on 30 days’ prior written notice
12.7  Memorandum of Understanding between Strenuus Limited (UK) and ePAT dated 11 March 2016
ePAT has signed a binding Memorandum of Understanding with UK-based counter-fraud group 
Strenuus Limited, which provides for an exclusive working relationship with Strenuus to 
develop a scalable anti-fraud medico-legal assessment platform through the integration of 
ePAT’s capabilities within Strenuus’ behavioural assessment platform, SCAn®. In particular, 
Strenuus and ePAT will seek to develop a tool incorporating ePAT’s pain recognition 
application for facial expression mapping to assess the validity of people’s claims for whiplash 
injury. Subject to validation of the assessment platform, the parties intend to move towards a 
collaboration or joint venture arrangement to exploit ePAT’s technology in the field of 
medico-legal claims assessment and share the resultant revenue. The existing intellectual 
property rights of each party and ownership of the intellectual property will remain with each 
of the parties.  The period of exclusivity ends on 11 March 2017. The agreement may be 
terminated at any time for any reason.
136
12.8
Clinical Trial Research Agreement between Mercy Health and ePAT dated 5 May 2016
Mercy Health have given ethical approval for ePAT to conduct validation trials of the ePAT App 
for Dementia involving residents with moderate to severe dementia in two of its Perth aged 
care homes.  The trial must be completed before 8 May 2019.
12.9  Executive Services Agreement for Philip Daffas, Managing Director
The Company has entered into an executive services agreement with Philip Daffas for his 
services as managing Director for the Company. This agreement will commence only upon 
Completion of the Acquisition and is subject to Shareholder approval of his appointment as a 
Director. The terms of this agreement include: 
(a)
Remuneration:  During the initial term expiring on 31 January 2017, during which Mr
Daffas will work 3 days per week, Mr Daffas will receive a pro-rated salary of
$135,000. Beyond the initial term, Mr Daffas will receive a salary of $225,000 per
annum and work full time.  In addition, subject to shareholder approval, he will be
issued Options equivalent to 5% of the Company’s fully diluted securities on issue at
the Completion of the Acquisition, with vesting and other terms and conditions
equivalent to the proposed terms of the proposed Director equity compensation
outlined in Section 10.6.
(b)
Termination: Mr Daffas may terminate the contract giving three months’ notice in
writing. The Company may terminate the agreement without cause by giving three
months’ written notice, or immediately with payment of an amount equal to three
months base salary, or immediately for cause.
12.10  Underwriting Agreement dated 24 August 2016
The Offer is partially and severally underwritten by two Underwriters, Patersons Securities 
Limited and RM Corporate Finance Pty Ltd, pursuant to an Underwriting Agreement with the 
Company. The Underwriting Agreement provides for a total of $4,500,000 in New Shares to be 
underwritten, on the following terms:
(a)
Fees
The Company has agreed to pay 3% of the proceeds of the Offers in underwriting and 
management fees to each of the two Underwriters (being collectively 6% of the proceeds of 
the Offers). The Company has also agreed to offer 22,500,000 Options to each Underwriter 
(being a total of 45,000,000 Options), subject to Shareholder approval at the Meeting.
(b)
Completion
The Underwriting Agreement is conditional upon (amongst other things): 
(i)
the Underwriters being satisfied with the Due Diligence investigations and the
Due Diligence results by the Lodgement Date; and
(ii)
the Underwriters entering into sub-underwriting agreements on terms and
conditions which they each find satisfactory.
137
(c)
Termination
Either  Underwriter  may  terminate  its  obligations  to  underwrite  the  Offer  upon  the
happening of a number of circumstances, including:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(xi)
(xii)
the Shareholders at the Meeting not approving any Acquisition Resolution;
Completion of the Acquisition not proceeding or being delayed;
any of the All Ordinaries Index or the All Industrial Index as published by ASX
falls 10% or more below its level as at the close of business on the business
day prior to the date of the Underwriting Agreement.
the Company fails to provide each Underwriter with reasonable copies of the
Prospectus;
Official Quotation has not been granted within 2 business days after the close
of the Offers, or such other date agreed between the Company and the
Underwriters;
if a supplementary or replacement prospectus is required as a result of a new
circumstances that is materially adverse to an investor, but a supplementary
or replacement prospectus is not lodged with the content and within the time
reasonably required by the Underwriters, or the Company lodges one without
the Underwriters’ consents;
the Prospectus does not comply with the Corporations Act;
the Company is prevented from allotting the Offer Shares within the time
required by the Underwriting Agreement, the Corporations Act, the Listing
Rules, any statute, regulation or order of a court of competent jurisdiction by
ASIC, ASX or any court of competent jurisdiction or any governmental or semi -
governmental agency or authority;
any person (other than the Underwriters) who has previously consented to the
inclusion of its, his or her name in the Prospectus or to be named in the
Prospectus, withdraws that consent;
an application is made by ASIC for an order under section 1324B or any other
provision of the Corporations Act in relation to the Prospectus, and this is not
dismissed or withdrawn by 2 business days after the close of the Offers (or
such date as agreed in writing by the Company and the Underwriters);
ASIC gives notice under section 739 of the Corporations Act of its intention to
hold a hearing to determine if it should make a stop order in relation to the
Prospectus or of an interim or final stop order in relation to the Prospectus;
the Takeovers Panel makes a declaration that circumstances in relation to the
affairs of the Company are unacceptable circumstances under Pt 6.10 of the
138
Corporations Act, or an application for such a declaration is made to the 
Takeovers Panel;
any authorisation which is material to anything referred to in the Prospectus is
repealed, revoked or terminated or expires, or is modified or amended in a
manner unacceptable to the Underwriters;
a director or senior manager of the Company or ePAT is charged with an
indictable offence.
(xiii)
(xiv)
The Underwriter may also terminate its obligations under the Underwriting Agreement where 
one or more of the following events has occurred and in the reasonable opinion of the 
Underwriters reached in good faith, the event has or is likely to have, a material adverse effect 
on the marketing or success of the Offer or renders it impractical to effect acceptances under 
the Offer, or leads or is likely to lead to a material liability for the Underwriter under the 
Corporations Act or any other applicable law:
(xv)
(xvi)
(xvii)
(xviii)
(xix)
(xx)
(xxi)
(xxii)
default or breach by the Company under the Underwriting Agreement;
any representation, warranty or undertaking given by the Company in the
Underwriting Agreement is or becomes untrue or incorrect;
a contravention by the Company or ePAT of any provision of its constitution,
the Corporations Act, the Listing Rules or any other applicable legislation or
any policy or requirement of ASIC or ASX;
an event occurs which gives rise to a material adverse effect or any adverse
change or any development including a prospective adverse change after the
date of the Underwriting Agreement in the assets, liabilities, financial position,
trading results, profits, forecasts, losses, prospects, business or operations of
any relevant company including, without limitation, if any forecast in the
Prospectus becomes incapable of being met or in the Underwriters'
reasonable opinion, unlikely to be met in the projected time;
the due diligence results or any part of the verification material for the
Prospectus being false, misleading or deceptive or that there was an omission
from them;
a "new circumstance" as referred to in section 719(1) of the Corporations Act
arises that is materially adverse from the point of view of an investor;
without the prior approval of the Underwriters a public statement is made by
the Company in relation to the Offer, the issue of Shares, or the Prospectus;
any information supplied at any time by the Company or any person on its
behalf to the Underwriters in respect of any aspect of the Offer or the issue of
Shares or the affairs of the Company or ePAT is or becomes misleading or
deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive;
(xxiii)
the official quotation is qualified or conditional;
(xxiv)
any new, or any major change in, existing, monetary, taxation, exchange or
fiscal policy or budget is announced, proposed or introduced, into or adopted
by the federal or any state or territory Parliament or by the Reserve Bank of
Australia;
139
(xxv)
(xxvi)
a share capital reduction or consolidation occurs, or an alteration in capital
structure, occurs, other than as disclosed in the Prospectus;
the Company or a subsidiary suspends payment of its debts generally, or
experiences an event of insolvency, or a judgment over $25,000 is obtained
against the Company or a subsidiary and is not set aside or satisfied within 7
days;
(xxvii)
litigation, arbitration, administrative or industrial proceedings are commenced
or threatened against the Company or a subsidiary after the date of the
Underwriting Agreement;
(xxviii) there is a change in the composition of the Board or a change in the senior
management of the Company before Completion without the prior written
consent of the Underwriters;
(xxix)
there is a material change in the major or controlling shareholdings of the
Company or a subsidiary, or a takeover offer or scheme of arrangement
pursuant to Chapter 5 or 6 of the Corporations Act is publicly announced in
relation to a subsidiary of the Company;
(xxx) more than 3 business days’ delay in any specified date in the timetable;
(xxxi)
(xxxii)
a force majeure affecting the Company's business or any obligation under the
Underwriting Agreement lasting in excess of 7 days;
the Company or ePAT passes or takes any steps to pass a resolution under
section 254N, section 257A or section 260B of the Corporations Act or a
resolution to amend its constitution without the prior written consent of the
Underwriters;
(xxxiii) any of the material contracts are terminated or substantially modified;
(xxxiv) any person is appointed under any legislation in respect of companies to
investigate the affairs of the Company or a subsidiary;
(xxxv) a suspension or material limitation in trading generally on ASX occurs or any
material adverse change or disruption occurs in the existing financial markets,
political or economic conditions of Australia, Japan, the United Kingdom, the
United States of America or other international financial markets; or
(d)
Indemnity
The Underwriting Agreement contains a standard indemnity by Company to the
Underwriters for losses in respect of the Offer, non-compliance with the Listing Rules,
the Prospectus and accompanying documents, announcements made with the
Company’s consent or any breach by the Company of the Underwriting Agreement.
12.11  Lead Manager Agreement between the Company and Patersons Securities Limited
On 11 August 2016, the Company and the Lead Manager entered into an agreement pursuant 
to which the Lead Manager would provide lead management, corporate advisory and Capital 
Raising services, in return for a success fee of $100,000, a lead management fee of 1.5% of the 
gross amount raised in the Capital Raising, and a selling fee of 4.5% of the gross amount of 
capital raised in the Capital Raising, in excess of the amount underwritten under the
140
Underwriting Agreement (which is governed by the Underwriting Agreement summarised in 
Section 12.11.
12.12  The Company Constitution
The Constitution of the Company is a contract between the Company and each member, the 
Company and each Director and Company Secretary, and between a member and each other 
member pursuant to section 140 of the Corporations Act. Investors who take Shares under the 
Offer will become bound by the Constitution of the Company and must agree to observe and 
perform the provisions thereunder and any regulations or by-laws which may be made.
The rights attaching to ownership of the Shares arise from a combination of the Constitution, 
the Listing Rules, the Corporations Act and general law.
A brief summary of certain provisions of the Constitution and the significant rights attaching to 
Shares is set out below. This summary is not exhaustive and does not constitute a definitive 
statement of the rights and liabilities of Shareholders. The summary assumes that MinQuest is 
re-admitted to the official list of ASX. The Constitution may be inspected during normal 
business hours at the registered address of MinQuest Limited.
Shares
The Constitution empowers the Company to issue Shares as and when the Directors 
determine, on terms the Directors consider appropriate, subject to the Corporations Act, ASX 
Listing Rules, and ASX Settlement Operating Rules.
Alteration of rights
The Constitution only permits the alteration of rights and restrictions attaching to any class of 
shares (unless provided by the terms of issue of the shares of that class), by the written 
consent of members with at least three-quarters of the votes in that class, or by special 
resolution passed at a separate meeting of the holders of shares of that class.
Share transfers
Shares may be transferred by a member in any manner required or permitted by the Listing 
Rules or the ASX Settlement Operating Rules and by any instrument in writing in any usual or 
common form or in any other form that the Directors approve. Except in the case of a proper 
Securities Clearing House (SCH) transfer, the Directors may refuse to register a transfer of 
securities:
•
•
•
•
on which stamp duty is payable but unpaid;
if the registration of the transfer would result in a contravention of or failure to
observe the provisions of any applicable law or the Listing Rules;
if the shares are not fully paid or the Company has a lien on the shares; or
in circumstances where the Listing Rules permit the Company to do so.
Meetings
Each Shareholder of the Company is entitled to receive notice of and attend any general 
meeting of the Company. The quorum for a valid meeting is 2 Shareholders.
141
Voting rights
Each Share in the Company carries the right to cast one vote on a show of hands and on a poll, 
one vote for each fully paid Share held. Voting may be in person, by proxy, attorney or 
representative.
Dividends
The Directors may resolve to pay any dividend it thinks justified either as a final or interim 
dividend subject to the requirement of the Corporations Act.
Calls
The Shares issued under this Offer will be fully paid Shares and the Company currently has no 
partly-paid shares on issue. If the Company does issue partly-paid shares in the future, 
Directors are empowered to make calls for unpaid monies on those shares, and if such 
amounts remain unpaid, the partly-paid shares may become subject to forfeiture. The 
Company also has a first and paramount lien or charge for unpaid calls, instalments and 
related interest and any amount it is legally required to pay in relation to a member’s shares.
No share certificates
Subject to the requirements of the Listing Rules and the Corporations Act, the Company need 
not issue Share certificates.
Winding-up
If the Company is wound up, the liquidator may, with the sanction of a special resolution of 
the Company, divide among the Members in kind the whole or any part of the property of the 
Company and may for that purpose set such value as the liquidator considers fair to the 
members or different classes of members or may vest any part of the assets of the Company 
in trustees on any trusts for the benefit of all or any of the contributories as the liquidator 
thinks fit.
12.13  Deeds of access, indemnity and insurance
The Company has entered into deeds of indemnity and access with each Director under which 
the Company agrees to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
indemnify the Directors against certain liabilities incurred while acting as a Director;
insure the Directors against certain risks to which the Directors are exposed as a
Director; and
grant to the Directors a right of access to certain records of the Company,
for a period of up to 7 years after the Director ceases to be a director of the Company. These 
deeds are in a usual form for documents of this nature.
142
13
13.1
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Substantial Shareholders
Based on information available to the Company, the following Shareholders (and their 
associates) will hold 5% or more of the total number of Shares on issue (on a post-
Consolidation basis) following completion of the Offers under this Prospectus.
As at the date of lodgement of this Prospectus, the Company’s current substantial 
shareholders are:
Shareholder 
Mr Robert Anthony Healy 
Mr Rodney James Wellstead 
Trindis Pty Ltd 
Mr Jeremy James Read 
Granzian Pty Ltd <The Ian Murie 
Super Fund A/C>
Shares Held 
 36,400,000 
22,318,805 
13,638,173 
 12,592,434
7,436,667
Voting Power
12.26% 
7.52% 
4.59% 
4.24%
2.51%
The table sets out alternative scenarios based on the minimum Capital Raising of $4,000,000 
and the maximum Capital Raising of $5,750,000 under this Prospectus:
Shareholder 
Buyers of Shares from 
Curtin University  
J&E Consulting Pty Ltd 
Kreshnik Hoti 
Mustafa Atee
Voting power assuming 
$4,000,000 capital raising
Undiluted
Fully diluted
Voting power assuming 
$5,750,000 capital raising 
Fully diluted
Undiluted
17.78%
14.67%
15.77%
13.28%
5.63% 
5.63% 
5.63%
4.65% 
4.65% 
4.65%
4.99% 
4.99% 
4.99%
4.20% 
4.20% 
4.20%
The buyers of the Curtin University shares in ePAT have not yet been determined and it is not 
yet known whether there will be a single buyer or multiple buyers who are not associates of 
each other.
13.2
Company tax status
The Company is taxed in Australia as a public company.
13.3
Corporate governance
Detailed below are the corporate governance practices that the Board has considered as 
appropriate for the Company. These practices have been adopted having regard to the 
Recommendations, the size and the nature of the Company and its business. Any departure 
from the Recommendations are disclosed by the Company annually in its annual report on an 
“if not, why not” basis.
143
13.4
Board responsibilities
The Board is responsible for guiding and monitoring the Company on behalf of Shareholders to 
whom they are accountable. The Board is responsible for the strategic direction, policies and 
procedures of the Company and establishing goals for management and the operation of the 
Company.
The Board has adopted a Board charter, which sets out requirements for the selection and re-
appointment of Directors, composition of the Board, the role of the Chairman and Board 
committees and Board performance review.
The primary responsibility of the Board is to represent and advance Shareholders’ interests, 
create value for shareholders and to protect the interests of all stakeholders. To fulfil this role, 
the Board is responsible for the overall corporate governance of the Company. The Board 
recognises the need for the Company to operate with the highest standards of behaviour and 
accountability.
The responsibilities of the Board include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
protection and enhancement of shareholder value;
formulation, review and approval of the objectives and strategic direction of the
Company;
monitoring the financial performance of the Company by reviewing and approving
budgets and monitoring results;
approving all significant business transactions including acquisitions, divestments and
capital expenditure;
ensuring that adequate internal control systems and procedures exist and that
compliance with these systems and procedures is maintained;
the identification of significant business risks and ensuring that such risks are
adequately managed;
the review of performance and remuneration of executive directors and key staff;
the establishment and maintenance of appropriate ethical standards; and
evaluating and, where appropriate, adopting with or without modification the
Recommendations.
The Company has considered the Recommendations as detailed by the ASX to determine an 
appropriate system of control and accountability to best fit its business and operations 
commensurate with these guidelines. The Company seeks to follow these Recommendations 
for ASX listed companies where appropriate for its size and operations. In cases where the 
Company determines it would be inappropriate to follow the principles because of its 
circumstances, the Company will provide reasons for not doing so in its Annual Report.
The Board will consider on an ongoing basis its corporate governance procedures and whether 
they are sufficient given the Company’s nature of operations and size. The corporate 
governance procedures are formally reviewed on an annual basis.
144
13.5
Board appointment and composition
Appointment of Directors requires notice in writing duly signed by the nominee giving their 
consent to the nomination and signing of their candidature for the office or the intention of 
such Shareholder to propose them. Each shareholder will be given notice of the nomination of 
each and every candidature for election.
Every year at the annual general meeting, one third of the Directors must retire from office. A 
retiring Director is eligible for re-election. The retiring Directors are those who have served 
longest in office since their last election. Only the Managing Director shall hold office for a 
period in excess of 3 years.
Each Director is entitled to receive notice of and to attend all general meetings and all 
separate general meetings of the holders of any class of shares in the Company and is entitled 
to speak at those meetings.
13.6
Risk Management
The Board determines the Company’s risk profile and is responsible for overseeing and 
approving risk management strategy and policies, internal compliance and internal controls.
The Company’s process of risk management and internal compliance and control includes 
continuously identifying and reacting to risks that might impact upon the achievement of the 
Company’s goals, formulating risk management strategies to manage identified risks and 
monitoring the performance of risk management systems and internal compliance and 
controls.
13.7  Audit Committee
It is an important priority for the Board to identify and manage the Company’s risks. The Audit 
Committee is responsible for assisting the Board to monitor and review the integrity of the 
financial reporting of the Company and matters of significance affecting financial reporting 
and compliance. The Board has adopted an Audit Committee Charter that outlines the 
composition of the Audit Committee and its responsibilities and authorities including:
(a)
(b)
reporting procedures and
oversight of the risk management system.
13.8  Diversity Policy
The Board has adopted a diversity policy to ensure that the Company encourages a culture 
that recognises and values diversity, treating all employees and consultants with fairness and 
respect. The Company is an equal opportunity employer and welcomes people from all 
backgrounds.
Diversity includes, but is not limited to, diversity in respect of gender, age, ethnicity, disability, 
marital or family status, religious or cultural background, sexual orientation and gender 
identity.
13.9
Securities Trading Policy
The Board has adopted a securities trading policy, under which Directors, officers, employees 
(and their associates) as well as contractors and consultants where appropriate (Restricted 
Persons) are restricted in dealing with the Company’s securities. The policy aims to:
145
(a)
(b)
(c)
inform all relevant persons of insider trading and tipping of non-public, price-sensitive
information;
establish guidelines in relation to dealings in the Shares; and
protect the Company and its reputation in the marketplace.
Restricted Persons must not, under any circumstances, deal in the Company’s securities or 
procure another person to do so, if they are in possession of inside information regarding the 
Company.
The policy also contains a prohibited period within which trading is prohibited except in 
exceptional circumstances and subject to obtaining prior written clearance before trading. 
Short term and speculative trading is strictly prohibited.
13.10  Shareholder communication policy
The Company is committed to regularly communicating with its Shareholders. It is also 
important for the Company to ensure that it complies with the law and ASX Listing Rules 
relating to continuous disclosure. The purpose of the policy is to set out the processes by 
which the Company will ensure that Shareholders are provided with appropriate information 
and facilities to allow them to exercise their rights effectively.
The policy includes:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the manner in which the Company will communicate with Shareholders before and
during its annual general meeting notices, including the distribution of its notice of
meeting;
that the annual report will provide Shareholders with a good understanding of the
Company’s activities, performance and position for the previous financial year and be
made available electronically on its website, although shareholders may also elect for
a printed copy;
the Company’s obligations regarding continuous disclosure; and
release of investor and analyst briefings when the Board deems appropriate.
The Company will make available all information electronically on its website wherever 
possible. This includes information on the Directors and senior executives, the Company’s 
corporate governance documents and policies, annual reports, ASX announcements and 
notices of meeting.
13.11  Code of Conduct Policy
The Code of Conduct sets out the general principles and standards which the Board, officers 
and employees are encouraged to adopt when dealing with each other, Shareholders, other 
stakeholders and the general community. The Company is to comply with all laws, customs 
and business practices where it operates. The Company will recognise the rights of individuals 
and create a culture of treating people fairly and with respect. In their dealings the Board, 
officers and employees will value integrity and will not engage in deceptive, coercive or 
misleading practices.
The Code of Conduct sets out directives for Directors, officers and employees relating to 
conflicts of interests, protection and use of the Company's assets and confidentiality. Where
146
the interests of associates, the personal interest of a Director or a Director’s family does or 
may conflict with those of the Company, it requires the Director to immediately disclose any 
conflict and either eliminate the conflict or manage such conflict in an appropriate and lawful 
manner.
13.12  Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
The Company’s accounting policies have been summarised in the Company’s financial 
information in Section 5.
13.13  Litigation and claims
The Directors are not aware of any litigation of a material nature instituted, pending or 
threatened involving the Company or ePAT or any subsidiary as at the date of this Prospectus.
13.14  Taxation implications
The acquisition and disposal of Shares in the Company will have tax consequences, which will 
differ depending on the individual financial affairs of each investor. All potential investors in 
the Company are urged to obtain independent financial advice about the consequences of 
acquiring Shares from a taxation viewpoint and generally.
To the maximum extent permitted by law, the Company, its officers and each of their 
respective advisors accept no liability and responsibility with respect to the taxation 
consequences of subscribing for Shares under this Prospectus.
13.15  Goods and services tax (GST)
Revenue, expenses and assets are recognised net of the amount of GST, except where the 
amount of GST incurred is not recoverable from the taxation authority. In these 
circumstances, the GST is recognised as part of the cost of acquisition of the asset or as part of 
the expense.
Receivables and payables are stated with the amount of GST included. The net amount of GST 
recoverable from, or payable to, the ATO is included as a current asset or liability in the 
balance sheet.
13.16  Stamp duty
No stamp duty is payable in respect of Shares or any Application for Shares.
13.17  Tax file number (TFN)
The Company’s tax file number is 918 955 812
13.18  Waivers and confirmations
The Company has been granted ASX for waivers in order to progress the transaction in keeping 
with key terms of the Share Sale and Purchase Agreement. The waivers enable:
(a)
(b)
the Deferred Consideration Shares to be issued after a 3 month period (from the time
of approval) and within a period of 12 months;
the Company to set issue the price of the Shares under the Prospectus and for future
Options to be less than 20 cents. This is in keeping and indicative of the share price of
the Company over the last 24 months.
147
13.19
Interests of named persons
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Prospectus:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
no person named in this Prospectus as performing a function in a professional,
advisory or other capacity in connection with the preparation or distribution of this
Prospectus has, or during the two years before the lodgement of this Prospectus with
ASIC, any interest in:
(i)
(ii)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
any property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in
connection with its formation or promotion of the Company or the Offer; or
(iii)
the Offer; and
no amount has been paid or agreed to be paid and no benefits has been given or
agreed to be given to any of those persons for services rendered by them in
connection with the formation or promotion of the Company or the Offer.
BDO Audit Pty Ltd has acted as independent accountants and has prepared the
Independent Limited Assurance Report which is included in Section 9 of this
Prospectus.  The Company estimates that it will pay BDO Audit Pty Ltd a total of
$22,500 (exclusive of GST) for these services.
Patersons Securities Limited has acted as the Lead Manager and Underwriter to the
Offer. They will be paid a management fee and a selling fee as set out in Section 12.11
of this Prospectus and an underwriting fee as set out in Section 12.10 of this
Prospectus. In addition, Patersons Securities Limited will receive, subject to
Shareholder approval at the Meeting, 22,500,000 Underwriter Options as set out in
Section 13.20 of this Prospectus.
RM Corporate Finance Pty Ltd has acted as the Underwriter to the Offer. They will be
paid an underwriting fee as set out in Section 12.10 of this Prospectus and, subject to
Shareholder approval at the Meeting, 22,500,000 Underwriter Options as set out in
Section 13.20 of this Prospectus.
GRT Lawyers has acted as the Company’s legal advisers in respect of the Listing. The
Company estimates that it will pay GRT Lawyers a total of $150,000 (exclusive of GST)
for these services.
Bellanhouse Legal has acted as ePAT’s legal advisers in respect of the Listing. ePAT
estimates that it will pay Bellanhouse Legal a total of $35,000 (exclusive of GST) for
these services.
Griffith Hack has acted as the Company’s Patent adviser in respect of the Offer and has
prepared the Patent Report, which is included in Section 8 of this Prospectus. The
Company estimates that it will pay Griffith Hack a total of $1,974 (exclusive of GST) for
these services.
QRC Solutions has acted as the Company’s regulatory adviser in respect of the Offer
and has prepared the Regulatory Report, which is included in Section 7 of this
Prospectus. The Company estimates that it will pay QRC Solutions a total of $2,000.00
(exclusive of GST) for these services.
148
(j)
Boardroom Pty Ltd has acted and acts as the Company’s share registry on an ongoing
basis and receives no additional fees in relation to this Prospectus.
13.20  Terms of Underwriter Options
The Underwriter Options are to be issued to parties advising the Company in relation to the 
ePAT Acquisition and the Capital Raising. 45,000,000 Underwriter Options are to be issued to 
the Underwriters, subject to Shareholder approval at the Meeting. The Underwriter Options 
entitle the holder to subscribe for Shares on the following terms and conditions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
each Underwriter Option gives the holder the right to subscribe for one Share;
the Underwriter Options will expire on the date that is three years after their issue
date – any Underwriter Option not exercised will lapse;
the amount payable upon exercise of each Underwriter Option will be equal one
hundred and twenty five percent (125%) of the price at which Shares are issued
pursuant to the Capital Raising ($0.025);
the Underwriter Options held by each holder may be exercised in whole or in part,
and if exercised in part, a minimum of 1,000 Underwriter Options must be exercised
on each occasion;
the holder of Underwriter Options holder may exercise the Underwriter Options by
lodging with the Company, before the Expiry Date:
(i)
(ii)
a written notice of exercise of Underwriter Options specifying the number of
Underwriter Options being exercised; and
a cheque or electronic funds transfer for the exercise price for the number of
Underwriter Options being exercised;
An exercise notice is only effective when the Company has received the full amount of
the exercise price in cleared funds.
Within 10 business days of receipt of the exercise notice accompanied by payment of
the exercise price, the Company will allot the number of Shares required under these
terms and conditions in respect of the number of Underwriter Options specified in the
exercise notice.
The Underwriter Options are freely transferrable.
All Shares allotted upon the exercise of Underwriter Options will upon allotment rank
pari passu in all respects with other Shares.
The Underwriter Options will not be listed.
If at any time the issued capital of the Company is reconstructed, all rights of an
Underwriter Option holder are to be changed in a manner consistent with the
Corporations Act and the Listing Rules at the time of the reconstruction.
There are no participating rights or entitlements inherent in the Underwriter Options
and the holders of Underwriter Options will not be entitled to participate in new
issues of capital offered to Shareholders without exercising the Options. The Company
will ensure that for the purposes of determining entitlements to any such issue, the
record date will be at least 3 business days after the issue is announced. This will give
149
holders of Underwriter Option the opportunity to exercise their Underwriter Options 
prior to the date for determining entitlements to participate in any such issue.
(m)
Subject to paragraph (l), an Underwriter Option does not confer the right to a change
in exercise price or a change in the number of underlying securities over which the
Underwriter Option can be exercised.
13.21  Consents to be named and disclaimers of responsibility
Each of the parties listed in this Section 13, to the maximum extent permitted by law, 
expressly disclaims all liabilities in respect of, makes no representations regarding and takes 
no responsibility for any statements in or omissions from this Prospectus, other than the 
reference to its name in the form and context in which it is named and a statement or report 
included in this Prospectus with its consent as specified below.
Each of the parties listed below have given and has not, before lodgement of this Prospectus 
with ASIC, withdrawn its written consent to the inclusion of the statements in this Prospectus 
that are specified below in the form and context in which the statements appear:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Patersons Securities Limited has given and has not, before lodgement of this Prospectus 
with ASIC, withdrawn its written consent to be named in this Prospectus as Lead 
Manager and Underwriter to the Offer in the form and context in which it is named; 
Patersons Securities Limited was not involved in the preparation of any part of this 
Prospectus and did not authorise or cause the issue of this Prospectus. Patersons 
Securities Limited makes no express or implied representation or warranty in relation 
to the Company, this Prospectus or the Offer and does not make any statement in this 
Prospectus, nor is any statement in it based on any statement made by Patersons 
Securities Limited. To the maximum extent permitted by law, Patersons Securities 
Limited expressly disclaims and takes no responsibility for any material in, or omission 
from, this Prospectus other than the reference to its name;
RM Corporate Finance Pty Ltd  has given, and at the time of lodgement of this 
Prospectus, has not withdrawn its consent to be named as Underwriter to the offer of 
securities under this Prospectus, in the form and context in which it is named. RM 
Corporate Finance Pty Ltd was not involved in the preparation of any part of this 
Prospectus and did not authorise or cause the issue of this Prospectus. RM Corporate 
Finance Pty Ltd makes no express or implied representation or warranty in relation to 
the Company, this Prospectus or the Offer and does not make any statement in this 
Prospectus, nor is any statement in it based on any statement made by RM Corporate 
Finance Pty Ltd. To the maximum extent permitted by law, RM Corporate Finance Ptyy 
Ltd expressly disclaims and takes no responsibility for any material in, or omission 
from, this Prospectus other than the reference to its name;
BDO Audit Pty Ltd has given and not withdrawn its consent to the inclusion in this 
Prospectus of its Independent Limited Assurance Report in the form and context in 
which it is included;
GRT Lawyers Pty Ltd has given and has not, before lodgement of this Prospectus with 
ASIC, withdrawn its written consent to be named in this Prospectus as Australian legal 
adviser to the Company in the form and context in which it is named;
150
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Bellanhouse Legal Pty Ltd has given and has not, before lodgement of this Prospectus
with ASIC, withdrawn its written consent to be named in this Prospectus as Australian
legal adviser to ePAT in the form and context in which it is named; and
Griffith Hack has given and has not, before lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC,
withdrawn its written consent to be named in this Prospectus as the Company’s
intellectual property adviser in the form and context in which it is named; and
QRC Solutions has given and has not, before lodgement of this Prospectus with ASIC,
withdrawn its written consent to be named in this Prospectus as regulatory adviser to
the Company in the form and context in which she is named; and
Boardroom Pty Ltd has given and has not, before lodgement of this Prospectus with
ASIC, withdrawn its written consent to be named in this Prospectus as the Share
Registry in the form and context in which it is named. Boardroom Pty Ltd has had no
involvement in the preparation of any part of this Prospectus other than being named
as Share Registry to the Company.
13.22
Interests of named persons
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Prospectus:
(a)
no person named in this Prospectus as performing a function in a professional,
advisory or other capacity in connection with the preparation or distribution of this
Prospectus has, or during the two years before the lodgement of this Prospectus with
ASIC, any interest in:
(i)
(ii)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
any property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in
connection with its formation or promotion of the Company or the Offer; or
(iii)
the Offer; and
(b)
no amount has been paid or agreed to be paid and no benefits has been given or
agreed to be given to any of those persons for services rendered by them in
connection with the formation or promotion of the Company or the Offer.
13.23  Costs of the Offer
The costs of the Offer are set out in the table below.
These costs will be borne by the Company from the proceeds of the Interim Raising Notes and 
the proceeds of the Offer and include ASX and ASIC fees, legal fees, accounting fees, share 
registry fees, stamp duties, corporate advisory fees, printing costs, fees payable to the Lead 
Manager and other miscellaneous expenses and are summarised as follows:
Costs
ASX and ASIC fees 
Professional fees, postage and printing 
Lead Manager and Underwriter fees 
 Total
$4,000,000 Capital
Raising
$5,750,000 Capital
Raising
$71,500 
$272,250 
$340,000 
$683,750
$73,300 
$272,250 
$445,000 
$790,000
151
13.24  Continuous disclosure obligations
The Company is, and following re-admission to the official list of the ASX, the Company will 
continue to be a “disclosing entity” (as defined in s. 111AC of the Corporations Act) and, as 
such, is and will be subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations. Specifically, like all 
listed entities, the Company will be required to continuously disclose any information it has to 
the market which a reasonable person would expect to have a material effect on the price of 
the value of the Company’s securities.
Price sensitive information will be publicly released through ASX before it is disclosed to 
Shareholders and other market participants. Distribution of other information to Shareholders 
and market participants will be managed through disclosure to the ASX. In addition, the 
Company will post this information on its website after the ASX confirms an announcement 
has been made, with the aim of making the information readily accessible to the widest 
audience.
13.25  Photographs and diagrams
Photographs and diagrams used in this Prospectus that do not have descriptions are for 
illustration only and should not be interpreted to mean that any person shown in them 
endorses this Prospectus or its contents or that the assets shown in them are owned by the 
Company unless otherwise stated. Diagrams used in this Prospectus are illustrative only and 
may not be drawn to scale. Unless otherwise indicated all data contained in charts, graphs and 
tables is based on information available at the date of this Prospectus.
13.26
International offer restrictions
This document does not constitute an offer of Shares of the Company in any jurisdiction in 
which it would be unlawful. Shares may not be offered or sold in any country outside Australia 
except to the extent permitted below.
United States
This document may not be released or distributed in the United States. This document does 
not constitute an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy, securities in the United 
States. Any securities described in this document have not been, and will not be, registered 
under the US Securities Act of 1933 and may not be offered or sold in the United States except 
in transactions exempt from, or not subject to, the registration requirements under the US 
Securities Act and applicable US state securities laws.
Hong Kong
This document has not been, and will not be, registered as a prospectus under the Companies 
Ordinance (Cap. 32) of Hong Kong (Companies Ordinance), nor has it been authorised by the 
Securities and Futures Commission in Hong Kong pursuant to the Securities and Futures 
Ordinance (Cap. 571) of the Laws of Hong Kong (SFO). No action has been taken in Hong Kong 
to authorise or register this document or to permit the distribution of this document or any 
documents issued in connection with it. Accordingly, the Shares have not been and will not be 
offered or sold in Hong Kong other than to "professional investors" (as defined in the SFO).
No advertisement, invitation or document relating to the Shares has been or will be issued, or 
has been or will be in the possession of any person for the purpose of issue, in Hong Kong or 
elsewhere that is directed at, or the contents of which are likely to be accessed or read by, the 
public of Hong Kong (except if permitted to do so under the securities laws of Hong Kong)
152
other than with respect to Shares that are or are intended to be disposed of only to persons 
outside Hong Kong or only to professional investors (as defined in the SFO and any rules made 
under that ordinance). No person allotted Shares may sell, or offer to sell, such securities in 
circumstances that amount to an offer to the public in Hong Kong within six months following 
the date of issue of such securities.
The contents of this document have not been reviewed by any Hong Kong regulatory 
authority. You are advised to exercise caution in relation to the offer. If you are in doubt about 
any contents of this document, you should obtain independent professional advice.
Singapore
This document and any other materials relating to the Shares have not been, and will not be, 
lodged or registered as a prospectus in Singapore with the Monetary Authority of Singapore. 
Accordingly, this document and any other document or materials in connection with the offer 
or sale, or invitation for subscription or purchase, of Shares, may not be issued, circulated or 
distributed, nor may the Shares be offered or sold, or be made the subject of an invitation for 
subscription or purchase, whether directly or indirectly, to persons in Singapore except 
pursuant to and in accordance with exemptions in Subdivision (4) Division 1, Part XIII of the 
Securities and Futures Act, Chapter 289 of Singapore (SFA), or as otherwise pursuant to, and in 
accordance with the conditions of any other applicable provisions of the SFA.
This document has been given to you on the basis that you are (i) an existing holder of the 
Company’s shares, (ii) an "institutional investor" (as defined in the SFA) or (iii) a "relevant 
person" (as defined in section 275(2) of the SFA). In the event that you are not an investor 
falling within any of the categories set out above, please return this document immediately. 
You may not forward or circulate this document to any other person in Singapore.
Any offer is not made to you with a view to the Shares being subsequently offered for sale to 
any other party. There are on-sale restrictions in Singapore that may be applicable to investors 
who acquire Shares. As such, investors are advised to acquaint themselves with the SFA 
provisions relating to resale restrictions in Singapore and comply accordingly.
New Zealand
This document has not been registered, filed with or approved by any New Zealand regulatory 
authority under the Financial Markets Conduct Act 2013 (FMC Act).
Shares may not be offered or sold in New Zealand (or allotted with a view to being offered for 
sale in New Zealand) other than to a person who:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
is an investment business;
meets the investment activity criteria specified in clause 38 of Schedule 1 of the FMC
Act;
is large within the meaning of clause 39 of Schedule 1 of the FMC Act;
is a government agency; or
subscribes, or has subscribed, for securities that have a minimum amount payable of
at least NZ$750,000.
153
13.27  Forward-looking statements
This Prospectus may contain forward-looking statements which are identified by words such 
as ‘may’, ‘could’, ‘believes’, ‘estimates’, ‘targets’, ‘expects’, ‘intends’, or other similar words 
that involve risks and uncertainties.
Such statements are based on an assessment of present economic and operating conditions, 
and on a number of assumptions regarding future events and actions that, as at the date of 
this Prospectus, are expected to take place. Such forward-looking statements are not 
guarantees of future performance and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, 
assumptions and other important factors, many of which are beyond the control of the 
Company, the Directors and senior management.
The Company cannot and does not give any assurance that the results, performance or 
achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in this 
Prospectus will actually occur and investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on 
these forward-looking statements.
The Company has no intention to update or revise forward-looking statements, or to publish 
prospective financial information in the future, regardless of whether new information, future 
events or other factors affect the information contained in this Prospectus, except where 
required by law.
Any forward-looking statements are subject to various risk factors that could cause actual 
results to differ materially from the results expressed or anticipated in these statements.  
These risk factors are set out in Section 6 of this Prospectus.
13.28  No overseas registration
This Prospectus does not constitute an offer or invitation in any place in which, or to any 
person to whom, it would not be lawful to make such an offer or invitation. No action has 
been taken to register or qualify the Shares or the Offer, or to otherwise permit a public 
offering of Shares, in any jurisdiction outside Australia. The distribution of this Prospectus 
(including in electronic form) outside Australia may be restricted by law and persons who 
come into possession of this Prospectus outside Australia should seek advice and observe any 
such restrictions. Any failure to comply with such restrictions may constitute a violation of the 
applicable securities laws. This Prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell, or a solicitation 
of an offer to buy, securities in the United States. In particular, the Shares have not been, and 
will not be, registered under the US Securities Act 1933 (US Securities Act), and may not be 
offered or sold in the United States.
13.29  Further information or assistance
If you require assistance to complete the Application Form, require additional copies of this 
Prospectus, have any questions in relation to the Offer or you are uncertain as to whether 
obtaining Shares in the Company is a suitable investment for you, you should seek 
professional advice from your stockbroker, lawyer, accountant or other professional adviser.
13.30  Governing Law
This Prospectus and the contracts that arise from the acceptance of the Applications are 
governed by the laws applicable in Queensland and each Applicant submits to the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the courts of Queensland.
154
13.31 Directors’ responsibility and consents

Each of the Directors and proposed Directors has consented to the Iodgement of this
Prospectus in accordance with section 720 of the Corporations Act and has not withdrawn that
consent.
Dated: 25 August 2016‘

‘ .__;_;»;;,_\

/

/ hairman
MinQuest Limited
155


14
GLOSSARY
In this Prospectus the following expressions have the meanings set out below:
Term 
$ 
AASB 
ABN 
Acquisition
Acquisition 
Resolutions 
Underwriter 
Options
Applicant 
Application 
Application Form
Application 
Monies 
ASIC 
ASX
ASX Listing Rules 
ASX Settlement 
Operating Rules 
Board 
CHESS 
Closing Date
Company or 
MinQuest Limited 
Conditions 
Precedent 
Consolidation
Meaning 
Australian dollars. 
Australian Accounting Standards Board. 
Australian Business Number. 
the acquisition of ePAT by the Company under the SSPA (the details 
of which are summarised in Sections 1.2, 2.1, 2.4 and 12.3). 
all of the proposed Shareholder resolutions set out in Section 2, 
which Shareholders have been invited to approve at the Meeting. 
Options to be issued to the Lead Manager and/or its nominees 
with an exercise price of $0.025 per Option and an expiry date 
3 years after the date of issue. 
a person who submits an Application Form. 
an application for Shares by submitting an Application Form. 
an application form for Shares attached to or accompanying this 
Prospectus. 
the Offer Price multiplied by the number of Shares applied for.
Australian Securities & Investments Commission. 
ASX Limited ACN 008 624 691 or the securities exchange operated by 
it (as the case requires). 
the official rules of the ASX. 
the operating rules of ASX Settlement Pty Ltd ACN 008 504 532.
the board of Directors of the Company. 
Clearing House Electronics Sub-register System. 
means the date by which valid Applications must be received by the 
Share Registry being 5:00pm AEST 5 September 2016 or such other 
date and time determined by the Board. 
MinQuest Limited ACN 146 035 127.
the conditions precedent to the Acquisition, as set out in the SSPA 
and summarised in Section 2.4. 
consolidation of the Company’s Shares issued as at the date of this 
Prospectus on a 7:4 basis.
156
Completion of the 
Acquisition 
Consideration 
Shares 
Constitution 
Consultancy 
Agreement 
Corporations Act 
Curtin University 
Deferred 
Consideration 
Shares 
Director 
EBIT 
EBITDA
End User
ePAT
ePAT App
ePAT App for 
Children
ePAT App for 
Dementia
ePAT 
Technologies 
FDA 
Griffith Hack
GST
completion under the SSPA.
the Shares to be issued to ePAT shareholders at Completion of the 
Acquisition pursuant to the SSPA. 
the constitution of the Company. 
the consultancy agreement between Dr Kreshnik Hoti and ePAT 
dated 19 August 2016. 
the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth). 
Curtin University of Technology ABN 99 143 842 569 
$1,000,000 worth of Shares to be issued to ePAT shareholders under 
the SSPA if a Milestone is met within 12 months after Completion of 
the Acquisition. 
a director of the Company. 
earnings before interest and tax. 
earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation.
in the context of a Milestone, means any one of the following:
(a)
one or more residential aged care facility owners
managing in total in excess of 150 beds;
(b)
(c)
one or more medical clinics which service in total in
excess of 2,000 patients per year;
a metropolitan hospital with in excess of 200 beds.
Electronic Pain Assessment Technologies (EPAT) Pty Ltd ACN 600 
520 134. 
medical pain assessment applications developed by ePAT for use on 
smartphones, tablets or mobile devices, including the ePAT App for 
Dementia and the ePAT Apps for Children. 
the versions of the medical pain assessment applications developed 
or to be developed by ePAT for use on smartphones, tablets or 
mobile devices, which are specialised for children. 
a version of the medical pain assessment applications developed by 
ePAT for use on smartphones, tablets or mobile devices, which is 
specialised for persons with dementia. 
ePAT Technologies Limited, the new name planned for the Company.
United States Food and Drug Administration. 
The Trustee for Griffith Hack Unit Trust trading as Griffith Hack ABN 
35 026 846 389. 
Goods and Services Tax.
157
Independent 
Limited Assurance 
Report 
Interim Raising 
Notes
Lead Manager 
Listing
Listing Rules 
Magna 
Meeting
Milestone
the report prepared by BDO Audit Pty Ltd ACN 134 022 870 in Section 
9.
the 1,050,000 convertible notes issued by the Company (comprising 
750,000 convertible notes issued on 22 April 2016, and 300,000 
convertible notes issued on 18 July 2016) at a face value of $1 and 
expiry date of 31 December 2016. 
Patersons Securities Limited ACN 008 896 311. 
the re-admission of the Company to the official list of the ASX and 
the re-quotation of its Shares. 
the listing rules of the ASX. 
Magna Equities II LLC. 
the extraordinary general meeting of the Company to be held on 31 
August 2016. 
the achievement, within 12 months after Completion of the 
Acquisition, of either of the milestones under the SSPA, namely: 
Regulatory Approval having been received to enable
commercial use of the ePAT App in Australia, the
United States of America or Europe; or
(a)
(b)
the execution of a binding licence agreement to
licence the ePAT App to any End User or a global
distribution partner with multiple End Users as
existing customers.
MinQuest 
New Shares
Noteholder 
Options
Offer 
Offers 
Offer Period
Offer Price 
Official List 
Official Quotation 
Opening Date 
Option
MinQuest Limited ACN 146 035 127. 
Shares issued by the Company under this Prospectus, being a 
minimum of 200,000,000 Shares and a maximum of 287,500,000 
Shares, at $0.02 per Share, as part of the Offer. 
the 52,500,000 note Options issued to the holders of Interim Raising 
Notes at an exercise price equal to the capital price, expiring on 11 
August 2018. (For clarification, this quantity of note Options is 
calculated on a post-Consolidation basis). 
the offer of Shares under this Prospectus. 
the Offer and the Underwriter Options Offer. 
the period commencing on the Opening Date and ending on the 
Closing Date. 
$0.02 per Share. 
the official list of the ASX. 
the re-quotation of Shares on ASX. 
the date the Offer opens being 25 August 2016. 
an option in the Company.
158
Prospectus
QRC Solutions
this document (including the electronic form of the prospectus) and 
any supplementary or replacement prospectus in relation to this 
document. 
Biotech Recruitment Consultants Pty Ltd, trading as QRC Solutions 
ABN 41 109 700.
Recommendations  ASX Corporate Governance Principles and Recommendations. 
Regulatory 
Approval
for the purpose of a Milestone, means approval by the Therapeutic 
Goods Administration of Australia, Food and Drug Administration of 
the United States, or a CE mark from the relevant authority in 
Europe. 
means the agreement of that name entered into by ePAT and Curtin 
University on 29 July 2016. 
fully paid ordinary share(s) in the Company. 
a holder of a Share in the Company. 
Boardroom Pty Ltd. 
share purchase agreement dated 25 July 2016 between the Company 
and Electronic Pain Assessment Technologies (EPAT) Pty Ltd ACN 600 
520 134, Curtin University , Sobol Capital Pty Ltd ACN 126 969 800, J 
& E Consulting Pty Ltd ACN 100 122 638, Kreshnik Hoti, Mustafa 
Abdul Wahed Atee, Kevin Fynn and Husif Nominees Pty Ltd ACN 070 
563 192. 
Department of Health’s Therapeutic Goods Administration. 
each of Patersons Securities Limited ABN 69 008 896 311 and RM 
Corporate Finance Pty Limited ABN 50 108 084 386. 
the agreement between the Company and the Underwriters dated 
24 August 2016 which obliges the Underwriters to underwrite the 
Capital Raising under this Prospectus. 
the Options to be issued to the Underwriters pursuant to the 
Underwriting Agreement.
Research Services 
Agreement 
Share(s) 
Shareholder 
Share Registry 
SSPA
TGA 
Underwriter
Underwriting 
Agreement
Underwriter 
Options
159
15
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
Current Board 
Frank Terranova 
Jeremy Read  
Paul Niardone  
Adam Davey
Non-Executive Chairman  
Managing Director   
Non-Executive Director   
Non-Executive Director
Proposed Board 
John Murray 
Philip Daffas 
Ross Harricks 
Adam Davey
Non-Executive Chairman  
Managing Director 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director
Current Company Secretary 
Stephen Kelly
Proposed Company Secretary 
Ian Hobson
Auditor to ePAT 
RSM Australia Partners 
85 St Georges Terrace 
Perth WA 6000
ePAT Legal Advisor 
Bellanhouse Legal  
11 Ventnor Avenue 
West Perth WA 6005
Intellectual Property - Patent Expert 
Griffith Hack Patent & Trade Mark Attorneys 
Level 19, 109 St Georges Terrace  
Perth WA 6000
Regulatory Expert 
QRC Solutions 
PO Box 610 
West Perth WA 6872
Websites 
www.minquest.com.au 
www.epat.com.au
Company Auditor 
BDO Audit Pty Ltd 
Level  10, 12 Creek Street 
Brisbane QLD 4000
Company Legal Advisor 
GRT Lawyers 
Level 2, 400 Queen Street 
Brisbane QLD 4000
Lead Manager and Underwriter 
Patersons Securities Limited 
Level 23, Exchange Tower 
2 The Esplanade 
Perth WA 6000
Underwriter 
RM Corporate Finance Pty Ltd 
Level 1, 143 Hay Street 
Subiaco WA 6008
MinQuest Offer Information Line 
(07) 3511 6570 (within Australia)
++ 61 7 3511 6570 (outside Australia)
from 8.30am to 5.30pm (Brisbane time)
Monday to Friday
Share Registry* 
Boardroom Pty Limited 
Grosvenor Place, Level 12 
225 George Street 
Sydney NSW 2000
ASX Code 
Current: MNQ 
Future: EPT
* This entity is included for information purposes only. It has not been involved in the
preparation of this Prospectus.
160
PIN CHEQUE(S) HERE 
MinQuest Limited 
 
 Application form
Fill out this Application form if you want to apply for shares in MinQuest Limited 
 
 

Read the Prospectus dated 25 August 2016 
Follow the instructions to complete this Application form (see reverse). 
Print clearly in capital letters using black or blue pen.
Broker Reference – Stamp Only
Broker Code
Advisor Code
A
Number of shares you are applying for
x $0.02 per share =
B   
Total amount payable
Minimum of 100,000 shares ($2,000.00) then in multiplies of 25,000 shares ($500.00) to be applied for.
C  Write the name(s) you wish to register the units in (see reverse for instructions)
Applicant 1
Name of Applicant 2 or < Account Name>
Name of Applicant 3 or < Account Name>
D Write your postal address here
Number / Street
Suburb/Town
State
Postcode
E  CHESS Participant – Holder Identification Number
F  Enter your Tax File Number(s), ABN, or exemption category
Important please note if the name & address details above in 
sections C & D do not match exactly with your registration 
details held at CHESS, any Securities issued as a result of 
your application will be held on the Issuer Sponsored 
subregister.
Applicant #1
Applicant #3
Applicant #2
G  Cheque payment details
Please enter details of the cheque(s) that accompany this application.
Name of drawer of cheque
Cheque No.
BSB No.
Account No.
Cheque Amount A$
H  Contact telephone number (daytime/work/mobile)
I    Email address
By submitting this Application form, I/We declare that this Application is completed and lodged according to the instructions  on the reverse 
of the Application form and declare that all details and statements made by me/us are compete and accurate.  I/We agree to be bound by 
the constitution of MinQuest Limited. I/We represent, warrant and undertake to the Company that our subscription for the above shares will 
not cause the Company or me/us to violate the laws of Australia or any other jurisdiction which may be applicable to this subscription for 
shares in the Company.
GUIDE TO THE APPLICATION FORM
Please complete all relevant sections of the appropriate Application Form using BLOCK LETTERS.  
These instructions are cross-referenced to each section of the Application Form.
Instructions
A.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
If  applying  for  Shares  insert  the  number  of  Shares  for  which  you  wish  to  subscribe  at  Item  A  (not  less  than  100,000
shares then in multiplies of 25,000) Multiply by $0.02 AUD to calculate the total for Shares and enter the $amount at B.
Write your full name.  Initials are not acceptable for first names.
Enter your postal address for all correspondence.  All communications to you from MinQuest Limited will be mailed to the
person(s) and address as shown.  For joint Applicants, only one address can be entered.
If  you  are  sponsored  in  CHESS  by  a  stockbroker  or  other  CHESS  participant,  you  may  enter  your  CHESS  HIN  if  you
would like the allocation to be directed to your HIN.
NB: your registration details provided must match your CHESS account exactly.
Enter your Australian tax file number ("TFN") or ABN or exemption category, if you are an Australian resident.  Where
applicable,  please  enter  the  TFN  /ABN  of  each  joint  Applicant.    Collection  of  TFN's  is  authorised  by  taxation  laws.
Quotation of your TFN is not compulsory and will not affect your Application Form.
Complete cheque details as requested.  Make your cheque payable to MinQuest Limited in Australian currency, cross it
and  mark  it  "Not  Negotiable".  Cheques  must  be  made  in  Australian  currency,  and  cheques  must  be  drawn  on  an
Australian Bank.
Enter your contact details so we may contact you regarding your Application Form or Application Monies.
Enter  your  email  address  so  we  may  contact  you  regarding  your  Application  Form  or  Application  Monies  or  other
correspondence.
CORRECT FORMS OF REGISTRABLE TITLE
Note  that  ONLY  legal  entities  can  hold  the  Shares.    The  Application  must  be  in  the  name  of  a  natural  person(s),  companies  or 
other legal entities acceptable to MinQuest Limited.  At least one full given name and surname is required for each natural person.
Examples of the correct form of registrable title are set out below.
Type of Investor
Correct Form of Registrable Title
Incorrect Form of Registrable Title
Trusts
Deceased Estates
Partnerships
Mr John David Smith 
<J D Smith Family A/C> 
Mr Michael Peter Smith 
<Est Lte John Smith A/C> 
Mr John David Smith & Mr Ian Lee Smith
Clubs/Unincorporated Bodies
Superannuation Funds
Mr John David Smith 
<Smith Investment A/C> 
Mr John Smith & Mrs Mary Smith 
<Smith Family Super Fund A/C>
Lodgement
John Smith Family Trust
John Smith (deceased)
John Smith & Son
Smith Investment Club
John  &  Mary  Smith  Superannuation 
Fund
Mail your completed Application Form with cheque(s) attached to the following address:
Delivery and mailing address:
MinQuest Limited 
1/47 Park Road 
Milton QLD 4064
It is not necessary to sign or otherwise execute the Application Form.
Privacy Statement:  The personal information you provide on this form is collected by MinQuest Limited for the purpose of 
maintaining registers of securityholders, facilitating distribution payments and other corporate actions and communications, 
including marketing material.  You may elect not to receive marketing material by contacting us using the details provided above. 
We may be required to collect your personal information under the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) and ASX Settlement Operating 
Rules. We may disclose your personal information to our related bodies corporate and to other individuals or companies who assist 
us in supplying our services or who perform functions on our behalf or to third parties where related to our administration of your 
securityholding, or as otherwise required or authorised by law. Some of these recipients may be located outside Australia. For 
further details, including how to access and correct your personal information, and information on our privacy complaints handling 
procedure, please write to us at 1/47 Park Rd, Milton Qld 4064.