
EX-99.2 3 caplcstactmergerannounce.htm EXHIBIT 99.2 caplcstactmergerannounce
CST Merger with ​ Couche-Tard ​ August 2016 ​ ​
Safe Harbor Statement ​ Statements contained in this presentation that state the Partnership’s or management’s expectations or predictions of the future ​ are forward-looking statements. The words
“believe,” “expect,” “should,” “intends,” “estimates,” “target” and other similar ​ expressions identify forward-looking statements. It is important to note that actual results could differ materially from those ​
projected in such forward-looking statements. For more information concerning factors that could cause actual results to differ ​ from those expressed or forecasted, see CrossAmerica’s Forms 10-Q or
Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange ​ Commission and available on CrossAmerica’s website at www.crossamericapartners.com. If any of these factors materialize, or if ​ our underlying
assumptions prove to be incorrect, actual results may vary significantly from what we projected. Any forward-​ looking statement you see or hear during this presentation reflects our current views as of the
date of this presentation with ​ respect to future events. We assume no obligation to publicly update or revise these forward-looking statements for any reason, ​ whether as a result of new information,
future events, or otherwise. ​ Important Additional Information ​ In connection with the proposed transaction, CST intends to file a proxy statement and other relevant documents concerning the ​ proposed
transaction with the SEC. The definitive proxy statement will be sent or given to CST stockholders and will contain ​ important information about the proposed transaction. INVESTORS AND SECURITY
HOLDERS ARE URGED TO READ CAREFULLY AND ​ IN THEIR ENTIRETY THE PROXY STATEMENT AND ANY OTHER RELEVANT DOCUMENTS FILED WITH THE SEC, AS WELL AS ANY ​
AMENDMENTS OR SUPPLEMENTS TO THOSE DOCUMENTS, WHEN THEY BECOME AVAILABLE. Investors and security holders will be ​ able to obtain a copy of the proxy statement as well as other
documents filed with the SEC free of charge at the SEC’s website at ​ http://www.sec.gov. In addition, the proxy statement, the SEC filings that will be incorporated by reference in the proxy statement ​
and the other documents filed with the SEC by CST may be obtained free of charge from CST’s Investor Relations page on its ​ corporate website at http://www.cstbrands.com. ​ Certain Information
Concerning Participants ​ CST and its directors, executive officers, and certain other members of management and employees may be deemed to be ​ participants in the solicitation of proxies from CST
stockholders in connection with the proposed transaction. Information about the ​ directors and executive officers of CST is set forth in CST’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2015 and ​ the proxy statement on Schedule 14A for CST’s 2015 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, which was filed with the SEC on April 29, ​ 2016. Additional information regarding participants in the
proxy solicitation may be obtained by reading the proxy statement ​ regarding the proposed transaction when it becomes available. ​ ​ ​ 2 ​ ​
Overview of Parties ​ • Alimentation Couche-Tard Inc. (“Couche-​ Tard”) ​ • Based in Laval, Quebec, Canada ​ • Largest independent convenience store ​ operator in North America in terms of ​ company-
operated stores ​ – 7,888 convenience stores, including 6,490 with ​ road transportation fuel dispensing ​ – 80,000 people employed throughout network ​ • Leader in convenience store and road ​
transportation fuel retail in Europe, with ​ presence in Scandinavian countries, Baltic ​ states and Ireland ​ – 2,659 sites, majority of which offer road ​ transportation fuel and convenience products ​ –
25,000 people employed throughout network ​ • Additional 1,500 stores operated by ​ independent operators in other countries ​ and territories ​ • Market Cap of approximately CAD $35 billion ​ – TSX:
ATD.A ATD.B ​ 3 ​ • CST Brands, Inc. (“CST”) ​ • Based in San Antonio, Texas ​ • One of the largest independent ​ retailers of motor fuels and ​ convenience merchandise in ​ North America ​ – Over 2,000
locations throughout ​ the Southwestern United States, ​ Georgia, Florida, New York and ​ Eastern Canada ​ – Employing over 14,000 team ​ members ​ • Owns the general partner of ​ CrossAmerica
Partners LP ​ • Market Cap of USD $3.6 billion ​ – NYSE: CST ​ • CrossAmerica Partners LP ​ (“CrossAmerica”) ​ • Based in Allentown, Pennsylvania ​ • Leading wholesale distributor of ​ motor fuels and lessor
of real estate ​ used in distribution of motor fuels ​ – With a geographic footprint covering 29 ​ states, distributes fuel to more than ​ 1,180 locations and owns or leases more ​ than 800 sites ​ • Master
Limited Partnership whose ​ general partners is owned by CST ​ Brands, Inc. ​ • Market Cap of USD $841 million ​ – NYSE: CAPL ​ Note: Market Cap is as of August 19, 2016 ​ ​
Transaction Overview ​ 4 ​ Operating ​ Subsidiaries ​ 56% ​ Limited Partner ​ Interest ​ CrossAmerica ​ Partners LP ​ NYSE: CAPL ​ Public ​ Unitholders ​ Joseph Topper ​ & Affiliates ​ Circle K Stores Inc. ​ Former
CST ​ Canadian ​ Operations* ​ Former CST ​ US Operations ​ CrossAmerica ​ General Partner ​ Alimentation ​ Couche-Tard Inc. ​ TSX: ATD.A ATD.B ​ 25% ​ Limited Partner ​ Interest ​ 100% ​ Ownership Interest
​ 100% Ownership Interest ​ 19% Limited ​ Partner Interest ​ 100% IDR ​ Interest ​ 100% ​ Ownership Interest ​ 100% ​ General Partner Interest ​ * - Couche-Tard entered into an agreement with another party
to sell certain Canadian assets of CST after the merger. ​ • Couche-Tard subsidiary, Circle K Stores Inc, to ​ acquire CST in early 2017 ​ – Includes assets related to CrossAmerica ​ • Organizational
Relationship Upon Closing ​ – Circle K controls the general partner of CrossAmerica through ​ its 100% ownership of the general partner interest ​ – Circle K owns 19% of CrossAmerica limited partner, or ​
common units ​ – Circle K owns 100% of CrossAmerica Incentive Distribution ​ Rights (IDRs) ​ – CrossAmerica owns 17.5% interest in CST Fuel Supply ​ ​ 17.5% Interest in ​ CST Fuel Supply ​ Note: This
organizational chart represents the structure being acquired upon closing and is subject to change. ​ ​
Strategic Benefit to CAPL ​ • Provides continuity with a sponsor whose management culture is aligned with ​ CrossAmerica ​ – Disciplined operator with best practices in acquisitions and integration ​ –
Strong and consistent financial performance throughout all economic cycles ​ – Heightened focus on growing Free Cash Flow, with particular expertise in cost management ​ – Well capitalized with solid
balance sheet ​ – Well positioned to lead further consolidation in fragmented industry ​ • Scale and global reach provides additional operational benefits ​ – Further strengthens relationship with many of
our key suppliers ​ – Many turnkey branding and franchise programs that can ​ complement our dealer offerings ​ • Supports dealer health, which ​ impacts fuel volume growth and ​ additional rental income
potential ​ • Wholesale operations with ​ complementary geographic reach ​ ​ 5 ​ ​
Combined Wholesale ​ 6 ​ West Coast Region ​ ​ Couche-Tard ​ CrossAmerica ​ CODO ​ 98 ​ 0 ​ DODO ​ 224 ​ 0 ​ Arizona Region ​ ​ Couche-Tard ​ CrossAmerica ​ CODO ​ 0 ​ 0 ​ DODO ​ 0 ​ 1 ​ Southwest Region ​ ​
Couche-Tard ​ CrossAmerica ​ CODO ​ 2 ​ 22 ​ DODO ​ 94 ​ 16 ​ Gulf Region ​ ​ Couche-Tard ​ CrossAmerica ​ CODO ​ 1 ​ 44 ​ DODO ​ 51 ​ 7 ​ Southeast Region ​ ​ Couche-Tard ​ CrossAmerica ​ CODO ​ 3 ​ 50 ​ DODO ​
15 ​ 5 ​ Florida Region ​ ​ Couche-Tard ​ CrossAmerica ​ CODO ​ 14 ​ 0 ​ DODO ​ 47 ​ 0 ​ South Atlantic Region ​ ​ Couche-Tard ​ CrossAmerica ​ CODO ​ 2 ​ 82 ​ DODO ​ 15 ​ 138 ​ Great Lakes Region ​ ​ Couche-Tard ​
CrossAmerica ​ CODO ​ 0 ​ 424 ​ DODO ​ 0 ​ 170 ​ Midwest Region ​ ​ Couche-Tard ​ CrossAmerica ​ CODO ​ 5 ​ 35 ​ DODO ​ 60 ​ 10 ​ Heartland Region ​ ​ Couche-Tard ​ CrossAmerica ​ CODO ​ 27 ​ 27 ​ DODO ​ 38 ​ 38
​ CODO: Company Owned Dealer Operated – Sites for which the real estate is controlled by Company (through ownership or lease agreements) and for which the stores (and/or the service stations) are ​
operated by an independent operator in exchange for rent and to which Company supplies road transportation fuel through supply contracts. Some of these sites are subject to a franchise ​ agreement,
licensing or other similar agreement. Includes Commission Agent locations at CrossAmerica. ​ DODO: Dealer Owned Dealer Operated – Sites controlled and operated by independent operators to which
Company supplies road transportation fuel through supply contracts. Some of these sites are ​ subject to a franchise agreement, licensing or other similar agreement. ​ Creates Leading Wholesale
Distributorship in US ​ CODO ​ 152 ​ 684 ​ DODO ​ 544 ​ 385 ​ ​