
S-4/A 1 forms4a.htm FORM S-4/A Xtra-Gold Resources Corp.: Form S-4 - Filed by newsfilecorp.com
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on September 28, 2012
Registration No. 333-183376
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C., 20549
Amendment No. 1
to
FORM S-4
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Nevada
(State or other jurisdiction or organization)
(Primary Standard Industrial Classification Code Number)
1040
91-1956240
(I.R.S. Employer Identification Number)
Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. 
360 Bay Street, Suite 301
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5H 2V6
416 366-4227
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant's principal executive offices)
Paul Zyla, President
Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. 
360 Bay Street, Suite 301
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5H 2V6
416 366-4227
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies of communications to:
Dennis H. Peterson
Peterson Law Professional Corporation
390 Bay Street, Suite 806
Toronto, Ontario Canada M5H 2Y2
416 777-6772
James M. Schneider, Esq.
Pearlman Schneider LLP
2200 Corporate Blvd. NW, Suite 210
Boca Raton, Florida 33431
561 362-9595
__________
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: As soon as practicable after this registration statement is declared
effective and at the effective time of the Continuation referred to herein.
If the securities being registered on this Form are being offered in connection with the formation of a holding company and there is compliance
with General Instruction G, check the following box. [  ]
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box and
list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. [  ]
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities
Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. [  ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting
company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange
Act.
Large accelerated filer
Non-accelerated filer
[  ]
[  ]
Accelerated filer
Smaller reporting company
[  ]
[X]
If applicable, place an “X” in the box to designate the appropriate rule provision relied upon in conducting this transaction:
Exchange Act Rule 13e-4(i) (Cross-Border Issuer Tender Offer) [  ] 
Exchange Act Rule 14d-1(d) (Cross-Border Third-Party Tender Offer) [  ]
ii
THE REGISTRANT HEREBY AMENDS THIS REGISTRATION STATEMENT ON SUCH DATE OR DATES AS MAY BE NECESSARY
TO DELAY ITS EFFECTIVE DATE UNTIL THE REGISTRANT SHALL FILE A FURTHER AMENDMENT WHICH SPECIFICALLY
STATES THAT THIS REGISTRATION STATEMENT SHALL THEREAFTER BECOME EFFECTIVE IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION
8(a) OF THE SECURITIES ACT, OR UNTIL THIS REGISTRATION STATEMENT SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE ON SUCH DATE AS
THE COMMISSION, ACTING PURSUANT TO SECTION 8(a), MAY DETERMINE.
iii
THE INFORMATION IN THIS PRELIMINARY PROXY STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS IS NOT COMPLETE AND MAY BE CHANGED. WE
MAY NOT OFFER OR SELL THESE SECURITIES UNTIL THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT FILED WITH THE SECURITIES AND
EXCHANGE COMMISSION IS EFFECTIVE. THIS PRELIMINARY PROXY STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS IS NOT AN OFFER TO SELL
THESE SECURITIES AND IT IS NOT SOLICITING AN OFFER TO BUY THESE SECURITIES IN ANY JURISDICTION WHERE THE
OFFER OR SALE IS NOT PERMITTED.
PRELIMINARY PROXY STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED SEPTEMBER 28, 2012.
__________
360 Bay Street, Suite 301
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5H 2V6
To the stockholders of Xtra-Gold Resources Corp.
This proxy statement/prospectus relates to a proposal to change the jurisdiction of incorporation of our company from Nevada to the British
Virgin Islands (the “Continuation”). The Continuation will be accomplished through the adoption by our stockholders of certain resolutions
and a plan of conversion (the “Plan of Conversion”) under Chapter 92A of the Nevada Revised Statutes (the “NRS”) which will authorize
our company to complete the Continuation. If we complete the Continuation, our company will be continued under the BVI Business
Companies Act, 2004 (the “BVI Act”) and will cease to be incorporated in Nevada and, as a result, will be governed by the BVI Act. If the
Continuation is completed, our company would still be called Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. but it would be a British Virgins Islands company,
which we sometimes refer to below and in in the remainder of this proxy statement/prospectus as “Xtra-Gold BVI”.
We are sending you this proxy statement/prospectus and related materials in connection with the solicitation of proxies by our Board of
Directors for use at the special meeting of our stockholders to be held on Friday, November 16, 2012. At the special meeting, our stockholders
will be asked to consider and vote on the proposal regarding the Continuation. This proposal is discussed in greater detail in the remainder of
this proxy statement/prospectus. We urge you to read carefully this proxy statement/prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference
into it.
If the Continuation is completed, each holder of shares of our common stock will be entitled to receive one Xtra-Gold BVI share for each share
of our common stock he, she or it owns. Our Board of Directors has approved unanimously the Continuation and recommends unanimously
that our stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the Continuation. We cannot complete the Continuation unless the holders of a
majority of the votes cast at the special meeting approve the Continuation.
All of our stockholders are invited to attend the special meeting in person. Your vote is very important, regardless of the number of
shares of our common stock you own. Whether or not you expect to attend the special meeting in person, please submit a proxy to
vote your shares of our common stock as promptly as possible so that your shares of our common stock may be represented and
voted at the special meeting by signing, dating and returning the enclosed proxy card, by fax, by e-mail, or by using the Internet as
described in the instructions included with your proxy card.
The accompanying proxy statement/prospectus contains detailed information about the Continuation and the special meeting. You should
read this proxy statement/prospectus carefully and in its entirety before voting, including the section entitled “Risk Factors” beginning on page
8.
By Order of the Board of Directors of Xtra-Gold Resources Corp.
“Paul Zyla” 
Paul Zyla 
President
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or disapproved of the
securities to be issued under this proxy statement/prospectus or determined if this proxy statement/prospectus is adequate,
accurate, truthful, or complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
This proxy statement/prospectus is dated October 24, 2012, and is first being mailed to stockholders on or about October 25, 2012.
ii
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
10:00 a.m. (local time)
 
Friday, November 16, 2012
 
Ontario Bar Association,
20 Toronto Street, 2nd Floor, Conference Rooms C and D,
Toronto, Ontario, M5C 2B8, Canada
(1)
 
(2)
(3)
To approve the Continuation
 
To approve any motion to adjourn or postpone the special meeting to another time or place, if necessary, to solicit
additional proxies if there are insufficient votes at the time of the special meeting to adopt the foregoing proposal
 
To consider and act upon such other business and matters or proposals as may properly come before the special
meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof
Time:
 
Date:
 
Place:
Purpose:
Record Date:
Proxy Statement:
Holders of record of shares of our common stock as of the close of business on October 10, 2012, the record date for the
special meeting, are entitled to notice of and to vote at the meeting.
 
The enclosed proxy statement/prospectus describes the purpose and business of the special meeting, contains a
detailed description of the Continuation, and includes a copy of the Plan of Conversion as Appendix A. Please read
these documents carefully before deciding how to vote.
Our Board of Directors recommends unanimously that our stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the Continuation and
“FOR” the proposal to adjourn or postpone the special meeting, if necessary to solicit additional proxies.
YOUR VOTE IS IMPORTANT
If you receive a copy of the proxy card by mail, we urge you to date, sign, and promptly return the enclosed form of proxy in the enclosed
envelope, to which no postage need be affixed if mailed in the United States. You may also authorize the individuals named on your proxy
card to vote shares by fax, by e-mail or by using the Internet as described in the instructions included with your card. Voting your shares of our
common stock over the Internet, via fax, via e-mail or by mailing a proxy card will not limit your right to vote in person or attend the special
meeting. You are invited to attend the special meeting. If you attend, you may revoke your proxy and vote in person if you wish, even if you
have previously returned your proxy. Please note, however, if your shares of our common stock are held of record by a broker, bank, or other
nominee and you wish to vote at the special meeting, you must obtain from the record holder a proxy issued in your name.
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
October 24, 2012
By order of the Board of Directors,
 
Paul Zyla
President
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
This proxy statement/prospectus references important business and financial information about our company that is not included in or
delivered with this proxy statement/prospectus. Stockholders of our company may obtain copies of this information (excluding all exhibits),
which are referred to or incorporated by reference in this proxy statement/prospectus, when available, free of cost, by directing a written or oral
request to our company at 360 Bay Street, Suite 301, Toronto, Ontario, M5H 2V6, Canada, telephone 416-366-4227, Attention: Paul Zyla,
President.
If you would like to request documents, to ensure timely delivery, you must do so at least five business days before the date of the special
meeting. This means you must request this information no later than November 9, 2012. We will mail properly requested documents to
requesting stockholders by first class mail, or another equally prompt means, within one business day after receipt of such request.
You should rely only on the information contained in, or incorporated by reference into, this proxy statement/ prospectus. No one has been
authorized to provide you with information that is different from that contained in, or incorporated by reference into, this proxy
statement/prospectus. This proxy statement/prospectus is dated October 24, 2012. You should not assume that the information contained in, or
incorporated by reference into, this proxy statement/prospectus is accurate as of any date other than that date, except to the extent that such
information is contained in an additional document filed with the SEC under section 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), between the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and the date of the special meeting and is
incorporated into this proxy statement/prospectus by reference. Neither the mailing of this proxy statement/prospectus to our stockholders nor
the issuance by Xtra-Gold BVI of the shares in connection with the Continuation will create any implication to the contrary.
This proxy statement/prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy, any securities, or the solicitation of a
proxy, in any jurisdiction to or from any person to whom it is unlawful to make any such offer or solicitation in such jurisdiction.
For a listing of the documents incorporated by reference into this proxy statement/prospectus, see the section entitled “Available Information”
beginning on page 149 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
In this document references to “Xtra-Gold Nevada”, “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Xtra-Gold Resources Corp., a Nevada corporation, and our
subsidiaries, and references to “Xtra-Gold BVI” refer to Xtra-Gold Resources Corp., a British Virgins Islands company. In this document the
symbol “CAD$” refers to Canadian dollars and the symbol “$” refers to United States Dollars.
Item
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
Page
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT CONCERNING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
THE CONTINUATION
DISSENTERS’ RIGHTS
MATERIAL UNITED STATES FEDERAL TAX CONSEQUENCES
MATERIAL BVI INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
CERTAIN CANADIAN INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
COMPARATIVE RIGHTS OF STOCKHOLDERS
ACCOUNTING TREATMENT
APPLICATION OF SECURITIES LAWS
THE SPECIAL MEETING
PROPOSAL 1 – APPROVAL OF THE CONTINUATION
PROPOSAL 2 – ADJOURNMENT OR POSTPONEMENT OF THE SPECIAL MEETING
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
MARKET FOR COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, PROMOTERS AND CONTROL PERSONS
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
DIRECTOR COMPENSATION
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
SECURITY OWNERSHIP
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
 
EXPERTS
LEGAL MATTERS
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN THE PROSPECTUS
SIGNATURES
  
APPENDIX A – Plan of Conversion
APPENDIX B – Sections 92A.300 to 92A.500 of the Nevada Revised Statutes
1
4
8
17
18
23
25
31
31
33
52
52
53
57
57
57
60
119
119
128
131
139
140
145
145
146
148
 
149
149
149
F-1
F-2
 
 
 
II-1
II-7
A-1
B-1
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Following are brief answers to certain questions that you may have regarding the proposal being considered at the special meeting of our
stockholders. We urge you to read carefully this entire proxy statement/prospectus, including the appendices, and the other documents to
which this proxy statement/prospectus refers or incorporates by reference, because this section does not provide all of the information that
might be important to you.
Q:
 
A:
Why am I receiving these materials?
 
To complete the Continuation, our stockholders must vote to the Continuation.
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
Q:
A:
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
 
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
To complete the Continuation, our stockholders must vote to the Continuation.
 
This proxy statement/prospectus, which you should read carefully, contains important information about the Continuation and the
special meeting of our stockholders.
 
When and where is the special meeting of our stockholders?
 
The special meeting will take place on Friday, November 16, 2012, at 10:00 a.m., local time, at the Ontario Bar Association, 20 Toronto
Street, 2nd Floor, Conference Rooms C and D, Toronto, Ontario, M5C 2B8, Canada.
 
What will our stockholders receive in the Continuation?
 
If the Continuation is completed, each outstanding share of our common stock will be automatically converted into one share in Xtra-
Gold BVI. Options and warrants to purchase shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada will become exercisable into shares in Xtra-
Gold BVI upon the same terms and conditions.
 
How do our directors and executive officers intend to vote at the special meetings on the proposals to approve the
Continuation?
 
As of October 10, 2012 which is the record date for the special meeting, our directors and executive officers held and are entitled to
vote, in the aggregate, shares of our common stock representing approximately 7.84% of our outstanding shares of common stock. We
believe that our directors and executive officers intend to vote all of their shares of our common stock “FOR” each of the proposals at
the special meeting.
 
Are there risks I should consider in deciding whether to vote for the Continuation?
 
Yes. A description of some of the risks that you should consider in connection with the Continuation is included in this proxy
statement/prospectus in the section entitled “Risk Factors” beginning on page 8.
 
When do you expect to complete the Continuation?
 
If we receive the required stockholder approval at the special meeting, we expect to complete the Continuation shortly after the
meeting.
 
What are the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the Continuation?
 
The Continuation from Nevada to the BVI will result in the application of the U.S. “corporate inversion” rules, and our company will be
treated as a U.S. domestic corporation after the Continuation for all purposes of the Internal Revenue Code (the “Code”), including that
we will be subject to U.S. federal income tax on our worldwide income, and distributions from us to our Non-U.S. Holders (as defined
later in this proxy statement/prospectus) will be subject to U.S. withholding tax. The Continuation should be treated as a tax-free
reorganization and should therefore not be a taxable transaction to us or to our holders of shares of our common stock.
 
For a more complete discussion of the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the Continuation, see the section entitled “Material
United States Federal Tax Consequences” beginning on page 25. Tax matters are complicated and the consequences of the
Continuation to you will depend on your particular facts and circumstances. You are urged to consult with your tax advisor as to the
specific tax consequences of the Continuation to you, including the applicability of U.S. federal, state, local, foreign and other tax laws.
Who is entitled to vote at the special meeting?
 
The record date for the special meeting is October 10, 2012. Only holders of record of shares of our common stock outstanding and
entitled to vote as of the close of business on the record date are entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the special meeting or any
adjournment or postponement of the special meeting.
 
What stockholder vote is required to adopt the Continuation at the special meeting?
 
The holders of a majority of the votes cast at the special meeting must vote in favor of the proposal to approve the Continuation.
 
What constitutes a quorum?
 
For the special meeting, a quorum is present if two individuals are present in person, each of whom is a stockholder or a proxyholder,
entitled to vote at the meeting. Broker non-votes (which are described below) and abstentions will be counted for purposes of
determining whether a quorum is present.
 
How do I vote my shares of common stock?
 
Holders of shares of our common stock may indicate how they want to vote on their proxy card and then sign, date, and mail their proxy
card in the enclosed return envelope as soon as possible so that their shares of our common stock may be represented at the special
meeting. You may also authorize the individuals named on your proxy card to vote your shares of our common stock by fax, by e-mail
or by using the Internet as described in the instructions included with your card. Holders of shares of our common stock may also attend
the special meeting and vote in person instead of submitting a proxy.
 
If you are a holder of record of shares of our common stock and you sign, date, and send in your proxy but do not indicate how you want
to vote, your proxy will be voted “FOR” the proposal to approve the Continuation and “FOR” all other proposals to be voted on at the
special meeting. If your shares of our common stock are held by a broker, bank or other nominee, please see the answer to the next
question.
 
If my shares of common stock are held by a broker, bank or other nominee, will my broker, bank or other nominee vote my
shares for me?
 
If you are a stockholder and you do not provide your broker, bank or other nominee with instructions on how to vote your shares of our
common stock, your broker, bank or other nominee will not be permitted to vote them with respect to the proposal regarding the
Continuation. This results in a broker non-vote. A broker non-vote with respect to the proposal to approve the Continuation will have the
same effect as a vote “AGAINST” such proposal since approval of the proposal requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the voting
power of the shares of our common stock outstanding and entitled to vote. You should, therefore, provide your broker, bank or other
nominee with instructions on how to vote your shares of our common stock or arrange to attend the special meeting and vote your
shares of our common stock in person to avoid a broker non-vote. You are urged to utilize fax, e-mail or Internet voting if your broker,
bank or other nominee has provided you with the opportunity to do so. See the relevant voting instruction form for instructions. If your
broker, bank or other nominee holds your shares of our common stock and you attend the special meeting in person, you should bring
a letter from your broker, bank or other nominee identifying you as the beneficial owner of the shares of our common stock and
authorizing you to vote your shares of our common stock at the special meeting.
 
If I am a stockholder, can I attend the special meeting and vote my shares of common stock in person?
 
Yes. All holders of shares of our common stock, including stockholders of record and stockholders who hold their shares of our
common stock through a broker, bank or other nominee, or any other holder of record, are invited to attend the special meeting. Holders
of record of shares of our common stock as of the record date can vote in person at the special meeting. If you are not a stockholder of
record, you must obtain a proxy, executed in your favor, from the record holder of your shares of our common stock, such as a broker,
bank or other nominee, to be able to vote in person at the special meeting. If you plan to attend the special meeting, you must hold your
shares of our common stock in your own name or have a letter from the record holder of your shares of our common stock confirming
your ownership, and you must bring a form of personal photo identification with you to be admitted. We reserve the right to refuse
admittance to anyone without proper proof of share ownership or without proper photo identification.
2 -
May I change my vote after I have delivered my proxy or voting instruction card?
 
Yes. You may change your vote at any time before your proxy is voted at the special meeting. You may do this in one of four ways:
by sending a notice of revocation to the corporate secretary of Xtra-Gold Nevada which must be received no later than 5:00 p.m.
Eastern time on the day before the special meeting;
 
by logging onto the Internet website specified on your proxy card in the same manner in which you would to submit your proxy
electronically or by fax or by e-mail, as specified on your proxy card, in each case if you are eligible to do so and following the
instructions on the proxy card, at any time before 5:00 p.m., Eastern time on November 15, 2012;
 
by sending a completed proxy card bearing a later date than your original proxy card, which must be received by 5:00 p.m.,
Eastern time on November 15, 2012; or
 
by attending the special meeting and voting in person.
Are Xtra-Gold Nevada stockholders entitled to exercise appraisal rights?
 
Yes. If the Continuation is approved, our stockholders who did not vote at the special meeting are entitled to exercise appraisal rights in
connection with the Continuation. For more information on stockholder appraisal rights, see the section entitled “Dissenters’ Rights”
beginning on page 23.
 
What should I do if I receive more than one set of voting materials for the special meeting?
 
You may receive more than one set of voting materials for the special meeting, including multiple copies of this proxy
statement/prospectus and multiple proxy cards or voting instruction cards. For example, if you hold your shares of our common stock in
more than one brokerage account, you will receive a separate voting instruction card for each brokerage account in which you hold
shares of our common stock. If you are a holder of record and your shares of our common stock are registered in more than one name,
you will receive more than one proxy card. Please submit each separate proxy or voting instruction card that you receive by following
the instructions set forth in each separate proxy or voting instruction card.
 
Should I send in my Xtra-Gold Nevada stock certificates now?
No. You should not send in your Xtra-Gold Nevada stock certificates until you receive written instructions and a letter of transmittal.
Q:
A:
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
No. You should not send in your Xtra-Gold Nevada stock certificates until you receive written instructions and a letter of transmittal.
Please do not send your stock certificates with your proxy.
 
What do I need to do now?
 
Mail your signed and dated proxy card in the enclosed return envelope as soon as possible, so that your shares of our common stock
may be represented at the special meeting to vote on approving the Continuation.
 
Whom do I call if I have questions about the special meeting or the Continuation?
 
Please call our President, Paul Zyla at 416 366-4227.
Q:
 
A:
Q:
 
A:
3 -
PART I
SUMMARY
THIS SUMMARY PROVIDES AN OVERVIEW OF THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THIS PROXY STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS AND
DOES NOT CONTAIN ALL OF THE INFORMATION YOU SHOULD CONSIDER. YOU SHOULD READ THE MORE DETAILED
INFORMATION SET FORTH IN THIS DOCUMENT AND THE DOCUMENTS TO WHICH WE REFER YOU. WE HAVE INCLUDED PAGE
REFERENCES TO DIRECT YOU TO MORE COMPLETE DESCRIPTIONS OF THE TOPICS PRESENTED IN THIS SUMMARY.
Description of Business (page 57)
Xtra-Gold Nevada is engaged in the exploration of gold properties exclusively in Ghana, West Africa in the search for mineral deposits or
reserves which could be economically and legally extracted or produced. Our exploration activities include the review of existing data, grid
establishment, geological mapping, geophysical surveying, trenching and pitting to test the areas of anomalous soil samples and reverse
circulation (RC) and/or diamond drilling to test targets followed by infill drilling, if successful, to define a mineral resource and, perhaps
ultimately, a mineral reserve. Our office is located at 360 Bay Street, Suite 301, Toronto, Ontario, M5H 2V6, Canada, and our telephone
number is 416 366-4227. For additional information regarding Xtra-Gold Nevada, see the section entitled “Description of Business” beginning
on page 57.
The Special Meeting (page 53)
We will hold our special meeting of stockholders at the Ontario Bar Association, 20 Toronto Street, 2nd Floor, Conference Rooms C and D,
Toronto, Ontario, M5C 2B8, Canada on the 16th day of November, 2012 at 10:00 a.m., local time. At this meeting, our stockholders will be
asked to:
approve the Continuation,
approve any motion to adjourn or postpone the meeting to solicit additional proxies; and
consider such other business as may properly come before the special meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof.
You can vote at the special meeting only if you owned shares of Xtra-Gold Nevada common stock at the close of business on October 10,
2012 which is the record date for that meeting.
The holders of a majority of the shares of Xtra-Gold Nevada common stock outstanding and entitled to vote at the special meeting must vote in
favor of the Continuation for its approval.
The holders of a majority of the shares of Xtra-Gold Nevada common stock outstanding, represented and entitled to vote at the special
meeting, whether or not a quorum is present, must vote in favor of the proposal to approve any motion to adjourn or postpone the special
meeting to another time or place, if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are insufficient votes at the time of the special meeting to
adopt the proposal, for the Continuation to be approved and adopted.
As of October 10, 2012, which is the record date for the special meeting, the directors and executive officers of Xtra-Gold Nevada held and are
entitled to vote, in the aggregate, shares of our common stock representing approximately 7.84% of the outstanding shares of Xtra-Gold
Nevada common stock.
Background to the Continuation (page 18)
We are currently incorporated under the corporate laws of Nevada. We are proposing to change our governing jurisdiction from the State of
Nevada to the British Virgin Islands (the “BVI”) under the BVI Act through a process known as a continuation under applicable corporate law.
A continuation is a process by which a corporation which is not incorporated under the laws of the BVI may change its governing jurisdiction to
the BVI. Under the BVI Act, if the laws of its home jurisdiction allow for it, a company may be “continued” as a BVI company by making an
application with the Registrar of Corporate Affairs under the BVI Act. To give effect to the Continuation, our Board of Directors has adopted a
Plan of Conversion under Chapter 92A of the NRS and has recommended that our stockholders approve and adopt this Plan of Conversion.
After the completion of the Continuation, Xtra-Gold Nevada will be a BVI company governed by the BVI Act. We will continue to conduct the
business in which we are currently engaged.
- 4 -
The Continuation will have the effect of changing our domicile from Nevada to the BVI. The Plan of Conversion is attached hereto as
Appendix A and the forms of the memorandum of association and articles of association (the “Memorandum and Articles”) to be adopted by
Xtra-Gold BVI are attached thereto as Exhibit B.
The Continuation will not result in any material effect on our operations. The business and operations of Xtra-Gold BVI following the
Continuation will be identical in most respects to our current business, except that we will no longer be subject to the corporate laws of the
State of Nevada but will be subject to the BVI Act. Xtra-Gold BVI will be liable for all the debts and obligations of Xtra-Gold Nevada, and the
officers and directors of Xtra-Gold Nevada will be the officers and directors of Xtra-Gold BVI.
Reasons for the Change in Domicile; Risks related to the Continuation (page 19; page 8)
Given that none of our operations or material assets are located in the State of Nevada, we believe that the Continuation to an international
jurisdiction such as the BVI will more accurately reflect our international operations, which are primarily conducted in West Africa. The BVI has
enjoyed a long history of political and economic stability and is considered to be a well-developed international business and financial centre.
BVI companies, provided that they do not operate or hold real property in the BVI or employ persons resident in the BVI, and all amounts paid
by them to non-residents are generally exempt from all local taxes and stamp duty. Generally, all dividends, royalties, interest, fees and
management fees paid or deemed to be paid by a company to a person resident outside the BVI are exempt from tax and no amount is
required to be withheld under the jurisdiction’s legislation. A company incorporated under the BVI Act is not liable for any tax in the BVI on the
transfer of any securities or assets of the company. However, we will continue to be treated as a U.S. domestic corporation for United States
tax purposes after the Continuation, subject to tax on our worldwide income, and amounts paid by us will be subject to U.S. tax withholding
and reporting rules, as applicable. Stockholders are urged to review the discussion under “Material United States Federal Tax Consequences”
commencing on page 25.
Factors such as possible adverse tax consequences relating to our shares of common stock following the Continuation may affect your
interest in owning Xtra-Gold BVI shares. In evaluating the merits of the proposed Continuation, you should carefully consider the risk factors
and the other information included in this proxy statement/prospectus, including without limitation, the information under the caption “Risk
Factors commencing on page 8.”
Recommendation of the Board of Directors (page 22)
The Xtra-Gold Nevada Board of Directors determined unanimously that the Continuation is advisable and in the best interests of Xtra-Gold
Nevada and its stockholders, and approved the Continuation. Our Board of Directors recommends unanimously that our stockholders
vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the Continuation.
Accounting Treatment (page 52)
For United States accounting purposes, the Continuation of our company from a Nevada corporation to a BVI company represents a non-
substantive exchange to be accounted for in a manner consistent with a transaction between entities under common control. All assets,
liabilities, revenues and expenses will be reflected in the accounts of Xtra-Gold BVI based on existing carrying values at the date of the
exchange. The historical comparative figures of Xtra-Gold BVI will be those of Xtra-Gold Nevada.
5 -
Dissenters’ Rights (page 23)
Under the NRS, you are entitled to dissent from the proposed Continuation and, as a dissenter, to tender your shares of common stock and
receive the fair value, in cash, for your tendered shares of our common stock.
Market for Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters (page 128)
The Continuation will have no impact on the trading market for our common stock. After the Continuation, our shares of common stock will
continue to be traded on the Toronto Stock Exchange (the “TSX”) under the symbol XTG and quoted on the OTC Bulletin Board under the
symbol XTGR.
Comparative Rights of Stockholders (page 33)
You will continue to hold the same shares you now hold following the Continuation of our company to the BVI. However, the rights of
stockholders under Nevada law differ in certain substantive ways from the rights of stockholders under the BVI Act. Please see “Comparative
Rights of Stockholders” on page 33 of this proxy statement/prospectus for a detailed comparison of the rights of stockholders under the NRS
and the BVI Act.
Authorized Capital Following Continuation (page 20)
The Memorandum and Articles of Xtra-Gold BVI will provide that Xtra-Gold BVI will be authorized to issue an unlimited number of shares,
without par value. Xtra-Gold Nevada’s articles of incorporation presently provide that our authorized capital is 250,000,000 shares of common
stock, with a par value of $0.001 per share. Accordingly, there will be an increase in the shares that Xtra-Gold BVI will be authorized to issue
as a result of the Continuation.
Reporting Obligations under Securities Laws (page 21)
We currently prepare our financial statements in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”).
We file our audited annual financial statements with the SEC on Annual Reports on Form 10-K and our unaudited interim financial statements
with the SEC on Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q. We also file Current Reports on Form 8-K to report material information in accordance with
SEC rules. Inasmuch as we are not registered under Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act, we are not subject to the SEC’s proxy rules and our
officers, directors and principal stockholders are not required to file ownership reports under Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act, and those
persons are not subject to the short-swing profit rules of Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act.
Upon completion of the Continuation, we anticipate that we will meet the definition of a “foreign private issuer” in the United States under the
Exchange Act. As a reporting foreign private issuer, we anticipate that we will file an Annual Report on Form 20-F (a “Form 20-F Annual
Report”) each year with the SEC. We anticipate that the Form 20-F Annual Report will include financial statements prepared in accordance
with U.S. GAAP. We will not be required to file interim quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, however we will be required to furnish to the SEC under
cover of Form 6-K, our interim financial statements and management discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) that we prepare as a reporting issuer
under Canadian securities legislation. Our interim financial statements will be prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP similar to our current
Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, which also include interim financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We may adopt in
the future International Financial Reporting Standards accounting rules adopted by the SEC.
In addition, as a foreign private issuer, our directors, officers and 10% stockholders will not be subject to the insider reporting requirements of
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act or the “short swing” profit rules of Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act; and we will not be subject to the proxy
rules of Section 14 of the Exchange Act. Furthermore, Regulation FD does not apply to non-United States companies and will not apply to
Xtra-Gold BVI upon completion of the Continuation and election of foreign private issuer status.
Additionally, we are a reporting issuer in the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario, Canada. Whether or not we continue to the
BVI, we will remain subject to Canadian disclosure requirements including publishing news releases, filing information about major changes
for Xtra-Gold BVI, filing annual and quarterly financial statements and MD&A, and filing reports in connection with changes in outstanding and
reserved securities. Additionally, insider reports are required to be filed in Canada via SEDI (System for Electronic Disclosure by Insiders) in
connection with transactions regarding trading in our shares or acquisitions and dispositions of other issued or granted company securities by
our officers, directors and significant stockholders holding more than 10% of the voting rights attached to our company’s outstanding voting
securities.
6 -
Material Tax Consequences of the Continuation
The following is a brief summary of our management’s understanding of the material tax consequences the Continuation will have for our
stockholders. The following information has been reviewed by our management and is believed by our management to be accurate. However,
our stockholders should consult their own tax advisers with respect to tax implications of the Continuation on their particular circumstances. A
more detailed summary of the factors affecting the tax consequences for our stockholders is set out under “Material United States Federal Tax
Consequences”, “Certain Canadian Federal Income Tax Consequences” and “Material BVI Income Tax Consequences” commencing on
pages 25 and 31 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Material United States Federal Tax Consequences (Page 25)
The Continuation from Nevada to BVI will result in the application of the U.S. “corporate inversion” rules. United States federal income tax law
with respect to corporate inversions provides in certain cases that a non-U.S. corporation may be treated as a U.S. corporation for all purposes
of the Code. An inversion can occur in certain transactions in which a non-U.S. corporation acquires substantially all of the assets of or equity
interests in a U.S. corporation, if, after the transaction, former equity owners of the U.S. corporation own 80% or more of the stock, by vote or by
value, in the non-U.S. corporation. We believe that these conditions will be met as a result of the Continuation.
Thus, even though following the Continuation, we will be registered under the laws of BVI and treated as a BVI company for corporate law and
BVI tax purposes, we will be treated also as a U.S. domestic corporation under United States federal tax law, fully subject to United States
federal income tax on our worldwide income under Section 7874(b) of the Code.
The Continuation should be treated as a tax-free reorganization pursuant to Section 368(a)(1)(F) of the Code, and should therefore not be
taxable to us. Moreover, U.S. Holders (as defined hereinafter) and Non-U.S. Holders (as defined hereinafter) should not recognize gain or loss
on their shares of common stock as a result of the Continuation. Accordingly, such stockholders’ tax bases in and holding periods for their
shares of common stock after the Continuation will be the same as their tax bases in and holding periods for the shares of common stock
before the Continuation. Our company and our stockholders may be required to report certain information to the Internal Revenue
Service (“IRS”) in connection with the Continuation. Accordingly, U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders should consult with their own
tax advisors regarding any statements or information reporting to the IRS in connection with the Continuation.
For a more complete discussion of the United States income tax consequences, please see “Material United States Federal Tax
Consequences” on page 25 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Material BVI Income Tax Consequences (Page 31)
We should not incur any liability for BVI income tax on Continuation. We will become a resident of the BVI as a result of the Continuation and
possibly subject to BVI tax in certain limited circumstances.
No stockholder should incur any liability for BVI income tax or any other taxes on the Continuation, regardless of the stockholder’s fiscal
residence. For a more detailed summary of the BVI tax consequences, please see “Material BVI Income Tax Consequences” beginning on
page 31 of this proxy statement/prospectus.
7 -
Certain Canadian Income Tax Consequences (Page 31)
No disposition of the shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada should be considered to have occurred for Canadian federal income tax
purposes solely as result of the Continuation. Consequently, the Continuation should not result in the realization of any capital gain (or capital
loss) by a Holder.
RISK FACTORS
In addition to the other information in this proxy statement/prospectus or incorporated in this proxy statement/prospectus by reference,
including the matters addressed under “Cautionary Statements Regarding Forward-Looking Information,” you should consider carefully the
following factors before deciding how to vote.
Risks Related to the Continuation
We will still be treated as a U.S. corporation and taxed on our worldwide income after the Continuation.
The Continuation of our company from Nevada to the BVI is for corporate purposes a migration from Nevada to the BVI. Transactions whereby
a U.S. corporation migrates to a foreign jurisdiction are considered by the United States Congress to be a potential abuse of the U.S. tax rules
because after the migration the foreign entity is not subject to U.S. tax on its worldwide income. As a result, Section 7874(b) of the Code was
enacted in 2004 to address this potential abuse. Section 7874(b) of the Code provides generally that a corporation that migrates from the
United States will still remain subject to U.S. tax on its worldwide income unless the migrating entity has substantial business activities in the
foreign country in which it is migrating when compared to its total business activities.
Section 7874(b) of the Code will apply to the migration of our company from Nevada to the BVI, causing Xtra-Gold BVI to be subject to United States federal income
taxation on its worldwide income because Xtra-Gold BVI does not have substantial business activities in the BVI when compared to its total business activities. Our
administrative functions and our business operations are primarily located outside of the BVI. Substantially, all of our stockholders reside outside of the BVI and historically
most of our funds have been raised outside of the BVI. Accordingly, we believe that Xtra-Gold BVI will continue to be treated as a U.S. domestic corporation under Section
7874 of the Code after the Continuation.
Moreover, while we believe we have addressed the material U.S. federal income tax considerations as to the exchange of the shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada
for shares of Xtra-Gold BVI pursuant to the Continuation, we cannot assure Holders that we have addressed the material U.S. federal income tax consequences to persons
who may be subject to special provisions of the U.S. federal income tax law based on their individual circumstances. Holders should review the discussion under “Material
United Federal Tax Consequences” in its entirety, including the definitions of “U.S. Holder” and “Non-U.S. Holder” described therein.
Under the BVI Act, the number of stockholder votes required to approve certain fundamental matters, including amendments to our
articles and business combination transactions, may be less than under Nevada law with the result that these transactions may
more easily be approved under the BVI Act than under Nevada law.
Under the BVI Act, stockholder approval by resolution, being a majority approval, is required to approve certain fundamental changes,
including amendments to our articles and mergers, which are the equivalent of mergers under Nevada law. Under the BVI Act, the majority
approval is determined based upon those stockholders present at the meeting and entitled to vote on the fundamental change. While majority
approval is required, the number of shares required may be significantly less than 50% of the outstanding share capital, which is the
requirement under Nevada law, due to the fact that the quorum requirement for stockholders meetings is only two individuals present in
person, each of whom is a stockholder or a proxyholder entitled to vote at a meeting.
As a result of the Continuation, the Memorandum and Articles of Xtra-Gold BVI will require us to maintain a Board of Directors of not
less than three directors.
The Memorandum and Articles of of Xtra-Gold BVI will require us to maintain a minimum of three directors on our Board of Directors. This
contrasts to Nevada law which does not impose any director requirement beyond having at least one director. We will meet this requirement if
we complete the Continuation assuming the current constitution of our Board of Directors. However, in the future, we will have to ensure that
we at all times have at least three directors, notwithstanding the resignation or death of any director or our inability to identify new directors.
8 -
Pursuant to the Memorandum and Articles of Xtra-Gold BVI, our stockholders will have greater rights of dissent, with the result that
dissenting stockholders may impede our ability to make fundamental corporate changes or increase the cost to us of making these
changes.
Pursuant to the Memorandum and Articles of Xtra-Gold BVI, our stockholders will have the right to dissent when we amend our articles to
change any provisions restricting or constraining the issue, transfer or ownership of shares of that class. Our stockholders will also have
dissenters’ rights when we propose to amend our articles to add, change or remove any restrictions on our business or businesses that we
may carry on, merge (other than a vertical short-form merger with a wholly-owned subsidiary), continue to another jurisdiction, sell, lease or
exchange all or substantially all of our property, or carry out a going private or squeeze-out transaction. The exercise by stockholders of their
dissent and appraisal rights when we attempt to complete any of these fundamental changes could impede our ability to make fundamental
corporate changes or increase the cost to us of making these changes.
The stock price of our shares may be volatile. In addition, demand in the United States for our shares may be decreased by the
change in domicile.
The market price of our shares may be subject to significant fluctuations in response to variations in results of operations and other factors.
Developments affecting the mining industry generally, including general economic conditions and government regulation, could also have a
significant impact on the market price for our shares. In addition, the stock market has experienced a high level of price and volume volatility.
Market prices for the stock of many similar companies have experienced wide fluctuations which have not necessarily been related to the
operating performance of such companies. These broad market fluctuations, which are beyond our control, could have a material adverse
effect on the market price of our shares. We cannot predict what effect, if any, the Continuation will have on the market price prevailing from
time to time or the liquidity of our shares. The change in domicile may decrease the demand for our shares in the United States. The decrease
may not be offset by increased demand for our shares in the BVI.
As a reporting issuer under Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act, we file more limited reports with the SEC than do companies who are
registered under Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act. If we elect “foreign private issuer” status following our Continuation into the
BVI, our reporting obligations under U.S. securities laws will be more limited than if we remained a domestic issuer. This lack of
transparency may make it more difficult for investors in our securities to make informed investment decisions.
While we are subject to Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act, we do not have a class of securities registered under Section 12(g) of the
Exchange Act. Consequently, we file more limited reports with the SEC than do companies whose shares are registered under Section 12(g).
For example, as a company reporting under Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act, we are not subject to the SEC’s proxy rules and our officers,
directors and principal stockholders are not required to file reports under Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act, and such persons are not subject
to the short-swing profit rules of Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act.
Following our Continuation into the BVI, we will qualify as a foreign private issuer under U.S. securities laws and we intend to elect foreign
private issuer status. While we will remain subject to limited reporting obligations under U.S. federal securities law, as a foreign private issuer:
We will not be required to file quarterly reports on Form 10-Q with the SEC; although since our securities are listed on the TSX we are a
reporting issuer in Canada and subject to the rules of the Canadian securities administrators (the “CSA”) which includes the applicable
provincial securities commissions in the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario, we will file quarterly reports containing
unaudited interim financial statements and MD&A with the CSA via SEDAR and, in accordance with SEC rules, post copies of such
reports on our website;
We will not be required to file current reports on Form 8-K; although we will be required to file current reports on Form 6-K but for less
mandatory items than are required under Form 8-K, and since our securities are listed on the TSX and subject to the rules of the CSA,
we will file material change reports with the CSA via SEDAR and, under SEC rules, post copies of such reports on our website;
9 -
Our officers, directors and principal stockholders will not be subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act, which otherwise requires them to
file ownership reports with the SEC and subjects them to “short-swing” profit liability;
We will not be subject to the SEC’s proxy rules; and
We will not be subject to the provisions of Regulation FD which is designed to prevent selective disclosure of material information.
While we believe that the disclosure requirements of the TSX and the CSA, and SEC regulations applicable to foreign private issuers, will
collectively provide transparency to the investment community and allow informed investment decisions to be made by investors in our
securities, there is no assurance that the reduced transparency afforded to foreign private issuers will not also reduce the information available
to investors and make investment decisions in our securities more difficult.
Risks Associated with our Operations
Our company is currently in the exploration stage with respect to all our projects. The chance of ever reaching the production stage
at our projects is uncertain. Our company cannot predict whether we will successfully effectuate our company’s current business
plan.
If our company does not obtain new financings, commencing from 2012, the amount of funds available to our company to pursue
any further exploration activities at our projects will be reduced and our company’s plan of operations may be adversely affected.
Our company has relied on private placement financings and an initial public offering completed in Canada in November 2010 to fund our
exploration programs, including our drilling programs at our Kibi project. Commencing from 2012, our company will continue to require
additional financing to complete our plan of operations to carry out any further exploration activities on our projects. Any impairment in our
company’s ability to raise additional funds through financings would reduce the available funds for such exploration activities, with the result
that our company’s plan of operations may be adversely affected.
Substantial additional capital may be required commencing from 2012 to continue exploration activities at all of our projects. If our
company cannot raise additional capital as needed, our ability to execute our business plan and fund our ongoing operations will be
in jeopardy.
Commencing from 2012, our company may need to explore various financing alternatives to meet our projected costs and expenses. Our
company cannot assure our stockholders that we will be able to obtain the necessary financing for our projects on favorable terms or at all.
Additionally, if the actual costs to execute our company’s business plan are significantly higher than expected, our company may not have
sufficient funds to cover these costs and we may not be able to obtain other sources of financing. The failure to obtain all necessary financing
would prevent our company from executing our business plan and would impede our company’s ability to sustain operations or become
profitable, and our company could be forced to cease our operations.
To date, we have not generated revenues from operations and our company will continue to incur operating losses and there is no
guarantee that we will achieve operating profits.
Our company has incurred operating losses on an annual basis for a number of years, primarily arising out of the costs related to continued
exploration and development of mineral resource properties, including costs written off on properties no longer being pursued by our
company. As of June 30, 2012, our company had an accumulated deficit during the exploration stage of $22,102,936. It is anticipated that our
company will continue to experience operating losses for fiscal 2012 and until our company discovers economically mineable mineralized
material and successfully develops a mine. There can be no assurance that our company will ever achieve significant revenues or profitable
operations.
10 -
Our company’s projects are in the exploration stage and may not result in the discovery of commercial bodies of mineralization
which would result in our company discontinuing that project. Substantial expenditures are required to determine if a project has
economically mineable mineralized material.
Our company’s projects are all in the exploration stage. Mineral exploration involves a high degree of risk and few properties which are
explored are developed into producing mines. The exploration efforts of our company on our projects may not result in the discovery of
commercial bodies of mineralization which would require our company to discontinue that project. Substantial expenditures are required to
determine if a project has economically mineable mineralized material. It could take several years to establish proven and probable mineral
resources or reserves. Due to these uncertainties, there can be no assurance that current and future exploration programs will result in the
discovery of mineral resources or reserves.
Our company currently depends significantly on a limited number of projects.
Our company’s activities are currently focused on our Kibi project. Our company will as a consequence be exposed to some heightened
degree of risk due to the lack of property diversification. Adverse changes or developments affecting our Kibi project would have a material
and adverse effect on our company’s business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects.
Our company is subject to factors beyond our control which may impact our company’s title in our projects.
Although our company has obtained title opinions with respect to all of our projects and has taken other reasonable measures to ensure
proper title to these projects, there is no guarantee that title to any of our projects will not be challenged or impugned. Third parties may have
valid claims underlying portions of our company’s interests. Our projects may be subject to prior unregistered liens, agreements, transfers or
claims and title may be affected by, among other things, undetected defects. In addition, our company may be unable to operate our projects
as permitted or to enforce its rights with respect to our projects.
Our company’s activities are and will be subject to complex laws, significant government regulations and accounting standards that
may delay or prevent operations at our projects and can adversely affect our company’s operating costs, the timing of the our
company’s operations, ability to operate and financial results.
Business, exploration activities and any future development activities and mining operations are and will be subject to extensive Ghanaian,
United States, Canadian, BVI and other foreign, federal, state, territorial and local laws and regulations and also exploration, development,
production, exports, taxes, labor standards, waste disposal, protection of the environment, reclamation, historic and cultural resource
preservation, mine safety and occupational health, reporting and other matters, as well as accounting standards. Compliance with these laws,
regulations and standards or the imposition of new such requirements could adversely affect our company’s operating and future development
costs, the timing of our company’s operations, ability to operate and financial results. These laws and regulations governing various matters
include:
environmental protection;
management of natural resources;
exploration, development of mines, production and post-closure reclamation;
export and import controls and restrictions;
price controls;
taxation;
11 -
labor standards and occupational health and safety, including mine safety;
historic and cultural preservation; and
generally accepted accounting principles.
The costs associated with compliance with these laws and regulations may be substantial and possible future laws and regulations, or more
stringent enforcement of current laws and regulations by governmental authorities, could cause additional expense, capital expenditures,
restrictions on or suspensions of our company’s operations and delays in the development of our projects. These laws and regulations may
allow governmental authorities and private parties to bring lawsuits based upon damages to property and injury to persons resulting from the
environmental, health and safety impacts of our company’s past and current operations, and could lead to the imposition of substantial fines,
penalties or other civil or criminal sanctions. In addition, our company’s failure to comply strictly with applicable laws, regulations and local
practices relating to permitting applications or reporting requirements could result in loss, reduction or expropriation of entitlements, or the
imposition of additional local or foreign parties as joint venture partners. Any such loss, reduction, expropriation or imposition of partners could
have a materially adverse effect on our company’s operations or business.
Our company may not be able to obtain, renew or continue to comply with all of the permits necessary to develop each of our
projects which would force our company to discontinue development, if any, on that project.
Pursuant to Ghanaian law, if our company discovers economically mineable mineralized material, we must obtain various approvals, licenses
or permits pertaining to environmental protection and use of water resources in connection with the development, if any, of our projects. In
addition to requiring permits for the development of our mineral concessions where our projects are located, our company may need to obtain
other permits and approvals during the life of our projects. Obtaining, renewing and continuing to comply with the necessary governmental
permits and approvals can be a complex and time-consuming process. The failure to obtain or renew the necessary permits or licenses or
continue to meet their requirements could delay future development and could increase the costs related to such activities.
The development of all of our company’s projects may be delayed due to delays in receiving regulatory permits and approvals,
which could impede our company’s ability to develop our projects which, absent raising additional capital, could cause it to curtail or
discontinue development, if any.
If our company discovers economically mineable mineralized material, our company may experience delays in developing our projects. The
timing of development at our projects depends on many factors, some of which are beyond our control, including:
taxation;
the timely issuance of permits; and
the acquisition of surface land and easement rights required to develop and operate our projects, (in particular, our company is required
to acquire surface land through expropriation in connection with our mineral concessions).
These delays could increase development costs of our projects, affect our company’s economic viability, or prevent our company from
completing the development of our projects.
Our company’s activities are subject to environmental laws and regulations that may increase our company’s costs of doing
business and may restrict our operations.
All of our company’s exploration activities in Ghana are subject to regulation by governmental agencies under various environmental laws. To
the extent our company conducts exploration activities or undertakes new exploration or future mining activities in other foreign countries, our
company will also be subject to environmental laws and regulations in those jurisdictions. These laws address emissions into the air,
discharges into water, management of waste, management of hazardous substances, protection of natural resources, antiquities and
endangered species, and reclamation of lands disturbed by mining operations. Environmental legislation in many countries is evolving and
the trend has been towards stricter standards and enforcement, increased fines and penalties for non-compliance, more stringent
environmental assessments of proposed projects and increasing responsibility for companies and their officers, directors and employees.
Compliance with environmental laws and regulations may require significant capital outlays and may cause material changes or delays in our
company’s intended activities. Our company cannot assure our stockholders that future changes in environmental regulations will not
adversely affect our company’s business, and it is possible that future changes in these laws or regulations could have a significant adverse
impact on some portion of our company’s business, causing our company to reevaluate those activities at that time.
12 -
In addition, our company may be exposed to potential environmental impacts during any full scale mining operation. At such time of
commencement of full scale mining, if ever, our company plans to negotiate posting of a reclamation bond to quantify the reclamation costs.
Our company anticipates that the dollar amount of reserves established for exposure to environmental liabilities will be $220,000, as to
$150,000 for our Kwabeng project and $70,000 for our Pameng project, as estimated by the Environmental Protection Agency of Ghana,
however, our company is currently unable to predict the ultimate cost of compliance or the extent of liability risks.
Our company is unable to predict the remediation costs for potential environmental liabilities.
The costs of remediation may exceed the provision that our company has made for such remediation by a material amount. Whenever a
previously unrecognized remediation liability becomes known, or a previously estimated cost is increased, the amount of that liability or
additional cost could adversely affect our company’s exploration activities and our financial condition.
There may be instances where certain events occur that our company is not insured against.
Our company maintains insurance policies to protect itself against certain risks related to its operations. This insurance is maintained in
amounts that our company believes to be reasonable depending upon the circumstances surrounding each identified risk. However, our
company may elect not to have insurance for certain risks because of the high premiums associated with insuring those risks or for various
other reasons; in other cases, insurance may not be available for certain risks. Some concern always exists with respect to investments in
parts of the world where civil unrest, war, nationalist movements, political violence or economic crisis are possible. These countries may also
pose heightened risks of expropriation of assets, business interruption, increased taxation and a unilateral modification of concessions and
contracts. Our company does not maintain insurance policies against political risk. Occurrence of events for which our company is not insured
could adversely affect our company’s exploration activities and its financial condition.
Our company is subject to the potential of legal claims and the associated costs of defense and settlement.
Our company is subject to litigation risks. All industries, including the mining industry, are subject to legal claims, with and without merit.
Defense and settlement costs of legal claims can be substantial, even with respect to claims that have no merit. Due to the inherent
uncertainty of the litigation process, the resolution of any particular legal proceeding to which our company is or may become subject could
have a material effect on its financial position, results of operations or our company’s project development operations.
Our company is subject to fluctuations in currency exchange rates, which could materially adversely affect our financial position.
Our company’s primary currency for operations is the United States dollar and, to a lesser extent, the “Cedi”, the Ghanaian currency. Our
company maintains most of its working capital in United States dollars. Our company converts its United States funds to foreign currencies as
certain payment obligations become due. Accordingly, our company is subject to fluctuations in the rates of currency exchange between the
United States dollar and these foreign currencies and these fluctuations, which are beyond our control, could materially affect our company’s
financial position and results of operations. A significant portion of the operating costs of our projects are in Cedi.
13 -
Our company obtains services and materials and supplies from providers in West Africa. The costs of goods and services could increase or
decrease due to changes in the value of the United States dollar or the Cedi or other currencies. Consequently, exploration and development
of our projects could be more costly than anticipated.
Our company’s business is impacted by any instability and fluctuations in global financial systems.
The recent credit crisis and related instability in the global financial system, although somewhat abated, has had, and may continue to have,
an impact on our company’s business and our company’s financial condition. Our company may face significant challenges if conditions in the
financial markets do not continue to improve. Our company’s ability to access the capital markets may be severely restricted at a time when
our company wishes or needs to access such markets, which could have a materially adverse impact on our company’s flexibility to react to
changing economic and business conditions or carry on our operations.
Our company is subject to the effects that historically high inflation rate may have on its results.
Our company’s mineral properties are located in Ghana, which has historically experienced relatively high rates of inflation. High inflation
rates in Ghana could cause the prices of materials obtained within Ghana to be slightly higher. As our company maintains our funds in U.S.
and/or Canadian currency, the effect due to Ghanaian currency fluctuations is minimal.
The Government of Ghana has the right to increase its current ownership interest of 10% in our company’s subsidiary, Xtra-Gold
Mining Limited (“XG Mining”), through which our company holds, among other things, its interest in our Kibi project and our other
projects, for a consideration agreed upon by the parties or by arbitration and has a right of pre-emption to purchase all minerals
produced by XG Mining. If the Government of Ghana were to exercise any of its rights, our company’s results of operations in future
periods could be adversely impacted.
The Government of Ghana is granted a 10% free carried interest in all mining operations and has no obligation to contribute to development or
operating expenses. The Government of Ghana currently has a 10% free carried interest in XG Mining, one of our Ghanaian subsidiaries that
holds all of the mining leases securing our interest in all of the concessions where our projects are located. The Government of Ghana also
has:
the right to acquire an additional interest in XG Mining for a price to be determined by agreement or arbitration;
the right to acquire a special share (as defined in the Minerals and Mining Act, 2006 (Act 703), as amended by the Minerals and Mining
Act, 2010 (Act 794) (the “Mining Act (Ghana)”) in XG Mining at any time for such consideration as the Government of Ghana and XG
Mining might agree; and
a right of pre-emption to purchase all minerals raised, won or obtained in Ghana.
While our company is not aware of the Government of Ghana having ever exercised such right of pre-emption, our company cannot assure our
stockholders that the Government of Ghana would not seek to exercise one or more of these rights which, if exercised, could have an adverse
affect on our company’s results of operations in future periods. If the Government of Ghana should exercise its right to either acquire the
additional interest in XG Mining or its right to acquire the special share, any profit that might otherwise be reported from XG Mining’s
operations would be proportionally reduced in the same percentage as the minority interest attributable to the Government of Ghana in that
subsidiary would be increased. If the Government of Ghana should exercise its right to purchase all gold and other minerals produced by XG
Mining, the price it would pay may be lower than the price our company could sell the gold or other minerals for in transactions with third
parties and it could result in a reduction in any revenues our company might otherwise report from XG Mining’s operations.
Our company currently relies on the continued services of key executives, including the directors of our company and a small
number of highly skilled and experienced executives and personnel. The loss of their services may delay our company’s exploration
activities or adversely affect our business and future operations.
Due to the relatively small size of our company, the loss of these persons or our company's inability to attract and retain additional highly
skilled employees may lead to our company having to delay our exploration activities or adversely affect our business and future operations.
14 -
Our company may experience difficulty in engaging the services of qualified personnel in connection with our technical operations
at our projects.
If the loss of any of our company’s key technical personnel occurs at any of our projects, our company may have difficulty finding qualified
replacements. Our company’s inability to hire and retain the services of qualified persons for these positions in a timely manner could impede
our company’s exploration activities at any of our projects which would have a material adverse effect on our company’s ability to conduct
business.
Our company is subject to changes in political stability in West Africa.
Our company conducts exploration and development activities in Ghana, West Africa. Our company’s projects in Ghana may be subject to the
effects of political changes, war and civil conflict, changes in government policy, lack of law enforcement and labor unrest and the creation of
new laws. These changes (which may include new or modified taxes or other government levies as well as other legislation) may impact the
profitability and viability of our properties. The effect of unrest and instability on political, social or economic conditions in Ghana could result in
the impairment of exploration, development and mining operations. Any such changes are beyond the control of our company and may
adversely affect our business.
In addition, local tribal authorities in West Africa exercise significant influence with respect to local land use, land labor and local security.
From time to time, the Government of Ghana has intervened in the export of mineral concentrates in response to concerns about the validity of
export rights and payment of duties. No assurances can be given that the co-operation of such authorities, if sought by our company, will be
obtained, and if obtained, maintained.
The Government of Ghana also recently announced that it will be engaging companies to address the issue of dividend payment, exemptions
and the mining sector fiscal regime, generally. As a result of these discussions, the Government of Ghana could amend the Mining Act
(Ghana) or other regulations resulting in a material adverse impact on our company including increases in operating costs, capital
expenditures or abandonment or delays in development of mining properties.
The mining industry is a competitive industry and our company may compete with larger, more established competitors for gold
acquisition opportunities.
Significant and increasing competition exists for the limited number of gold acquisition opportunities available. As a result of this competition,
some of which is with large established mining companies with substantial capabilities and greater financial and technical resources than our
company, our company may be unable to acquire additional attractive mining properties on terms we consider acceptable.
The marketability of our company’s minerals may be influenced by various industry conditions.
The marketability of minerals, if any, which may be acquired or discovered by our company, will be affected by numerous factors beyond the
control of our company. These factors include market fluctuations, the proximity and capacity of mineral markets and processing equipment
and government regulations, including regulations relating to prices, taxes, royalties, land tenure and environmental protection. The exact
effect of these factors cannot be accurately predicted, but the combination of these factors may result in our company not receiving an
adequate return on invested capital. The probability of our company not receiving an adequate return on invested capital will be, to a
significant extent, dependent upon the market price for gold. Gold prices fluctuate dramatically and are affected by numerous industry factors,
such as interest rates, exchange rates, inflation or deflation, fluctuation in the value of the United States dollar and foreign currencies, global
and regional supply and demand for precious metals, forward selling by producers, central bank sales and purchases of gold, production and
cost levels in major gold producing regions and the political and economic conditions of major gold, copper or other mineral-producing
countries throughout the world. Moreover, gold prices are also affected by macro-economic factors such as expectations for inflation, interest
rates, currency exchange rates and global or regional political and economic situations. The current demand for, and supply of, gold affects
gold prices, but not necessarily in the same manner as current demand and supply affect the prices of other commodities. The potential supply
of gold consists of new gold mine production plus existing stocks of bullion and fabricated gold held by governments, financial institutions,
industrial organizations and individuals. Since mine production in any single year constitutes a very small portion of the total potential supply
of gold, normal variations in current production do not necessarily have a significant effect on the supply of gold or its price.
15 -
It may be difficult for our stockholders to enforce any judgment obtained in the United States against us or our officers or directors,
which may limit the remedies otherwise available to our stockholders.
The majority of our directors and officers are residents of countries other than the United States and all or a substantial portion of such
persons’ assets are located outside the United States. As a result, it may be difficult or impossible for our stockholders to:
effect service of process on our directors or officers, or
enforce any United States judgment they receive against us or our officers or directors in a foreign court, or including judgments
predicated upon the securities laws of the United States or any state thereof. In addition, there is uncertainty as to whether foreign courts
would be competent to hear original actions brought in such foreign court against us or such persons predicated upon the securities laws
of the United States or any state thereof. Consequently, you may be effectively prevented from pursuing remedies under U.S. federal
securities laws against us or our officers and directors. The foregoing risks also apply to those experts identified in this proxy
statement/prospectus that are not residents of the United States.
Risks Relating to our Common Stock
Broker-dealers may be discouraged from effecting transactions in our common stock because they are considered a penny stock
and are subject to the penny stock rules.
Rules 15g-1 through 15g-9 promulgated under the Exchange Act impose sales practice and disclosure requirements on certain brokers-
dealers who engage in certain transactions involving a “penny stock”. Subject to certain exceptions, a penny stock generally includes any
equity security not listed on a stock exchange that has a market price of less than $5.00 per share. Our common stock has traded below $5.00
per share throughout its trading history.
A broker-dealer selling penny stock to anyone other than an established customer or “accredited investor”, generally, an individual with net
worth in excess of $1,000,000 or an annual income exceeding $200,000, or $300,000 together with his or her spouse, must make a special
suitability determination for the purchaser and must receive the purchaser‘s written consent to the transaction prior to sale, unless the broker-
dealer or the transaction is otherwise exempt. In addition, the penny stock regulations require the broker-dealer to deliver, prior to any
transaction involving a penny stock, a disclosure schedule prepared by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission relating to the
penny stock market, unless the broker-dealer or the transaction is otherwise exempt. A broker-dealer is also required to disclose commissions
payable to the broker-dealer and the registered representative and current quotations for the securities. Finally, a broker-dealer is required to
send monthly statements disclosing recent price information with respect to the penny stock held in a customer‘s account and information with
respect to the limited market in penny stocks. The additional sales practice and disclosure requirements imposed upon broker-dealers may
discourage broker-dealers from effecting transactions in our shares of common stock, which could severely limit the market liquidity of the
shares of our common stock and impede the sale of our shares of common stock in the secondary market.
16 -
The price of shares of our common stock is likely to be highly volatile and possibly illiquid, which could cause the value of
investments to decline.
The market price of our shares of common stock may be highly volatile and possibly illiquid. Our stockholders may not be able to resell their
shares of our common stock following periods of volatility because of the market’s adverse reaction to volatility. Factors that could cause such
volatility may include, among other things:
actual or anticipated fluctuations in our quarterly operating results;
large purchases or sales of shares of our common stock;
additions or departures of key personnel;
investor perception of our company’s business prospects;
conditions or trends in other industry related companies;
changes in the market valuations of publicly traded companies in general and other industry-related companies; and
world-wide political, economic and financial conditions.
The markets for shares of our common stock is limited.
There is currently only a limited trading market for shares of our common stock. Shares of our common stock trade on the OTC Bulletin Board
under the symbol “XTGR” which is a limited market in comparison to the NASDAQ Global Market, the NYSE MKT LLC and other national
securities exchanges. Our securities are also listed on the TSX under the trading symbol “XTG”. The market for our securities on the TSX only
commenced in November 2010 and, to date, trading has been limited. There is no assurance that the market for shares of our common stock
on the OTC Bulletin Board or TSX will develop into active trading markets.
In connection with future stock offerings, the value of our company’s shares of common stock may become diluted as more shares
of our common stock are issued and outstanding.
Our company may undertake in the future additional offerings of shares of our common stock or of securities convertible into shares of our
common stock. The increase in the number of shares of our common stock issued and outstanding and the possibility of sales of such shares
of our common stock may depress the price of shares of our common stock. In addition, as a result of such additional shares of our common
stock, the voting power of our company’s existing stockholders will be diluted.
We have never paid cash dividends on shares of our common stock.
We have never paid dividends on shares of our common stock and do not presently intend to pay cash dividends on shares of our common
stock. Any future decisions as to the payment of dividends will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors, subject to applicable law.
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT CONCERNING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This proxy statement/prospectus, including all exhibits hereto, contains forward-looking statements and forward-looking information. Forward-
looking statements are with reference to our financial condition, results of operations, business prospects, plans, objectives, goals, strategies,
future events, capital expenditure, and exploration and development efforts. Words such as “anticipates”, “expects”, “intends”, “plans”,
“forecasts”, “projects”, “budgets”, “believes”, “seeks”, “estimates”, “could”, “might”, “should”, and similar expressions identify forward-looking
statements. Although we believe that our plans, intentions and expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, we
cannot be certain that these plans, intentions or expectations will be achieved. Actual results, performance or achievements could differ
materially from those contemplated, expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. These statements include comments regarding
the establishment and estimates of mineral reserves and mineral resources, production, production commencement dates, productions costs,
cash operating costs per ounce, total cash costs per ounce, grade, processing capacity, potential mine life, feasibility studies, development
costs, capital and operating expenditures, exploration, the closing of certain transactions including acquisitions and offerings. All statements,
other than statements of historical facts, included in this proxy statement/prospectus, our other filings with the SEC and Canadian securities
commissions and in news releases and public statements made by our officers, directors or representatives of our company, that address
activities, events or developments that we expect or anticipate will or may occur in the future are forward-looking statements and forward-
looking information.
17 -
The following, in addition to the factors described elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus under “Risk Factors”, are among the factors
that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements:
unexpected changes in business and economic conditions;
significant increases or decreases in gold prices;
changes in interest rates and currency exchange rates;
unanticipated grade changes;
changes in metallurgy;
access and availability of materials, equipment, supplies, labor and supervision, power and water;
determination of mineral resources and mineral reserves;
availability of drill rigs; changes in project parameters;
costs and timing of development of new mineral reserves; results of current and future exploration activities;
results of pending and future feasibility studies; joint venture relationships;
political or economic instability, either globally or in the countries in which we operate;
local and community impacts and issues;
timing of receipt of government approvals; accidents and labor disputes; environmental costs and risks; and
competitive factors, including competition for property acquisitions; and availability of capital at reasonable rates or at all.
With respect to any forward-looking statement that includes a statement of its underlying assumptions or bases, we believe such assumptions
or bases to be reasonable and have formed them in good faith, assumed facts or bases almost always vary from actual results, and the
differences between assumed facts or bases and actual results can be material depending on the circumstances. When, in any forward-
looking statement, we express an expectation or belief as to future results, that expectation or belief is expressed in good faith and is believed
to have a reasonable basis, but there can be no assurance that the stated expectation or belief will result or be achieved or accomplished. All
subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us, or anyone acting on our behalf, are expressly qualified in their
entirety by the cautionary statements. Except for our ongoing obligations to disclose material information under the Federal securities laws, we
do not undertake any obligations to publicly release any revisions to any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after
the date of this proxy statement/prospectus or to reflect unanticipated events that may occur. These forward-looking statements speak only as
of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus and you should not rely on these statements without also considering the risks and uncertainties
associated with these statements and our business.
Background to the Continuation
THE CONTINUATION
Our Board of Directors has determined that it is advisable for our company to continue from Nevada to the BVI. Our management has
determined that the Continuation will be the most effective means of achieving the desired change of domicile. Nevada corporate law allows a
corporation that is incorporated under Nevada law to convert into a foreign entity pursuant to a conversion approved by the stockholders Xtra-
Gold Nevada.
Assuming the proposal is approved at the special meeting, following the special meeting, articles of conversion will be filed with the Secretary
of State of Nevada. An application to continue will also be filed with the Registrar of Corporate Affairs in the BVI. Upon the filing and
subsequent receipt of a certificate of continuation from the Registrar of Corporate Affairs in the BVI, we will be continued as a BVI company
and will be governed by the laws of the BVI.
18 -
The assets and liabilities of the Xtra-Gold BVI immediately after the Continuation will be identical to the assets and liabilities of Xtra-Gold
Nevada immediately before the Continuation. The current officers and directors of Xtra-Gold Nevada will be the officers and directors of Xtra-
Gold BVI. The change of domicile will not result in any material change to our business and will not have any effect on the relative equity or
voting interests of our stockholders. At the effectiveness of the Continuation, each previously issued and outstanding share of Xtra-Gold
Nevada common stock will become one share of Xtra-Gold BVI.
The change in domicile will, however, result in changes in the rights and obligations of current stockholders under applicable corporate laws.
For an explanation of these differences see “Comparative Rights of Stockholders” on page 33 of this proxy statement/prospectus. In addition,
the Continuation may have material tax consequences to our stockholders which may or may not be adverse to any particular stockholders
depending on the stockholder’s particular circumstances. For a more detailed explanation of the tax consequences, see “Material United
States Federal Tax Consequences” commencing on page 25 and “Certain Canadian Income Tax Consequences” commencing on page 31 of
this proxy statement/prospectus.
Pursuant to NRS 92A.105, our Board of Directors has adopted the Plan of Conversion, and recommends that our stockholders approve the
Continuation at the special meeting.
Reasons for the Change in Domicile
Given that none of our operations or material assets are located in Nevada, we believe that the Continuation to an international jurisdiction
such as the BVI will more accurately reflect our international operations, which are primarily conducted in West Africa.
The BVI has enjoyed a long history of political and economic stability and is considered to be a well-developed international business and
financial centre. BVI companies (provided that they do not operate or hold real property in the BVI or employ persons resident in the BVI) and
all amounts paid by them to non-residents are generally exempt from all local taxes and stamp duty. Generally, all dividends, royalties,
interest, fees and management fees paid or deemed to be paid by a company to a person resident outside the BVI are exempt from tax and no
amount is required to be withheld under the jurisdiction’s legislation. A company incorporated under the BVI Act is not liable for any tax in the
BVI on the transfer of any securities or assets of the company. However, our company will continue to be treated as a U.S. domestic
corporation for United States tax purposes after the Continuation, subject to tax on our worldwide income, and amounts paid by us will be
subject to U.S. tax withholding and reporting rules (as applicable). Our stockholders are urged to review the discussion under “Material United
States Federal Tax Consequences” beginning on page 25.
Effect of the Continuation
We are currently governed by the NRS. The NRS allows a corporation that is incorporated under the NRS to convert into a foreign entity
pursuant to a plan of conversion approved by the stockholders of such corporation. Pursuant to the proposed Continuation, subject to
stockholders’ approval at the special meeting, the articles of conversion will be filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Nevada. An
application to continue which includes the proposed Memorandum and Articles for Xtra-Gold BVI will also be filed with the Registrar of
Corporate Affairs in the BVI.
Upon the issuance of a certificate of continuation under the BVI Act, the Continuation will become effective and we will become subject to the
BVI Act, as if our company had been incorporated under the BVI Act, and the Memorandum and Articles filed as part of the Continuation will
be deemed to be the constitutional documents of our company. A copy of the form of our Memorandum and Articles are set forth as Exhibit B in
the Plan of Conversion which is attached as Appendix A to this proxy statement/prospectus. The form of our Memorandum and Articles may
be amended and is subject to the approval of our shareholders.
The BVI Act provides that when a company continues under the BVI Act:
19 -
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the BVI Act applies to the company as if it had been incorporated under the BVI Act;
 
the company is capable of exercising all the powers of a company incorporated under the BVI Act;
 
the company is no longer to be treated as a company incorporated under the laws of a jurisdiction outside the BVI; and
 
the Memorandum and Articles filed as part of the Continuation become the Memorandum and Articles of the company;
(i)
 
(ii)
 
(iii)
 
(iv)
 
the Continuation under the BVI Act does not affect:
 
(i)
 
(ii)
 
without limiting subsection (b) above,
 
(i)
the continuity of the company as a legal entity; or
 
the assets, rights, obligations or liabilities of the company;
(ii)
no conviction, judgment, ruling, order, claim, debt, liability or obligation due or to become due, and no cause existing, against
the company or against any shareholder, director, officer or agent thereof, is released or impaired by its continuation as a
company under the BVI Act; and
 
no proceedings, whether civil or criminal, pending at the time of the issue by the Registrar of Corporate Affairs in the BVI of a
certificate of continuation by or against the company, or against any shareholder, director, officer or agent thereof, are abated or
discontinued by its continuation as a company under the BVI Act, but the proceedings may be enforced, prosecuted, settled or
compromised by or against the company or against the shareholder, director, officer or agent thereof, as the case may be; and
all shares in the company that were outstanding before the issue by the Registrar of Corporate Affairs in the BVI of a certificate of
continuation shall be deemed to have been issued in conformity with the BVI Act.
Charter Documents Following the Continuation
Upon completion of the Continuation, our charter documents will be comprised of our Memorandum and Articles, in the forms set forth as
Exhibit B to the Plan of Conversion which is attached as Appendix A to this proxy statement/prospectus.
Authorized Capital Following Continuation
The Memorandum and Articles of Xtra-Gold BVI will provide that Xtra-Gold BVI will be authorized to issue an unlimited number of shares
without par value. Xtra-Gold Nevada’s articles of incorporation presently provide that our authorized capital is 250,000,000 shares of common
stock. Accordingly, the Board of Directors of Xtra-Gold BVI will have significantly more discretion with respect to the issuance of our shares as
a result of the Continuation. The terms of the shares of Xtra-Gold BVI following the Continuation will be substantially equivalent to the terms of
the Xtra-Gold Nevada shares of common stock immediately before the Continuation, except that following the Continuation, the Xtra-Gold BVI
shares will be subject to redemption, purchase and acquisition by us only with the written consent of the holder of such shares. Because the
Continuation results in an increased number of authorized but unissued shares, it may be construed as having an anti-takeover effect.
Although the Continuation is not being undertaken by our Board of Directors for this purpose, in the future our Board of Directors could, subject
to its fiduciary duties and applicable law, use the increased number of authorized but unissued shares to frustrate persons seeking to take
over or otherwise gain control of our company by, for example, privately placing shares with purchasers who might side with our Board of
Directors in opposing a hostile takeover bid. Shares could also be issued to a holder that would thereafter have sufficient voting power to
assure that any proposal to amend Xtra-Gold BVI’s Memorandum and Articles or certain provisions thereof would not receive the requisite
vote. Such uses of our shares could render more difficult, or discourage, an attempt to acquire control of our company if such transactions were
opposed by our Board of Directors. An indirect result of the anti-takeover effect of the Continuation could possibly deny our shareholders the
opportunity to obtain any advantages of a hostile takeover, including, but not limited to, receiving a premium to the then current market price of
our shares, if the same was so offered by a party attempting a hostile takeover of our company. We are not aware of any party’s interest in or
efforts to engage in a hostile takeover attempt as of the date of this proxy statement/ prospectus.
20 -
Reporting Obligations under Securities Laws
The Continuation will not affect our status as a reporting issuer under the securities legislation of the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta or
Ontario, or in the United States, and we will remain subject to the requirements of the securities legislation of such jurisdictions.
We presently prepare our financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We file our audited annual financial statements with the SEC
on Annual Reports on Form 10-K and our unaudited interim financial statements with the SEC on Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q. Upon
completion of the Continuation, we anticipate that we will meet the definition of a “foreign private issuer” in the United States under the
Exchange Act. As a reporting foreign private issuer, we anticipate that we will file a Form 20-F Annual Report each year with the SEC. The
Form 20-F Annual Report will include financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We will not be required to file interim
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, however we will be required to file our interim financial statements and MD&A that we prepare as a reporting
issuer under Canadian securities legislation with the SEC on SEC Form 6-K. Our interim financial statements will also be prepared in
accordance with U.S. GAAP similar to our current Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q which include interim financial statements prepared in
accordance with U.S. GAAP.
In addition, as a foreign private issuer, our directors, officers and 10% stockholders will not be subject to the insider reporting requirements of
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act or “short swing” profit liability under Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act, and we will not be subject to the
proxy rules of Section 14 of the Exchange Act. Furthermore, Regulation FD does not apply to non-United States companies and will not apply
to us upon completion of the Continuation.
We are a reporting issuer in the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario, Canada. Whether or not we continue to the BVI, we will
remain subject to Canadian disclosure requirements including publishing news releases, filing information about major changes for our
company, filing annual and quarterly financial statements and MD&A, and filing reports in connection with changes in outstanding and
reserved securities. Additionally, insider reports are required to be filed in Canada via SEDI in connection with transactions regarding trading
in our shares of common stock or acquisitions and dispositions of other issued or granted company securities by our officers, directors and
significant stockholders holding more than 10% of the voting rights attached to our outstanding voting securities.
Effective Time of the Continuation
Subject to the approval of the Continuation at the special meeting, the Continuation will become effective upon:
the delivery and filing of articles of conversion to the Nevada Secretary of State in accordance with NRS 92A.205; and
21 -
the issuance of a certificate of continuation by the Registrar of Corporate Affairs under the BVI Act in accordance with the BVI Act.
We anticipate that our articles of conversion will be filed and our application to continue will be made promptly after the special meeting.
Conditions to the Consummation of the Continuation
The only material consent, approval or authorization of or filing with any governmental entity required to consummate the Continuation are the
approval of our stockholders at the special meeting in accordance with Nevada corporate law. Upon the receipt of such approval, we will then
file the articles of conversion with the Nevada Secretary of State and the application to continue with the Registrar of Corporate Affairs under
the BVI Act.
Exchange of Stock Certificates
No exchange of certificates that, before the Continuation, represented shares of our common stock is required with respect to the Continuation
and the transactions contemplated by it. Promptly after the effective time of the Continuation, we shall mail to each record holder of our shares
of common stock immediately before the effective time of the Continuation, a letter of transmittal and instructions for use in surrendering those
certificates. Upon the surrender of each certificate formerly representing shares of Xtra-Gold Nevada common stock, together with a properly
completed letter of transmittal, we shall issue in exchange a share certificate of Xtra-Gold BVI, and the stock certificate representing shares of
common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada shall be cancelled. Until so surrendered and exchanged, each Xtra-Gold Nevada stock certificate shall
represent solely the right to receive shares of Xtra-Gold BVI.
Warrants and Stock Options
As of the effective time of the Continuation, all warrants and options to purchase shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada granted or
issued before the effective time of the Continuation will remain warrants and options to purchase shares of Xtra-Gold BVI.
Recommendation of the Board of Directors
OUR BOARD OF DIRECTORS HAS UNANIMOUSLY APPROVED THE CONTINUATION DESCRIBED IN THIS PROXY
STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS AND RECOMMENDS THAT OUR STOCKHOLDERS APPROVE THE CONTINUATION AT THE SPECIAL
MEETING.
In reaching its decision, our Board of Directors reviewed the fairness to our company and our stockholders of the proposed Continuation and
considered, without assigning relative weights to, the following factors:
the majority of our directors and executive officers are resident outside of the United States and our principal executive offices are
currently located outside of the United States;
the belief that there will be minimal United States tax consequences of the proposed Continuation;
the belief that the proposed Continuation may gain our company access to a larger capital market; and
our stockholders have an opportunity to vote on the proposed Continuation at the special meeting.
Without relying on any single factor listed above more than any other factor, but rather based upon their consideration of all such factors taken
as a whole, our Board of Directors have concluded that the Continuation proposal is fair to our company and our stockholders.
ACCORDINGLY, OUR BOARD OF DIRECTORS UNANIMOUSLY RECOMMENDS TO OUR STOCKHOLDERS THAT THEY VOTE
“FOR” THE PROPOSED CONTINUATION AT THE SPECIAL MEETING.
22 -
DISSENTERS’ RIGHTS
We are subject to the provisions of the NRS. Under Section 92A.120 of the NRS, the approval of the board of directors of a company and the
affirmative vote of the holders of at least a majority of its voting power is required to approve and adopt a plan of conversion. Our Board of
Directors has approved and adopted the Plan of Conversion by unanimous written consent, and our stockholders have been asked to
consider and vote upon the Continuation at the special meeting. If the Continuation is approved, eligible holders of our shares of common
stock that follow the procedures summarized below may be entitled to dissenters’ rights under Sections 92A.300 to 92A.500 of the NRS.
The following is a discussion of the material provisions of the law pertaining to dissenters’ rights as set forth in NRS Sections 92A.300 to
92A.500, a copy of which is attached hereto as Appendix B, which should be read in its entirety. Beneficial stockholders must act promptly to
cause the stockholder of record to follow the steps summarized below to properly, and in a timely manner, perfect their dissenters’ rights.
Failure to properly demand and perfect dissenters’ rights in accordance with NRS Sections 92A.300 to 92A.500 will result in the loss of
dissenters’ rights.
Eligible stockholders who wish to assert dissenters’ rights must not vote for the Continuation and must follow the steps set forth in the
dissenters’ notice described below.
If the Continuation is authorized by our stockholders at the special meeting, we will send a written dissenters’ notice within 10 days after the
effective date of the Continuation to all eligible stockholders who did not vote “FOR” the Continuation and who, before the vote was taken,
gave written notice of their intent to demand payment for their shares of our common stock.
The notice will:
state where the demand for payment must be sent and where and when stock certificates are to be deposited;
inform the holders of shares of our common stock not represented by certificates to what extent the transfer of shares of our common
stock will be restricted after the demand for payment is received;
supply a form for demanding payment;
set a date by which we must receive the demand for payment, which may not be less than 30 or more than 60 days after the date the
notice is delivered; and
be accompanied by a copy of NRS Sections 92A.300 through 92A.500.
An eligible stockholder to whom a dissenters’ notice is sent must, by the date set forth in the dissenters’ notice:
demand payment;
certify whether he or she acquired beneficial ownership of the shares of our common stock before the date required to be set forth in the
dissenters’ notice for this certification; and
deposit his or her certificates in accordance with the terms of the dissenters’ notice.
- 23 -
Eligible stockholders who do not demand payment or deposit their certificates where required, each by the date set forth in the dissenters’
notice, will not be entitled to demand payment for their shares of our common stock under the NRS governing dissenters’ rights.
Within 30 days after receipt of a valid demand for payment, we will pay each dissenter who complied with the procedures described by the
Nevada dissenters’ rights statute the amount we have estimated to be the fair value of the shares of our common stock, plus accrued interest.
The payment will be accompanied by:
our balance sheet as of the end of a fiscal year ending not more than 16 months before the date of payment, a statement of income for
that fiscal year, a statement of changes in stockholders’ equity for that fiscal year and the latest available interim financial statements, if
any;
a statement of our estimate of the fair value of the shares of our common stock;
an explanation of how the interest was calculated;
a statement of dissenters’ rights to demand payment under NRS Section 92A.480; and
a copy of NRS Sections 92A.300 through 92A.500.
An eligible dissenter may notify us in writing of the dissenter’s own estimate of the fair value of the shares of our common stock and interest
due, and demand payment based upon his or her estimate, less our estimated fair value payment, or reject the offer for payment made by us
and demand payment of the fair value of the dissenter’s shares of our common stock and interest due if the dissenter believes that the amount
paid or offered is less than the fair value of the dissenter’s shares of our common stock or that the interest due is incorrectly calculated. A
dissenter waives his right to demand such payment unless the dissenter notifies us of his demand in writing within 30 days after we have
made or offered payment for the dissenter’s shares of our common stock.
If a demand for payment remains unsettled, we will commence a proceeding within 60 days after receiving the demand for payment and
petition the Nevada Court to determine the fair value of the shares of our common stock and accrued interest. If we do not commence the
proceeding within the 60-day period, we will be required to pay each dissenter whose demand remains unsettled the amount demanded.
Each dissenter who is made a party to the proceeding is entitled to a judgment:
for the amount, if any, by which the Nevada Court finds the fair value of the dissenter’s shares of our common stock, plus interest,
exceeds the amount paid by us; or
for the fair value, plus accrued interest, of the dissenter’s after-acquired shares for which we elected to withhold payment pursuant to
Nevada law.
Under Nevada law, the fair value of a dissenter’s shares of stock means the value of the shares of our common stock immediately before the
consummation of the Continuation, excluding any increase or decrease in value in anticipation of the Continuation unless excluding such
increase or decrease is inequitable, and without discounting for lack of marketability or minority status. The value determined by the Nevada
Court for a dissenter’s shares of our common stock could be more than, less than, or the same as the consideration we offer pursuant to the
dissenters’ notice, but the form of consideration payable as a result of the dissent proceeding would be cash. The Nevada Court may, but it is
not required, to appoint one or more appraisers to assist the Nevada Court in determining the fair market value of the shares of our common
stock. Accordingly, no stockholder has a right to compel an appraisal of the shares of our common stock.
24 -
The Nevada Court will determine all of the costs of the proceeding, including the reasonable compensation and expenses of any appraisers
appointed by the Nevada Court. The Nevada Court will assess the costs against us, except that the court may assess costs against all or
some of the dissenters, in the amounts the Nevada Court finds equitable, to the extent that the Nevada Court finds the dissenters acted
arbitrarily, vexatiously or not in good faith in demanding payment. The Nevada Court may also assess the fees and expenses of the counsel
and experts for the respective parties, in amounts the court finds equitable:
against us in favor of all dissenters if the Nevada Court finds that we did not substantially comply with the Nevada dissenters’ rights
statute; or
against either us or a dissenter in favor of any other party, if the Nevada Court finds that the party against whom the fees and expenses
are assessed acted arbitrarily, vexatiously or not in good faith with respect to the dissenters’ rights provided under the Nevada
dissenters’ rights statute.
If the Nevada Court finds that the services of counsel for any dissenter were of substantial benefit to other dissenters similarly situated, and
that the fees for those services should not be assessed against us, the court may award to those counsel reasonable fees to be paid out of the
amounts awarded to the dissenters who were benefited.
The foregoing summary of the material rights of eligible dissenting stockholders does not purport to be a complete statement of such rights and
the procedures to be followed by stockholders desiring to exercise any available dissenters’ rights. The preservation and exercise of
dissenters’ rights require strict adherence to the applicable provisions of the NRS.
MATERIAL UNITED STATES FEDERAL TAX CONSEQUENCES
Subject to the limitations and qualifications described herein, the following discussion constitutes, as of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, the opinion of Hodgson
Russ LLP, special U.S. tax counsel to Xtra-Gold Nevada (
“Tax Counsel”), as to the material U.S. federal income tax consequences to:
Xtra-Gold Nevada of the Continuation; and
the stockholders of Xtra-Gold Nevada of the Continuation and the post-Continuation ownership and disposition of stock in Xtra-Gold BVI.
Scope of Discussion
This discussion constitutes Tax Counsel’s opinion to the extent of the legal conclusions stated herein. This discussion addresses the material United States federal income
tax considerations, under current U.S. law, generally applicable to U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders (as defined below) of the Continuation and the ownership and
disposition of the shares of common stock our company after the Continuation. This summary does not address all potentially relevant U.S. federal income tax matters
including the U.S. federal income tax consequences of a U.S. Holder or Non-U.S. Holder of shares of our common stock exercising dissenters’ rights pursuant to this proxy
statement/prospectus and it does not address consequences to persons subject to special provisions of U.S. federal income tax law, such as those described below as
excluded from the definitions of a U.S. Holder and Non-U.S. Holder. United States alternative minimum tax considerations are not addressed in this summary. In addition,
this summary does not cover any state, local or foreign tax consequences, nor any U.S. federal gift, estate or generationskipping transfer tax consequences (except for
such considerations addressed briefly herein for Non-U.S. Holders).
The following summary is based upon the Code, Treasury Regulations, published IRS rulings, published administrative positions of the IRS, and court decisions that are
currently applicable, any of which could be materially and adversely changed, possibly on a retroactive basis, at any time (including, without limitation, United States rates of
taxation). This summary does not consider the potential effects, both adverse and beneficial, of any recently proposed legislation which, if enacted, could be applied,
possibly on a retroactive basis, at any time. U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders should note that no rulings have been or will be sought from the IRS, nor will any opinions of
counsel be obtained other than herein, with respect to any of the U.S. federal income tax matters discussed in this summary. There is no assurance that the IRS will not
successfully challenge the conclusions reached herein.
25 -
U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders
As used herein, a “U.S. Holder” means a holder of shares of our common stock who is: a citizen, or an individual resident (as defined under
United States tax laws), of the United States; a corporation created or organized in or under the laws of the United States or of any political
subdivision thereof; an estate the income of which is taxable in the United States irrespective of source; or a trust if:
a court within the United States is able to exercise primary supervision over the trust’s administration and one or more United States
persons have the authority to control all of its substantial decisions; or
the trust was in existence on August 20, 1996 and has properly elected to continue to be treated as a United States person.
This summary is limited to U.S. Holders who hold their shares of our common stock directly (e.g., not through an intermediary entity such as a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or trust).
As used herein, a “Non-U.S. Holder” means a holder of shares of our common stock that is not a U.S. Holder and who holds their shares of
our common stock directly (e.g., not through an intermediary entity such as a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or trust).
This summary does not address the U.S. federal income tax consequences applicable to U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders that are subject
to special provisions under the Code, including, but not limited to, the following:
tax exempt organizations, qualified retirement plans, individual retirement accounts, or other tax-deferred accounts;
financial institutions, insurance companies, real estate investment trusts, or regulated investment companies;
dealers in securities or currencies or traders in securities that elect to apply a mark-to-market accounting method;
U.S. Holders that have a "functional currency" other than the U.S. dollar;
U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders that own shares of our common stock as part of a straddle, hedging transaction, conversion
transaction, constructive sale, or other arrangement involving more than one position;
U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders that acquired shares of our common stock in connection with the exercise of employee stock options
or otherwise as compensation for services;
U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders that hold shares of our common stock other than as a capital asset within the meaning of Section
1221 of the Code; or
U.S. tax expatriates or former long-term residents of the U.S.
- 26 -
U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders that are subject to special provisions under the Code, including U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders
described immediately above, should consult their own tax advisors regarding the U.S. federal income tax consequences arising from and
relating to the Continuation and the ownership and disposition of shares of common stock of our company following the Continuation.
Treatment of our Company as a U.S. Corporation for Tax Purposes Following the Continuation
The Continuation of our company from Nevada to the BVI will result in the application of the U.S. “corporate inversion” rules. United States
federal income tax law with respect to corporate inversions provides in certain cases that a non-U.S. corporation may be treated as a U.S.
corporation for all purposes of the Code. An inversion can occur in certain transactions in which a non-U.S. corporation acquires substantially
all of the assets of or equity interests in a U.S. corporation, if, after the transaction, former equity owners of the U.S. corporation own 80% or
more of the stock, by vote or by value, in the non-U.S. corporation. Our company believes that these conditions will be met as a result of the
Continuation.
Thus, even though following the Continuation our company will be organized under the laws of the BVI and treated as a BVI company for
corporate law and BVI tax purposes, we intend to treat our company also as a U.S. domestic corporation under United States federal tax law,
fully subject to United States federal income tax on our worldwide income under Section 7874(b) of the Code, and the remainder of this
discussion assumes such treatment.
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences of the Continuation
The Continuation should be treated as a tax-free reorganization pursuant to Section 368(a)(1)(F) of the Code, and should therefore not be
taxable to our company. Moreover, U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders should not recognize gain or loss on their shares of common stock of
Xtra-Gold Nevada as a result of the Continuation. Accordingly, such Holders’ tax bases in and holding periods for their shares of Xtra-Gold
BVI after the Continuation will be the same as their tax bases in and holding periods for their shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada
before the Continuation. Our company and our stockholders may be required to report certain information to the IRS in connection
with the Continuation. Accordingly, U.S. Holders and Non-U.S. Holders should consult with their own tax advisors regarding any
statements or information reporting to the IRS in connection with the Continuation.
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Considerations of Owning Shares after the Continuation
U.S. Holders
Distributions on Shares
For United States federal income tax purposes, the gross amount of any distribution (including non-cash property) paid by our company
(including BVI taxes withheld therefrom, if any) with respect to shares generally should be included in the gross income of a U.S. Holder as a
dividend to the extent such distribution is paid out of our current or accumulated earnings and profits, as determined under United States
federal income tax principles. To the extent that the amount of any distribution exceeds our company’s current and accumulated earnings and
profits for a taxable year, the distribution first will be treated as a tax-free return of capital to the extent of the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in
the shares and to the extent that such distribution exceeds the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the shares, will be taxed as a capital gain
(see “Capital Gains and Losses” below). Dividends received by non-corporate U.S. Holders may be subject to United States federal income
tax at lower rates (generally 15%) than other types of ordinary income in taxable years beginning on or before December 31, 2012 if certain
conditions are met. These conditions include the U.S. Holder’s satisfaction of a holding period requirement, and the U.S. Holder not treating
the distribution as “investment income” for purposes of the investment interest deduction rules. Unless the reduced rate provision is extended
by subsequent legislation, dividends received on or after January 1, 2013 will be taxed at ordinary income rates.
27 -
Dividend distributions to U.S. Holders that are corporations may qualify for the 70% dividends received deduction, which is generally available
to corporations that own less than 20% of the voting power or value of the outstanding stock of the distributing U.S. corporation. A U.S. Holder
that is a corporation holding 20% or more of the distributing U.S. corporation’s stock may be eligible for an 80% dividends received deduction.
A dividends received deduction is available only if certain holding period and other taxable income requirements are met.
Dispositions of Shares
Gain or loss, if any, realized by a U.S. Holder on the sale or other disposition of shares generally will be subject to United States federal
income taxation as a capital gain or loss in an amount equal to the difference between the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the shares and
the amount realized on the disposition (see “Capital Gains and Losses” below). Any such gain or loss that a U.S. Holder recognizes will
generally be treated as U.S.-source income or loss.
Capital Gains and Losses
A capital gain or loss may be realized with respect to a disposition of shares, as described above. The amount of the capital gain or loss will
be equal to the difference between the U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in the shares and the amount realized on the transaction. Net capital
gains (i.e. capital gains in excess of capital losses) recognized by a non-corporate U.S. Holder (including an individual) on capital assets that
have been held for more than one year will generally be subject to a maximum United States federal income tax rate of 15% (which is
scheduled to increase to a maximum rate of 20% on January 1, 2013 unless the reduced rate is extended by subsequent legislation).
Deductions for capital losses are subject to certain limitations.
Foreign Tax Credit
Generally, a U.S. Holder who pays (or has withheld from distributions) non-U.S. income tax with respect to stock he or she owns is entitled to
either a deduction or a tax credit for such foreign tax paid or withheld. Generally, it is more advantageous to claim a credit because a credit
reduces United States federal income tax on a dollar-for-dollar basis, while a deduction merely reduces the taxpayer’s income subject to tax.
This election is made on a year-by-year basis and generally applies to all foreign taxes paid by (or withheld from) the U.S. Holder during that
year.
In addition, this limitation is calculated separately with respect to specific “baskets” of income. Foreign taxes assigned to a particular class of
income generally cannot offset United States tax on income assigned to another class. Unused foreign tax credits can generally be carried
back one year and carried forward ten years.
In this situation, however, it is unclear whether BVI tax paid or withheld on distributions on our shares (if any) will be creditable for U.S. federal
income tax purposes because following the Continuation, we will be treated as a U.S. domestic corporation for U.S. tax purposes. The IRS
may take the position that distributions on our shares are U.S.-source income and thus BVI income tax withheld on distributions is not
creditable against a U.S. Holder’s United States federal income tax liability. U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisors
concerning their ability to utilize foreign tax credits in this context.
Currency Fluctuations
For United States federal income tax purposes, the amount received by a U.S. Holder as payment with respect to a distribution on, or
disposition of, shares, if paid in non-U.S. currency, will be the U.S. dollar value of the payment at the date of the payment, regardless of
whether the payment is later converted into U.S. dollars. In such case, the U.S. Holder may recognize ordinary income or loss as a result of
currency fluctuations between the date on which the payment is made and the date the payment is converted into U.S. dollars.
Information Reporting and Backup Withholding Tax
Payments made within the U.S. or by a U.S. payor or U.S. middleman, of dividends on, and proceeds arising from the sale or other taxable
disposition of, shares will generally be subject to information reporting and backup withholding tax, at the rate of 28% (under current law), if a
U.S. Holder:
28 -
fails to furnish such U.S. Holder’s correct U.S. taxpayer identification number (generally on Form W-9);
is notified by the IRS that such U.S. Holder has previously failed to properly report interest and dividend income; or
fails to certify, under penalty of perjury, that such U.S. Holder has furnished its correct U.S. taxpayer identification number that the IRS
has not notified such U.S. Holder that it is subject to backup withholding tax, and that such U.S. Holder is a U.S. person.
However, certain exempt persons generally are excluded from these information reporting and backup withholding rules. Backup withholding
is not an additional tax. Any amounts withheld under the U.S. backup withholding tax rules will be allowed as a credit against a U.S. Holder’s
U.S. federal income tax liability, if any, or will be refunded, if such U.S. Holder furnishes required information to the IRS in a timely manner.
Each U.S. Holder should consult its own tax advisor regarding the information reporting and backup withholding rules.
New Tax on Net Investment Income
For tax years beginning after December 31, 2012, certain U.S. Holders that are individuals, estates or trusts whose income exceeds certain
thresholds will be required to pay an additional 3.8% tax on “net investment income”, which includes, among other things, dividends and net
gain from the sale or other disposition of property (other than property held in a trade or business) tax on net investment income. U.S. Holders
are urged to consult with their own tax advisors regarding the effect, if any, of this on their ownership and disposition of our shares.
Non-U.S. Holders
Distributions on Shares
The gross amount of any distribution by our company to a Non-U.S. Holder with respect to shares is treated first as dividend income to the
extent such distribution is paid out of our current or accumulated earnings and profits, as determined under United States federal income tax
principles. To the extent that the amount of any distribution exceeds our company’s current and accumulated earnings and profits for a taxable
year, the distribution is treated as a tax-free return of capital to the extent of the Non-U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in shares. Then, to the
extent that such distribution exceeds the Non-U.S. Holder’s adjusted tax basis in shares, it is taxed as gain from the sale or exchange of the
Non-U.S. Holder’s shares (see “Dispositions of Common Shares”, below).
Any such distribution that constitutes a dividend is treated as U.S.-source gross income for Non-U.S. Holders of shares, and is subject to
withholding under Section 1441 of the Code (unless it is treated as “effectively connected” income as described below). The withholding rate
under the Code on dividends is generally 30%, but may be reduced pursuant to a treaty. Any dividend income that is “effectively connected”
with a Non-U.S. Holder’s conduct of a U.S. trade or business (and, where a tax treaty applies, is attributable to a U.S. permanent
establishment maintained by the Non-U.S. Holder) will not be subject to the withholding tax described in this paragraph but instead will be
taxed as described in the second bullet point and the remaining discussion under the heading “Dispositions of Shares” below. Non-U.S.
Holders will be required to provide specific documentation to claim a treaty exemption or reduced rate of withholding with respect to the
distribution. Non-U.S. Holders should also review the discussion of the new FATCA rules, below.
Dispositions of Shares
A Non-U.S. Holder generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income tax with respect to gain recognized upon the disposition of shares
unless:
such Non-U.S. Holder is an individual who is present in the United States for a period or periods aggregating 183 days or more during
the taxable year of disposition and certain other conditions are met;
29 -
such gain is effectively connected with such Non-U.S. Holder’s conduct of a U.S. trade or business (and, where a tax treaty applies, is
attributable to a U.S. permanent establishment maintained by the Non-U.S. Holder); or
the common shares constitute a U.S. real property interest by reason of the company’s status as a “United States real property holding
corporation” for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
A Non-U.S. Holder described in the first bullet above is required to pay a flat 30% tax on the gain derived from the sale, which tax may be
offset by U.S.-source capital losses. A Non-U.S. Holder described in the second bullet above or, if the third bullet applies, is required to pay
tax on the net gain derived from the sale under regular graduated U.S. federal income tax rates, and corporate Non-U.S. Holders described in
the second bullet above may also be subject to branch profits tax at a 30% rate or such lower rate as may be specified by an applicable
income tax treaty. Non-U.S. Holders should consult any applicable income tax treaties that may provide for different results. It is assumed that
our company is not a United States real property holding corporation within the meaning of Section 897 of the Code for purposes of the third
bullet point above. Non-U.S. Holders should also review the discussion of the new FATCA rules, below.
U.S. Estate and Gift Tax Consequences of Owning Shares
The U.S. gift, estate, and generation-skipping transfer tax rules generally apply to a Non-U.S. Holder of our shares. In general, our shares may
be considered a U.S.-situs asset for U.S. estate tax purposes and could be subject to U.S. estate tax at the death of a Non-U.S. Holder
depending on the particular facts and circumstances of the Non-U.S. Holder. Non-U.S. Holders of our shares should consult an
independent tax advisor with respect to U.S. gift, estate, and generation-skipping transfer tax consequences applicable to the
ownership of our shares.
Backup Withholding and Information Reporting
Generally, our company must report annually to the IRS and to Non-U.S. Holders the amount of dividends paid and the amount of tax, if any,
withheld with respect to those payments. These information reporting requirements apply even if withholding is not required. Pursuant to tax
treaties or other agreements, the IRS may make such information available to tax authorities in the Non-U.S. Holder’s country of residence.
The payment of proceeds from the sale of our shares by a broker to a Non-U.S. Holder is generally not subject to information reporting if:
the Non-U.S. Holder certifies his, her or its non-U.S. status under penalties of perjury by providing a properly executed IRS Form W-
8BEN, or otherwise establish an exemption; or
the sale of our common shares is effected outside the U.S. by a foreign office of a broker, unless the broker is:
a U.S. person;
a foreign person that derives 50% or more of its gross income for certain periods from activities that are effectively connected with the
conduct of a trade or business in the U.S.;
a “controlled foreign corporation” for U.S. federal income tax purposes; or
a foreign partnership more than 50% of the capital or profits interest of which is owned by one or more U.S. persons or which engages in
a U.S. trade or business.
A backup withholding tax may apply to amounts paid to a Non-U.S. Holder if the Non-U.S. Holder fails to properly establish its foreign status
on the applicable IRS Form W-8 or if certain other conditions are met. Backup withholding is not an additional tax. Any amounts withheld
under the backup withholding rules may be refunded or credited against the Non-U.S. Holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability, assuming the
required information is timely provided to the IRS.
30 -
FATCA
New U.S. legislation signed into law on March 18, 2010 (the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (“FATCA”)) substantially changes the
withholding and reporting rules applicable to Non-U.S. Holders who are not individuals that receive certain U.S.-source income, generally
effective for payments made after December 31, 2013 (with respect to dividends) and after December 31, 2014 (with respect to gross proceeds
from a sale or other disposition). Certain changes made by FATCA may result in different U.S. federal income tax consequences for Non-U.S.
Holders that are not individuals than those described above, including with respect to withholding and information reporting, and distributions
on and dispositions of shares.
FATCA imposes a 30% U.S. withholding tax (which may be reduced pursuant to a treaty) on dividends on, or gross proceeds from the sale or
other disposition of, shares paid to a Non-U.S. Holder that is a foreign financial institution or certain foreign non-financial entities, unless:
the foreign financial institution undertakes certain diligence and reporting obligations; or
the foreign non-financial entity either certifies it does not have any substantial United States owners or furnishes identifying information
regarding each substantial United States owner.
If the Non-U.S. Holder is a foreign financial institution, it must enter into an agreement with the United States Treasury requiring, among other
things, that it undertake to identify accounts held by certain United States persons or United States-owned foreign entities, annually report
certain information about such accounts, and withhold 30% on payments to account holders whose actions prevent it from complying with
these reporting and other requirements. Non-U.S. Holders should consult their own tax advisors with respect to the application of
FATCA to their particular circumstances.
MATERIAL BVI INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
BVI companies, provided that they do not operate or hold real property in the BVI or employ persons resident in the BVI, and all amounts paid
by them to non-residents, are generally exempt from all local taxes and stamp duty.
CERTAIN CANADIAN INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
The following is a summary of the principal Canadian federal income tax considerations under the Income Tax Act (Canada), as of the date of
this proxy statement/prospectus, which will generally be applicable to a holder of shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada who, for
purposes of the Income Tax Act (Canada) and at all relevant times:
is resident in Canada;
deals at arm’s length with our company;
is not affiliated with our company; and
holds shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada as capital property (a “Holder”).
Shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada generally will be considered to be capital property to a Holder unless the Holder holds such
shares in the course of carrying on a business, or the Holder has acquired them in a transaction or transactions considered to be an adventure
or concern in the nature of trade. This summary does not otherwise address any tax considerations relevant to the acquisition, holding or
disposition of the shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada or the shares of Xtra-Gold BVI.
31 -
This summary is based on the provisions of the Income Tax Act (Canada) and the regulations thereunder in force as of the date of this proxy
statement/prospectus and the current administrative policies and practices of the Canada Revenue Agency published in writing by the
Canada Revenue Agency before such date. This summary takes into account all specific proposals to amend the Income Tax Act (Canada)
and the regulations thereunder which have been publicly announced by or on behalf of the Minister of Finance (Canada) before the date of
this proxy statement/prospectus and assumes that all such proposed Canadian amendments will be enacted in their present form. No
assurance can be given that the proposed Canadian amendments will be enacted in the form proposed, if at all. This summary does not
otherwise take into account or anticipate any changes in law, whether by judicial, governmental or legislative decision or action, or changes in
the administrative policies and practices of the Canada Revenue Agency.
This summary does not apply to a Holder:
that is a “financial institution” for purposes of the “mark-to-market property” rules;
to which the “functional currency” reporting rules in subsection 261(5) of the Income Tax Act (Canada) apply;
an interest in which is a “tax shelter investment”; or
with respect to whom our company is a “foreign affiliate”, all within the meaning of the Income Tax Act (Canada).
Such Holders should consult their own tax advisors.
THE FOLLOWING SUMMARY OF THE CANADIAN TAX CONSEQUENCES OF THE CONTINUATION HAS BEEN PROVIDED FOR
GENERAL INFORMATION PURPOSES ONLY AND IS NOT INTENDED TO BE, AND SHOULD NOT UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES
BE ASSUMED OR RELIED ON BY ANY STOCKHOLDER TO BE, A COMPLETE ANALYSIS OR DISCUSSION OF ALL POTENTIAL
TAX CONSEQUENCES RELEVANT TO STOCKHOLDERS IN ANY JURISDICTION. THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION IS NOT
INTENDED TO BE, NOR SHOULD IT BE CONSTRUED TO BE, LEGAL ADVICE TO ANY PARTICULAR PERSON WHO HOLDS
SHARES OF COMMON STOCK OF XTRA-GOLD NEVADA OR SHARES OF XTRA-GOLD BVI.
STOCKHOLDERS ARE STRONGLY URGED TO CONSULT, AND MUST RELY ON THE ADVICE OF, THEIR OWN INDEPENDENT TAX
AND OTHER ADVISORS TO DETERMINE THE TAX CONSEQUENCES OF THE CONTINUATION TO THEM BECAUSE OF THEIR
OWN PARTICULAR CIRCUMSTANCES AND THE JURISDICTION IN WHICH THEY RESIDE OR IN WHICH THEY MAY BE SUBJECT
TO TAX CONSEQUENCES BY VIRTUE OF THEIR OWNERSHIP OF SHARES OF COMMON STOCK OF XTRA-GOLD NEVADA OR
SHARES OF XTRA-GOLD BVI.
This summary does not take into account, provincial, territorial or foreign income tax legislation or considerations, which may differ materially
from those described herein. Holders should consult their own legal advisors with respect to the tax consequences to them based on
their particular circumstances.
Continuation of our company to the BVI
No disposition of the shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada should be considered to have occurred for Canadian federal income tax
purposes solely as result of the Continuation. Consequently, the Continuation should not result in the realization of any capital gain (or capital
loss) by a Holder.
32 -
Qualified Investments
Provided the shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada are and the shares of Xtra-Gold BVI remain listed on a “designated stock
exchange” (within the meaning of the Income Tax Act (Canada) and which currently includes the TSX) at all relevant times, such shares of
common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada or the shares of Xtra-Gold BVI will be a “qualified investment” under the Income Tax Act (Canada) for
trusts governed by registered retirement savings plans, registered retirement income funds, deferred profit sharing plans, registered education
savings plans, registered disability savings plans and tax-free savings accounts.
Notwithstanding that the shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada or the shares of Xtra-Gold BVI may be a qualified investment for a trust
governed by a tax-free savings account, a registered retirement savings plan or a registered retirement income fund, the holder of a tax-free
savings account or the annuitant under a registered retirement savings plan or a registered retirement income fund will be subject to a penalty
tax on the Xtra-Gold Nevada shares of common stock or the Xtra-Gold BVI shares held in the tax-free savings account, registered retirement
savings plans or registered retirement income funds (as the case may be) if such shares are a “prohibited investment” for the purpose of
section 207.01 of the Income Tax Act (Canada). The shares of common stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada and the shares of Xtra-Gold BVI will
generally be a “prohibited investment” if the holder of a tax-free savings account or the annuitant of a registered retirement savings plan or a
registered retirement income fund does not deal at arm’s length with our company for the purposes of the Income Tax Act (Canada) or the
holder of a tax-free savings account or the annuitant of a registered retirement savings plan or a registered retirement income fund has a
“significant interest” (as defined in the Income Tax Act (Canada)) in our company or a corporation, partnership or trust with which our company
does not deal at arm’s length for the purposes of the Income Tax Act (Canada). Such holders are urged to consult their own tax advisors.
THE FOREGOING SUMMARIES OF THE UNITED STATES, BVI AND CANADIAN TAX CONSEQUENCES OF THE CONTINUATION
HAVE BEEN PROVIDED FOR GENERAL INFORMATION PURPOSES ONLY AND SHOULD NOT BE ASSUMED OR RELIED ON BY
ANY STOCKHOLDER TO BE, A COMPLETE ANALYSIS OR DISCUSSION OF ALL POTENTIAL TAX CONSEQUENCES RELEVANT
TO STOCKHOLDERS IN ANY JURISDICTION. THE FOREGOING DISCUSSION IS NOT LEGAL ADVICE TO ANY PARTICULAR
PERSON WHO HOLDS SHARES OF COMMON STOCK OF XTRA-GOLD NEVADA OR SHARES OF XTRA-GOLD BVI.
COMPARATIVE RIGHTS OF STOCKHOLDERS
Upon the issuance of the certificate of continuation under the BVI Act, our stockholders will become shareholders of a company registered
under the BVI Act. The differences between the NRS and the BVI Act will result in various changes to the rights of our stockholders. The
following summarizes the significant differences between the NRS and the BVI Act insofar as they affect the rights of our stockholders. The
following is a summary only and is qualified in its entirety by the relevant provisions of the NRS and the BVI Act and any other applicable law
in the jurisdictions of Nevada and the BVI. The following summary is not an exhaustive analysis of the two statutes, nor a comprehensive
statement of the particulars of the actual statutory provisions to which reference is made. Our stockholders should consult their own legal
advisors if they wish further information concerning these matters. We will continue to be subject to applicable securities laws in the United
States and the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario in Canada, which currently impose audit, financial reporting, proxy
solicitation and certain other requirements relating to the rights of our stockholders.
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Our company and the rights of our
stockholders are governed by the NRS.
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
Upon completion of the Continuation, our
company and the rights of our shareholders will
be governed by the BVI Act.
Governing Law
Corporate Purpose
Governing Documents
- 33 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Under the NRS, our company may conduct
any lawful activity in accordance with the laws
of the State of Nevada and the United States
of America.
    
Under the NRS, the governing documents of a
corporation consist of its articles of
incorporation and bylaws, as well as any
amendments thereto.
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
The object of a company incorporated in the BVI
is to engage in any act or activity that is not
prohibited under any law for the time being in
force in the BVI.
Under the BVI Act, the governing (constating)
documents of a company which has been
continued into the BVI are its Memorandum and
Articles. Upon Continuation into the BVI, our
company is required to adopt Memorandum and
Articles that comply with the BVI Act. As part of
the Continuation, certain provisions of the
existing articles and bylaws of our company will
be revised so that upon the Continuation, our
Memorandum and Articles will comply with the
necessary requirements of the BVI Act. These
revisions include providing that the object of our
company will be to engage in any activity not
prohibited by the laws of BVI. A copy of the form
of our Memorandum and Articles are set forth as
Exhibit B in our Plan of Conversion attached as
Appendix A to this proxy statement/prospectus.
The form of our Memorandum and Articles may
be amended and is subject to the approval of
the shareholders.
Holders of shares of a BVI company are referred
to as “members” or “shareholders”. For the
purposes of this section, references are made to
“shareholders” as the disclosure relates to a BVI
company. The minimum protections afforded to
shareholders of a BVI company under the BVI
Act are, in certain respects described below,
similar to shareholders than the comparable
protections afforded to stockholders of Nevada
corporation. However, as set out below, the
provisions of our Memorandum and Articles will
also, in certain circumstances, provide our
shareholders with protections comparable to
those of the NRS.
Holders of Shares
Under the NRS, holders of shares of common
stock of a Nevada corporation are referred to
as “stockholders”. For the purposes of this
section, references are made to “stockholders”
as disclosure relates to a Nevada corporation.
- 34 -
Shareholder Voting Rights
Quorum
Cumulative Voting
Meeting of Shareholders
Vote of Shareholders
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
Under the NRS, holders of common shares
are entitled to one vote per share, either in
person or by proxy, on each matter to be voted
on at stockholder meetings.
Our amended and restated bylaws provide for
voting by a show of hands except where a
ballot is demanded.
  
Under the NRS, unless the bylaws otherwise
provide, the holders of a majority of the shares
entitled to vote at a meeting of stockholders,
present in person or by proxy, constitute a
quorum. Our amended and restated bylaws
provide that the quorum requirement for the
transaction of business at a meeting of
stockholders is at least two individuals present
in person, each of whom is a stockholder or a
proxyholder entitled to vote at a meeting.
Under the NRS, cumulative voting is only
permitted in the election of directors if the
articles of a corporation provide for it. Our
amended and restated articles of incorporation
do not provide for such cumulative voting.
  
Under the NRS, unless otherwise specified in
the articles or the bylaws, a special meeting of
stockholders may be called by the entire board
of directors, by any two directors or by the
president of the corporation. Under the NRS,
notice of all meetings of stockholders of a
corporation must be sent not less than 10 days
and not more than 60 days before the meeting
to each stockholder entitled to vote at the
meeting.
- 35 -
When a vote is taken at a meeting of
shareholders, each shareholder is entitled to
vote the number of votes attaching to the total
number of shares held by such shareholder.
In our Memorandum and Articles, voting by a
show of hands unless a ballot is demanded will
cease to apply.
Under the BVI Act, the quorum for a meeting of
shareholders for the purpose of a resolution of
shareholders is that fixed by the Memorandum
and Articles of a company; where no quorum is
so fixed, a meeting of shareholders is properly
constituted for all purposes if at the
commencement of the meeting there are
present in person or by proxy one-half of the
votes of the shares of each class or series of
shares entitled to vote as a class or series
thereon and the same proportion of the votes of
the remaining shares entitled to vote thereon.
Our Memorandum and Articles will provide that
a meeting of shareholders is duly constituted if,
at the commencement of the meeting, there are
present in person or by proxy not less than two
shareholders representing not less than 5% of
the votes of the shares entitled to vote on
resolutions of shareholders to be considered at
the meeting.
The BVI Act does not provide for cumulative
voting on any matter.
Under the BVI Act, a company’s directors or
such person or persons as may be authorized
by the Memorandum and Articles may convene
a meeting. Our Memorandum and Articles will
provide that notice of all meetings of
shareholders must be sent not less than 21
days before the meeting to all shareholders
whose names appear on the register of
members of our company.
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Under the NRS, the vote of stockholders
required to pass a resolution is a majority of
the votes cast on the resolution.
However, the articles or bylaws may impose a
requirement for super-majority voting for some
or all resolutions.
Nevada law requires stock approval for each
of the following:
• any merger, conversion or exchange;
•
the sale, lease or exchange of substantially
all of the corporation’s property and assets;
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
Under the BVI Act, in addition to the election of
directors, the approval of the shareholders of a
company is required for:
• a disposition of more than 50% in value of
the company’s assets otherwise than in the
regular course of its business (subject to the
company’s memorandum and articles of
association);
•  mergers;
• a compulsory redemption of minority shares
(as described under the subheading
“Compulsory Action” below);
•
transactions involving interested directors
• approval or ratification of certain agreements
•
transactions involving interested directors
or officers;
• an amendment to the articles of
incorporation;
• any decrease in the number of issued and
outstanding shares (i.e. a reverse stock
split);
the removal of directors; and
•
• discretionary indemnification of officers or
directors.
• approval or ratification of certain agreements
or transactions where a director or liquidator
has a conflict of interest; and
the rescission of articles of dissolution in the
voluntary winding-up of a company.
•
Under our Memorandum and Articles, except as
described below, the vote of shareholders
generally required to pass resolutions is a
simple majority of the votes of shares entitled to
vote thereon and which were present at the
meeting and were voted or, if the resolution is
consented to in writing, all of the votes attaching
to the issued and outstanding shares entitled to
vote thereon. The approval of not less than two-
thirds of the votes of the shares or class of
shares entitled to vote thereon and which were
present at the meeting and were voted or, if the
resolution is consented to in writing, all of the
votes attaching to the issued and outstanding
shares or class of shares entitled to vote
thereon, is required for the following actions:
the sale, transfer, lease, exchange or other
•
disposition of more than 50% in value of the
assets of our company other than in the
ordinary course of business of our company;
- 36 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
•
the merger or consolidation of our company
with another entity, except where such entity
is the wholly owned subsidiary of our
company, the sole shareholder of our
company or is wholly owned by the sole
shareholder of our company; and
the Continuation of our company.
•
The variation of rights attached to a class of
shares will require the approval of not less than
two-thirds of the votes of the shares of that class
entitled to vote thereon which were present at
the meeting and were voted or, if the resolution
is consented to in writing, all of the votes
attaching to the issued and outstanding shares
of that class entitled to vote thereon.
When our company has been continued into the
BVI, certain actions by our company that
currently require stockholder approval under the
NRS may no longer require such approval
(unless the High Court of BVI otherwise orders),
and the percentage vote of shareholders
required to approve certain matters may be
lower than the percentage vote of stockholders
currently required to approve such matters.
Proposals of Shareholders
Under the NRS, if permitted by the bylaws, a
registered holder of shares entitled to vote at
an annual meeting of shareholders, or a
beneficial owner of shares, may submit to a
Nevada corporation notice of any proposal to
be raised at the meeting.
There is no identical provision in the BVI Act.
However, our Memorandum and Articles will
provide that shareholders holding at least 10%
of the outstanding shares of Xtra-Gold BVI may
requisition our Board of Directors to call a
meeting of shareholders.
Consent of Shareholders in Lieu of Meeting Under the NRS, a resolution in writing signed
by stockholders owning a majority of the
shares entitled to vote on that resolution at a
meeting of stockholders is as valid as if it had
been passed at a meeting of the stockholders.
Under the BVI Act, subject to any limitations in
the memorandum and articles of a company,
any action that may be taken by the
shareholders at a meeting may also be taken by
a resolution of shareholders consented to in
writing without the need for any notice. Such a
written resolution may be validly passed, if
consented to in writing by shareholders holding
shares to which are attached a majority of the
votes attaching to all outstanding shares, unless
a different percentage is specified in a
company’s memorandum and articles.
- 37 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
Inspection Rights
Preemptive Rights
Dividends
Our Memorandum and Articles will provide that
such a written resolution may be validly passed
if consented to in writing by all shareholders
entitled to vote on that resolution.
  
Under the BVI Act, a shareholder of a company
may request in writing to inspect during normal
business hours the share register of the
company or the books, records, minutes and
consents kept by the company and to make
copies or extracts therefrom. The relevant
company may by resolution of directors
determine that it is not in the best interest of the
company or of any other shareholder of the
company to comply with the request and the
company may refuse the request. Upon refusal
of the request, the shareholder may apply to the
High Court of BVI for an order allowing
inspection.
Under the BVI Act, shareholders of a company
do not have any pre-emptive rights unless such
rights are provided in the company’s
memorandum and articles. Our Memorandum
and Articles will not provide for any such pre-
emptive rights.
Under the NRS, any person who has been a
stockholder of record of a corporation for at
least six months, or any person holding at least
5% of all of its outstanding shares, upon at
least five days’ written demand, is entitled to
inspect in person or by agent or attorney,
during usual business hours, the following
records of the corporation and, at their own
expense, make copies:
•
the articles and bylaws of the corporation,
including any amendments, and
• a stockholder register.
In addition, any person who has been a
stockholder of record of any corporation and
owns not less than 15% of all of the issued and
outstanding shares of the stock of such
corporation or has been authorized in writing
by the holders of at least 15% of all its issued
and outstanding shares, upon at least five
days’ written demand, is entitled to inspect in
person or by agent or attorney, during normal
business hours, the books of account and all
financial records of the corporation, to make
copies of records, and to conduct an audit of
such records. The cost of such audit and
inspection must be borne by the stockholder.
Under the NRS, stockholders of a corporation
do not have a preemptive right to acquire the
corporation’s unissued shares except to the
extent the articles of incorporation so provide.
Our restated and amended articles of
incorporation do not provide for any such
preemptive rights.
- 38 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Under the NRS, the directors may declare and
the corporation may pay a dividend by issuing
fully paid shares of the corporation and,
subject to the solvency test described in the
following sentence, a corporation may pay a
dividend in money or property. The directors
are prohibited from declaring and the
corporation is prohibited from paying a
dividend if there are reasonable grounds for
believing that the corporation is or, after the
payment would be, unable to pay its liabilities
as they become due, or the realizable value of
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
Under the BVI Act, subject to any limitations or
provisions to the contrary in the memorandum
and articles of a company, a company may, by
resolution of directors, declare and pay
dividends in money, shares or other property.
Dividends may only be declared if the directors
are satisfied that the company is able to satisfy
the solvency test set out in the BVI Act.
Repurchases of Shares
Authority to Issue Shares
Amendments to Governing Instruments
the corporation’s assets would thereby be less
than the aggregate of its liabilities and its
stated capital of all classes. The NRS also
permits a corporation, subject to its articles, to
purchase or otherwise acquire any of its
issued shares, provided that no payment to
purchase or otherwise acquire shares issued
by it may be made unless the solvency test
described above is satisfied at the time of, and
after, such payment.
Under the NRS, a corporation may, subject to
its articles and to the solvency test mentioned
below, purchase or redeem any redeemable
shares issued by it at prices not exceeding the
redemption price thereof stated in the articles
or calculated according to a formula stated in
the articles. However, a corporation may not
make any payment to purchase or redeem any
redeemable shares issued by it if there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the
corporation is or, after the payment, would be
unable to pay its liabilities as they become
due, or after the payment, the realizable value
of the corporation’s assets would be less than
the aggregate of its liabilities and the amount
that would be required to pay the holders of
shares who have a right to be paid, on a
redemption or in a liquidation, ratably with or
before the holders of the shares to be
purchased or redeemed.
- 39 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
The NRS requires that a corporation’s articles
state the number of authorized shares the
corporation may issue. Our amended and
restated articles authorize our company to
issue 250,000,000 shares of common stock
with a par value of $0.001 per share.
Under the NRS, any change to the articles of a
corporation must be approved by a resolution
passed by the stockholders owning not less
than a majority of the voting stock, provided,
however, that the articles may require a super-
majority vote. 
Our articles do not require a super- majority
vote. 
Under the NRS, unless the articles, bylaws or
a unanimous stockholder agreement
otherwise provide, the Board of Directors of a
corporation may make, amend or repeal
bylaws, provided that a corporation’s existing
governing documents may impose a
requirement that any such amendment be
approved by stockholders. Our governing
documents allow our bylaws to be amended
by our Board of Directors.
- 40 -
Under the BVI Act, a company may only redeem
its shares if a solvency test similar to the test
applicable under the NRS is satisfied or if a
shareholder has a right to have his, her or its
shares redeemed. The consent of the
shareholder is generally required for a
redemption.
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
The BVI Act requires that the amount of shares
without par value that a company has authority
to issue must be stated and specified in its
memorandum of association or the
memorandum of association must state that the
company is authorized to issue an unlimited
number of shares. Our Memorandum and
Articles will provide that our company will be
authorized to issue an unlimited number of
shares without par value.
 
Under the BVI Act, subject to any limitation in its
memorandum and articles, a BVI company may
amend its memorandum and articles by a
resolution of shareholders or, where permitted
by its memorandum and articles or by the BVI
Act, by a resolution of directors. Our
Memorandum and Articles will provide that an
amendment to our Memorandum and Articles
will be subject to the approval of our
shareholders, or in certain limited
circumstances, by our Board of Directors.
Director Qualifications
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
The Board of Directors of a Nevada
corporation must consist of at least one
director, who must be a natural person.
Removal of Directors
Vacancies on the Board of Directors
Under the NRS, a director may be removed at
any time by the vote of stockholders
representing at least two- thirds of the voting
stock in the corporation.
Under the NRS, a quorum of directors may fill
a vacancy among the directors, except for the
following vacancies, which must be filled by
the stockholders:
• a vacancy resulting from an increase in the
number (otherwise than in accordance with
the NRS) or maximum number of directors,
and
• a vacancy resulting from a failure to elect
the number of directors required to be
elected.
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
Under the BVI Act, the number of directors must
be fixed by the articles of association of a
company and subject to any limitation in the
memorandum and articles of a company, the
articles of association may be amended to
change the number of directors, and any
amendment may, subject to a company’s
memorandum and articles, be effected by the
company’s directors or shareholders. No such
amendment is effective until filed at the Registry
of Corporate Affairs. A BVI company must have
at least one director. Our Memorandum and
Articles will provide that our Board of Directors
shall consist of at least three individuals and no
more than fifteen individuals.
Under the BVI Act, subject to any limitation in
the memorandum and articles of a company, a
director may be removed from office by a
resolution of shareholders or by a resolution of
directors. Under our Memorandum and Articles,
directors of our company may be removed from
office by a resolution of shareholders but not by
a resolution of our Board of Directors.
Under the BVI Act, subject to any limitations in a
company’s memorandum and articles, a
vacancy among the directors may be filled by a
resolution of shareholders or by a majority of the
remaining directors. Our Memorandum and
Articles will provide that a vacancy may be filled
by a resolution of directors, except a vacancy
resulting from an increase in the minimum
number of directors or from a failure of
shareholders to elect the minimum number of
directors. However, the directors of our
company may not, between meetings of
shareholders, appoint an additional director if,
after such appointment, the total number of
directors would be greater than one and one
third times the number of directors to have been
elected at the last annual meeting of
shareholders.
Fiduciary Duties of Directors 
Directors of corporations incorporated under
the NRS and directors of BVI companies have
fiduciary obligations to the corporation.
Pursuant to these fiduciary obligations, the
directors must act in accordance with the so-
called duties of “due care” and “loyalty” and in
the best interest of the company.
- 41 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
The NRS provides that every director and
officer of a corporation governed by the NRS,
in exercising his or her powers and
discharging his or her duties shall act honestly
and in good faith with a view to the best
interests of the corporation, and exercise the
care, diligence and skill that a reasonably
prudent person would exercise in comparable
circumstances. Every director and officer of a
corporation governed by the NRS must comply
with the provisions of the NRS, any and all
regulations promulgated thereunder, and the
articles and bylaws and any unanimous
stockholder agreement of such corporation. In
some circumstances, Nevada case law holds
that directors can be indemnified for breaches
The BVI Act provides that every director of a
company incorporated under the BVI Act in
performing his functions, shall act honestly and
in good faith with a view to the best interests of
the company and exercise the care, diligence
and skill that a reasonably prudent person
would exercise in comparable circumstances. In
addition, the BVI Act provides that no provision
in the memorandum and articles of a company
incorporated under the BVI Act or in any
agreement entered into by the company relieves
a director of the company from the duty to act in
accordance with the memorandum and articles
or from any personal liability arising from his
management of the business and affairs of the
company. Common law duties also apply to
Conflict of Interest of Directors and Officers Subject to certain specified exceptions, the
of their duties owed to the corporation.
Indemnification of Directors, Officers and
Others
NRS restricts interested directors from voting
on any transactions in which such director has
an interest. Interested directors and officers
must disclose in writing to the corporation or
request to have entered in the minutes of
meetings of directors the nature and extent of
their interest.
   
The NRS permits indemnification of a director
or officer, a former director or officer or another
individual who acts or acted at the
corporation’s request as a director or officer of
another entity, against all costs, charges and
expenses, including an amount paid to settle
an action or satisfy a judgment, reasonably
incurred by him or her in respect of any civil,
criminal, administrative, investigative or other
proceeding in which the individual is involved
because of that association with the
corporation or other entity, if such director or
officer, a former director or officer or another
individual who acts or acted at the
corporation’s request as a director or officer of
another entity acted and in a manner which he
or she reasonably believed to be in or not
opposed to the best interests of the
corporation, and, with respect to any criminal
action or proceeding had no reasonable cause
to believe the conduct was unlawful. Our
amended and restated bylaws provide for such
indemnification.
- 42 -
directors of BVI companies.
 
Under the BVI Act, a transaction entered into by
a company in respect of which a director is
interested is voidable by the company unless
the interest was disclosed to the board before
the company entering into the transaction, or the
transaction is approved or ratified by the
shareholders, or the company received fair
value for the transaction.
 
Under the BVI Act, and subject to subsection (2)
of Section 132 of the BVI Act (which makes it a
condition that the relevant person must inter alia
have acted honestly and in good faith) a
company may indemnify against all expenses,
including legal fees, and against all judgments,
fines and amounts paid in settlement and
reasonably incurred in connection with legal,
administrative or investigative proceeding any
person who:
•
is or was a party or is threatened to be made
a party to any threatened, pending or
completed proceedings, whether civil,
criminal, administrative or investigative, by
reason of the fact that the person is or was a
director of the company; or
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
•
is or was, at the request of the company,
serving as a director of, or in any other
capacity is or was acting for, another
company or a partnership, joint venture, trust
or other enterprise.
Subsection (1) of Section 132 of the BVI Act
only applies to a person referred to in that
subsection if the person acted honestly and in
good faith with a view to the best interests of the
company and, in the case of criminal
proceedings, the person has no reasonable
cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful.
The termination of any proceedings by any
judgment, order, settlement, conviction or the
entering of a nolle prosequi does not, by itself,
create a presumption that the person did not act
honestly and in good faith and with a view to the
best interests of the company or that the person
had reasonable cause to believe that his
conduct was unlawful. If a person referred to in
subsection (1) of Section 132 of the BVI Act has
been successful in defense of any proceedings
referred to in the said subsection (1), the person
is entitled to be indemnified against all
expenses, including legal fees, and against all
judgments, fines and amounts paid in
settlement and reasonably incurred by the
person in connection with the proceedings.
Director Liability
Stockholders’ Suits
Under the NRS, a director is not individually
liable to the corporation or its stockholders or
creditors for any damages as a result of any
act or failure to act in his or her capacity as a
director unless it is proven that:
•
the director’s act or failure to act constituted
a breach of his or her fiduciary duties as a
director; and
the breach of those duties involved
intentional misconduct, fraud or a knowing
violation of law.
•
- 43 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Under the NRS, a current stockholder may
petition the District Court in Nevada to be
appointed custodian over a Nevada
corporation which has been abandoned or for
which an irresolvable deadlock has entangled
the Board of Directors. If appointed, such
stockholder may commence litigation on
behalf of the corporation.
The BVI Act does not permit the limitation of a
director’s liability for breach of fiduciary
obligations to the company of which he is a
director, whether through the articles of
association or otherwise.
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
Under Section 184(C) of the BVI Act a
shareholder of a company may apply to the BVI
court for leave to bring proceedings in the name
and on behalf of the company or intervene in
proceedings to which the company is a party for
the purpose of continuing, defending or
discontinuing the proceedings on behalf of the
company. The court in determining whether to
grant leave to the member shall consider
whether the member is acting in good faith,
whether the proceedings are likely to succeed,
whether the derivative action is in the interest of
the company, the cost of the proceedings in
relation to the relief to be obtained and whether
an alternative remedy to the derivative claim is
available. 
The court must be satisfied that the company
does not intend to bring, diligently continue or
defend, or discontinue proceedings or it is in the
interest of the company that the conduct of the
proceedings should not be left to the directors or
to the determination of the shareholders as a
whole. 
The BVI Act provides that the court may make
any order it considers appropriate including: (i)
an order authorizing the shareholder or any
other person to control the proceedings; (ii) an
order giving directions for the conduct of the
proceedings; (iii) an order that the company or
its directors provide information or assistance in
relation to the proceedings; and (iv) an order
directing that any amount ordered to be paid by
a defendant in the proceedings must be paid, in
whole or in part, directly to former and present
shareholders of the company instead of to the
company.
Oppression
- 44 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
The NRS provides limited rights for minority
stockholders. In particular, the NRS permits
corporations to adopt articles prohibiting the
issuance of a fractional share of stock. In such
cases, any action to reverse split the shares of
stock may trigger a mandatory redemption of
shares from minority stockholders.
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
Part XA of the BVI Act sets out member’s
remedies. Section 184B (1) of the BVI Act
provides that if a company or a director of a
company engages in, or proposes to engage in,
conduct that contravenes the BVI Act or the
memorandum and articles of the company, the
High Court of BVI may, on the application of a
shareholder or a director of the company, make
an order directing the company or director to
comply with, or restraining the company or
director from engaging in conduct that
contravenes, the BVI Act or the memorandum
and articles. If the High Court of BVI makes an
order under Section 184B (1) of the BVI Act, it
may also grant such consequential relief as it
thinks fit. A shareholder may also bring a
derivative action in accordance with section
184C of the BVI Act (see “Stockholder Suits”
above).
 
A shareholder of a company may also bring an
action against the company for breach of a duty
owed by the company to him as a shareholder.
Where a shareholder of a company brings
proceedings against the company and other
shareholders have the same or substantially the
same interest in relation to the proceedings, the
High Court of BVI may appoint that shareholder
to represent all or some of the shareholders
having the same interest and may, for that
purpose, make such orders as it thinks fit,
including:
• an order as to the control and conduct of the
proceedings;
• as to the costs of the proceedings; and
• directing the distribution of any amount
ordered to be paid by a defendant in the
proceedings among the shareholders
represented.
- 45 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
A shareholder of a company who considers that
the affairs of the company have been, are being
or are likely to be, conducted in a manner that
is, or any act or acts of the company have been,
or are, likely to be oppressive, unfairly
discriminatory, or unfairly prejudicial to him in
that capacity, may apply to the High Court of
BVI for an order. 
A shareholder of a company who considers that
the affairs of the company have been, are being
or are likely to be, conducted in a manner that
is, or any act or acts of the company have been,
or are, likely to be oppressive, unfairly
discriminatory, or unfairly prejudicial to him in
that capacity, may apply to the High Court of
BVI for an order. 
If the High Court of BVI considers that it is just
and equitable to do so, it may make such an
order as it thinks fit, including, one or more of
the following orders:
•
in the case of a shareholder, requiring the
company or any other person to acquire the
shareholder’s shares;
requiring the company or any other person to
pay compensation to the shareholder;
regulating the future conduct of the
company’s affairs;
•
•
• amending the memorandum and articles of
the company;
• appointing a liquidator of the company;
• directing the rectification of the records of the
company; or
• setting aside any decision made or action
• setting aside any decision made or action
taken by the company or its directors in
breach of the BVI Act or the memorandum
and articles of the company.
- 46 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
Also, shareholders may exercise common law
rights to rectify actions which, among other
things, are inconsistent with the Memorandum
and Articles, the BVI Act or general law, and
which are oppressive or have been exercised in
bad faith. Also, a shareholder who has not
approved a transaction in which the directors
have a conflict of interest and which is proven to
be unfairly prejudicial to one or more
shareholders is capable of impugning such a
transaction. Shareholders may also, in
appropriate circumstances, petition for a just
and equitable winding-up of a company. The
High Court of BVI’s jurisdiction is an equitable
one and, even if a petitioner has standing, his
petition may nevertheless not be allowed to
proceed.
 
Under the BVI Act, the approval of the
shareholders of a BVI company is required for:
• subject to the company’s memorandum and
articles, a disposition of more than 50% in
value of the company’s assets other than in
the regular course of its business;
• mergers;
• subject to the company’s memorandum and
•
articles, a winding-up of the company; and
the rescission of articles of dissolution in the
voluntary winding-up of a company.
See “Continuation – Comparison of Stockholder
Rights under the NRS and the BVI Act –
Special Meeting of Shareholders” above for a
summary of the relevant provisions under our
Memorandum and Articles. Such matters as
take-over bids, issuer bids or self tenders,
going-private transactions and transactions with
directors, officers, significant shareholders and
other related parties to which our company is a
party are subject to regulation by Canadian
provincial securities legislation and
administrative policies and rules of Canadian
securities administrators and U.S. securities
laws. Such legislation and administrative
policies and rules will continue to apply to our
company after the Continuation. Such
legislation and administrative policies and rules
may impose shareholder approval requirements
in addition to the foregoing.
Reorganizations, Mergers, Extraordinary
Transactions
The NRS provides that certain extraordinary
corporate actions, such as certain mergers,
any continuation, and sales, leases or
exchanges of all or substantially all of the
property of a corporation other than in the
ordinary course of business, and other
extraordinary corporate actions such as
liquidations, dissolutions and  arrangements,
are to be approved by the stockholders owning
a majority of the  voting stock.
- 47 -
Dissenters’ Rights
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
The NRS provides that the stockholders of a
Nevada corporation entitled to vote on certain
matters are entitled to exercise dissenters’ rights
and to be paid the fair value of their shares of
Under the BVI Act, a shareholder of a
company may dissent from certain
transactions and receive payment upon
redemption of his shares. Shareholders may
common stock in connection therewith
Stockholders may dissent from the following
actions:
• a merger;
• a conversion; and
• an exchange.
dissent from the following actions:
•  a merger, if the company is a constituent
company (being an existing company that
is participating in a merger or
consolidation with one or more other
existing companies) unless  the company
is the surviving company and the
shareholder continues to hold the same or
similar shares;
• consolidation, if the company is a
•
constituent company;
the sale, transfer, lease, exchange or other
disposition of more than 50% in value of
the assets or business of the company if
not made in its usual or regular course of
business (other than a disposition
pursuant to an order of a court having
jurisdiction in the matter, a disposition for
money on terms requiring all or
substantially all net proceeds to be
distributed to the shareholders in
accordance with their respective interests
within one year after the date of
disposition, and certain transfers of assets
of the company in trust for the benefit of
the company, its shareholders or creditors
or any other person having a direct or
indirect interest in the company);
- 48 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
• an arrangement, if permitted by the High
Court of BVI; and
• a compulsory redemption of shares by a
company (as described below under the
subheading “Compulsory Acquisition”).
Our Memorandum and Articles will also provide
for dissent rights in certain additional
circumstances. Section 179 of the BVI Act sets
forth a procedure for exercising the right to
dissent and for determination of a fair value for
the dissenter’s shares.
Generally, under the BVI Act, where a
shareholder has given notice of his election to
dissent, the company must make a written offer
to each dissenting shareholder to purchase his
shares at a specified price that the company
determines to be their fair value. If within 30
days immediately following the date on which
the offer is made, the company making the offer
and the dissenting shareholder agree upon the
price to be paid for the shares, the company
shall pay to the shareholder the amount in
money upon the surrender of the certificates
representing his shares. If the company and
dissenting shareholder fail, within the
aforementioned period of thirty 30 days to agree
on the price to be paid for the shares owned by
the shareholder, within 20 days immediately
following the date on which the period of 30
days expires, the following applies:
•
the company and the dissenting shareholder
shall each designate an appraiser;
the two designated appraisers together shall
designate a third appraiser;
•
- 49 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
 of a BVI company
•
•
the three appraisers shall fix the value of the
shares owned by the dissenting shareholder
as of the close of business on the day before
the date on which the vote of the
shareholders authorizing the action was
taken or the date on which written consent of
shareholders without a meeting was
obtained, excluding any appreciation or
depreciation directly or indirectly by the
action or its proposal, and that value is
binding on the company and the dissenting
shareholder for all purposes; and
the company shall pay to the shareholder the
amount in money upon the surrender by him
of the certificates representing his shares.
Under the BVI Act, subject to any limitations in a
company’s memorandum and articles,
shareholders holding 90% of the votes of the
outstanding shares entitled to vote, and
shareholders holding 90% of the votes of the
outstanding shares of each class of shares
entitled to vote may give a written instruction to
the company directing the company to redeem
the shares held by the remaining shareholders.
Upon receipt of such written instruction, the
company shall redeem the shares specified in
the written instruction, irrespective of whether or
not the shares are by their terms redeemable.
The company shall give written notice to each
shareholder whose shares are to be redeemed
stating the redemption price and the manner in
which the redemption is to be effected. A
shareholder whose shares are to be so
redeemed is entitled to dissent from such
redemption, and to be paid the fair value of his
shares, as described above under the
subheading “Dissenters’ Rights”.
Compulsory Acquisition
Under the NRS, corporations may elect to opt
out of the anti-takeover provisions set forth in
Section 78.378 – 78.3793. If an election to opt
out has not been made, then the NRS imposes
certain obligations upon persons acquiring
control in a Nevada corporation, which limit
their rights to vote. We have not elected to opt
out of these provisions. Accordingly, if any
person acquires a controlling interest in our
company, that person will not be able to
exercise voting rights, except as approved by
stockholders owning a majority of the
remaining shares of our company. This makes
our company a less desirable target for a
hostile take- over.
Transferability of Shares
Return of Capital on Winding-Up,
Liquidation or Dissolution of the Company
- 50 -
Rights of Holders
of a Nevada corporation
Rights of Holders
of a BVI company
Under the NRS, unless the articles of a
corporation or a unanimous stockholders
agreement contain a restriction on the transfer
of shares, under the NRS, shares are
presumed to be freely transferable. Our
amended and restated articles of incorporation
do not contain any restriction on the transfer of
shares, and there is no stockholders
agreement in place
Subject to any limitations or provisions to the
contrary in its memorandum and articles,
registered shares of a company incorporated
under the BVI Act may be transferred by a
written instrument of transfer signed by the
transferor and containing the name and address
of the transferee. Our Memorandum and Articles
will not contain restrictions on the transfer of
shares.
Under the NRS, and subject to the preferential
rights of holders of any preferred shares which
may be then outstanding, the holders of
common shares have the right to receive the
remaining property of a corporation on
dissolution after paying or adequately
providing for the payment of the corporation’s
liabilities and obligations.
Under the BVI Act, shareholders are entitled to
the surplus assets of a company on liquidation,
subject to the rights attached to the shares held
by those shareholders as set out in the
memorandum and articles.
Borrowing Powers
Under the NRS, unless the articles, bylaws or Under the BVI Act, directors have similar
Borrowing Powers
Under the BVI Act, directors have similar
powers, unless provided otherwise in the
memorandum and articles. Our company’s
Memorandum and Articles will not restrict such
powers and our company will not be subject to a
unanimous shareholders agreement following
the Continuation.
Under the NRS, unless the articles, bylaws or
a unanimous stockholders agreement relating
to a corporation otherwise provide, the
directors of a corporation may, without
authorization of the stockholders:
• borrow money on the credit of the
•
corporation;
issue, reissue, sell or pledge debt
obligations of the corporation;
• give a guarantee on behalf of the
corporation to secure performance of an
obligation of any person; and
• mortgage, hypothecate, pledge or otherwise
create a security interest in all or any
property of the corporation, owned or
subsequently acquired, to secure any
obligation of the corporation.
Our amended and restated articles of
incorporation and our amended and restated
bylaws do not restrict these powers of our
Board of Directors, nor is our company subject
to a unanimous stockholders agreement.
- 51 -
ACCOUNTING TREATMENT
For United States accounting purposes, the Continuation of our company from a Nevada corporation to a BVI company represents a non-
substantive exchange to be accounted for in a manner consistent with a transaction between entities under common control. All assets,
liabilities, revenues and expenses will be reflected in the accounts of Xtra-Gold BVI based on existing carrying values at the date of the
exchange. The historical comparative figures of Xtra-Gold will be those of Xtra-Gold Nevada.
We currently prepare our financial statements in accordance with the U.S. GAAP. After our Continuation to the BVI, as a BVI domestic issuer,
we plan to continue to prepare our annual and interim financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. For the purpose of our annual
disclosure obligations in the United States, we will annually file in the United States financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S.
GAAP. In addition, as a foreign private issuer, we will not have to file quarterly reports with the SEC.
APPLICATION OF SECURITIES LAWS
We currently prepare our financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We file our audited annual financial statements with the SEC on
Annual Reports on Form 10-K and our unaudited interim financial statements with the SEC on Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q. We also file
Current Reports on Form 8-K to report material information in accordance with SEC rules. Inasmuch as we are not registered under Section
12(g) of the Exchange Act, we are not subject to the SEC’s proxy rules and our officers, directors and principal stockholders are not required to
file ownership reports under Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act, and those persons are not subject to the short-swing profit rules of Section
16(b) of the Exchange Act.
Upon completion of the Continuation, we anticipate that we will meet the definition of a “foreign private issuer” in the United States under the
Exchange Act. As a reporting foreign private issuer, we anticipate that we will file a Form 20-F Annual Report each year with the SEC. We
anticipate that the Form 20-F Annual Report will include financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We will not be required
to file interim quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, however we will be required to furnish to the SEC under cover of Form 6-K, our interim financial
statements and MD&A that we prepare as a reporting issuer under Canadian securities legislation. Our interim financial statements will be
prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP similar to our current Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q which include interim financial statements
prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. If we adopt International Financial Reporting Standards accounting rules adopted by the SEC, we
will not be required to provide a reconciliation to U.S. GAAP.
In addition, as a foreign private issuer, our directors, officers and 10% stockholders will not be subject to the insider reporting requirements of
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act or the “short swing” profit rules of Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act; and we will not be subject to the proxy
rules of Section 14 of the Exchange Act. Furthermore, Regulation FD does not apply to non-United States companies and will not apply to us
upon completion of the Continuation and election of foreign private issuer status.
Additionally, our securities are listed on the TSX and we are a reporting issuer in the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario,
Canada. Whether or not we continue to the BVI, we will remain subject to Canadian disclosure requirements including publishing news
releases, filing information about major changes for us, filing annual and quarterly financial statements, and filing reports in connection with
changes in outstanding and reserved securities. Additionally, insider reports are required to be filed via SEDI in connection with transactions
regarding trading in our shares or acquisitions and dispositions of other issued or granted company securities by our officers, directors and
significant stockholders holding more than 10% of the voting rights attached to our company’s outstanding voting securities.
- 52 -
THE SPECIAL MEETING
Time, Date, and Place
The special meeting will be held at the Ontario Bar Association, 20 Toronto Street, 2nd Floor, Conference Rooms C and D, Toronto, Ontario,
M5C 2B8, Canada on the 16th day of November, 2012, at 10:00 a.m., local time.
Matters to be Considered
The purpose of the special meeting is to:
vote on a proposal to approve the Continuation; and
approve any motion to adjourn or postpone the special meeting to another time or place, if necessary to solicit additional proxies if there
are insufficient votes at the time of the special meeting to adopt the foregoing proposal.
Our stockholders will also consider and act upon such other business and matters or proposals as may properly come before the special
meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof.
Who Can Vote at the Special Meeting
You are entitled to vote your shares of our common stock only if our records show that you held your shares as of the close of business on
October 10, 2012, the record date. As of the close of business on September 26, 2012, a total of 44,610,917 shares of our common stock were
outstanding. Each share of our common stock has one vote.
Solicitation of Proxies
This proxy statement/prospectus is being furnished in accordance with the solicitation by our management of proxies to be used at the special
meeting and any adjournments thereof, for the purposes set forth above. Proxies will be primarily solicited by mail and may also be personally
solicited or by telephone by our directors and/or officers, at nominal cost. The cost of solicitation will be borne by us.
We may also pay the reasonable costs incurred by persons who are the registered but not the beneficial owners of shares of our common
stock (such as brokers, dealers, other registrants under applicable securities laws, nominees and/or custodians) in sending or delivering
copies of this proxy statement/prospectus, the notice of meeting and form of proxy to the beneficial owners of such shares of our common
stock. We will provide, without cost to such persons, upon request to our Secretary and Treasurer, additional copies of the foregoing
documents required for this purpose.
No person is authorized to provide any information or to make any representation other than those contained in this proxy
statement/prospectus and, if given or made, such information or representation shall not be relied upon as having been authorized.
Appointment, Voting and Revocation of Proxies
Appointment
The individuals named in the accompanying proxy form are our directors and/or officers. A stockholder wishing to appoint some other
person (who need not be a stockholder) to represent the stockholder at the special meeting has the right to do so, either by striking
out the names of those persons named in the accompanying form of proxy and inserting the desired person’s name in the blank
space provided in the proxy or by completing another form of proxy. Such stockholder should first notify such person of his appointment
and obtain his consent to act as a proxyholder. In any case, the proxy should be dated and executed by the stockholder or his attorney
authorized in writing or, if the stockholder is a company, by an officer or attorney thereof duly authorized.
53 -
To be valid, the proxy must be received by our registrar and transfer agent, Olympia Transfer Services Inc. at its office at Suite 920, 120
Adelaide Street West, Toronto, Ontario, M5H 1T1, no later than 48 hours before the special meeting or adjournment thereof or delivered to the
Chairman at the meeting or adjournment thereof.
Voting
Each stockholder may instruct his proxy how to vote his shares by marking the proxy as applicable. All shares of our common stock
represented at the special meeting by properly executed proxies will be voted for, against or withheld from voting (including the voting on any
ballot), and where a choice with respect to any matter to be acted upon has been specified in the proxy, the shares of our common stock
represented by the proxy will be voted in accordance with such specification. In the absence of any such specification of voting on the proxy,
our management designees named in the proxy, will vote in favour of the matters set out therein.
The enclosed proxy, when properly completed and delivered and not revoked, confers discretionary authority upon the persons appointed
proxyholders thereunder to vote with respect to any amendments or variations of matters identified in the notice of meeting and with respect to
any other matters which may properly come before the special meeting. As of the date hereof, we are not aware of any amendments to,
variations of or of other matters which may be presented to the meeting.
Revocation of Proxy
In addition to the revocation in any other manner permitted by law, a stockholder who has given a proxy may revoke it, at any time before it is
exercised in accordance with the provisions of Section 78.355 of the NRS. The revocation of a proxy does not affect any matter on which a
vote has been taken before such revocation.
Advice to Beneficial Stockholders
Only registered stockholders or duly appointed proxyholders are permitted to vote at the special meeting. The information set forth in this
section is of significant importance to many stockholders as a substantial number of our stockholders do not hold their shares of our common
stock in their own name. Most of our stockholders are “non-registered” stockholders as their shares of our common stock are not registered in
their own names but rather are instead registered in the name of a bank, trust company or brokerage firm from whom they purchased the
shares of our common stock (referred to as “beneficial stockholders”). Such stockholders should note that only proxies deposited by
stockholders whose names appear on the records maintained by our registrar and transfer agent as the registered holders of shares of our
common stock can be recognized and acted upon at the special meeting. If the shares of our common stock are listed in an account statement
provided to a stockholder by a broker, then in almost all cases those shares of our common stock will not be registered in the stockholder’s
name. Such shares of our common stock are more likely to be registered under the names of the stockholder’s broker or an agent of that
broker. In the United States, the vast majority of such shares are registered under the name of Cede & Co. (the registration name for the
Depository Trust Company), while in Canada the vast majority of such shares are registered under the name of CDS & Co. (the registration
name for CDS Clearing and Depository Services Inc.), each of which acts as nominee for many banks, trust companies and brokerage firms.
Shares held by brokers or their agents or nominees can only be voted (for, against or withheld from voting resolutions) upon the instructions of
the beneficial stockholder. Without specific instructions, brokers and their agents and nominees are prohibited from voting shares for their
clients. Our directors and officers do not know for whose benefit the shares of our common stock registered in the name of Cede & Co. or CDS
& Co. are held. Therefore, beneficial stockholders should ensure that instructions respecting the voting of their shares of our common stock
are communicated to the appropriate person well in advance of the special meeting.
Applicable regulatory policy requires intermediaries/brokers to seek voting instructions from beneficial stockholders in advance of
stockholders’ meetings. Every intermediary/broker has its own mailing procedures and provides its own return instructions to clients, which
should be carefully followed by beneficial stockholders in order to ensure that their shares are voted at the meeting. The purpose of the form of
proxy supplied to a beneficial stockholder by its broker (or the agent of the broker) is limited to instructing the registered stockholder (the broker
or agent of the broker) how to vote on behalf of the beneficial stockholder. The majority of brokers now delegate responsibility for obtaining
instructions from clients to Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc. Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc. typically prepares a machine-readable
voting instruction form, mails the voting instruction form to the beneficial stockholders and requests the beneficial stockholders to return the
voting instruction forms to Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc. or otherwise communicate voting instructions to Broadridge Financial
Solutions, Inc. by way of the Internet or telephone. Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc. then tabulates the results of all instructions received
and provides appropriate instructions respecting the voting of shares to be represented at the meeting. A beneficial stockholder receiving a
Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc. voting instruction form cannot use that form to vote directly at the meeting. The voting instruction form
must be returned to Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc. well in advance of the meeting in order to have the shares of our common stock voted.
If you have any questions with respect to the voting of shares of our common stock held through a broker or other intermediary, please contact
your broker or other intermediary directly for assistance.
54 -
Although a beneficial stockholder may not be recognized directly at the meeting for the purposes of voting shares of our common stock
registered in the name of his or her broker (or agent of the broker), a beneficial stockholder may attend at the meeting as proxyholder for the
registered stockholder and vote the shares of our common stock in that capacity. If a beneficial stockholder wishes to attend and vote at the
meeting in person, the beneficial stockholder must insert his or her own name as appointee in the blank space of the form of proxy provided to
them and return the same to their broker (or the broker’s agent) in accordance with the instructions provided by such broker (or agent), well in
advance of the meeting.
All references to stockholders in this proxy statement/prospectus and the accompanying proxy and notice of meeting are to stockholders of
record unless specifically stated otherwise.
Record Date
We have fixed October 10, 2012 as the record date for the purposes of determining holders of shares of our common stock entitled to receive
notice of the special meeting. Registered stockholders, as shown on the stockholders’ list prepared as of the record date will be entitled to vote
such shares at the special meeting on the basis of one vote for each share of our common stock held.
Vote Required
The special meeting will be held only if there is a quorum. A quorum exists if two individuals are present in person, each of whom is a
stockholder or a proxyholder entitled to vote at the special meeting. If you return valid proxy instructions or attend the meeting in person, your
shares will be counted for purposes of determining whether there is a quorum, even if you abstain from voting. Broker non-votes also will be
counted for purposes of determining the existence of a quorum. A broker non-vote occurs when a broker, bank or other nominee holding
shares for a beneficial owner does not vote on a particular proposal because the broker, bank or other nominee lacks discretionary voting
power with respect to that item and has not received voting instructions from the beneficial owner.
In order for the Continuation to be approved, the holders of a majority of shares of our common stock outstanding and entitled to vote at the
special meeting must vote in favor of the Continuation.
The holders of a majority of shares of our common stock, represented and entitled to vote at the special meeting, whether or not a quorum is
present, must vote in favor of the proposal to approve any motion to adjourn or postpone the special meeting to another time or place, if
necessary to solicit additional proxies if there are insufficient votes at the time of the special meeting to approve the Continuation, for this
proposal to be approved and adopted.
A broker non-vote or abstention with respect to the proposal to approve the Continuation will have the same effect as a vote against such
proposal since approval of the proposal requires the affirmative vote of a majority of shares of our common stock outstanding and entitled to
vote.
At the close of business on the record date for the special meeting, the directors and executive officers of our company and their affiliates
owned and were entitled to vote 3,499,105 shares of common stock or 7.84% of shares of our common stock on that date. All of our directors
and executive officers that are holders of shares of our common stock, and their respective affiliates, intend to vote for the proposal to approve
the Continuation and for the proposal to adjourn or postpone the meeting, if necessary to solicit additional proxies.
55 -
We will appoint a scrutineer for the special meeting to tabulate affirmative and negative votes and abstentions.
Householding
If you and others who share your address own shares of our common stock that are held by a broker, bank or other nominee, your broker, bank
or other nominee may be sending only one proxy statement/prospectus to your address. This practice, known as “householding,” is designed
to reduce printing and postage costs.
Interest of Certain Persons or Companies in Matters to be Acted Upon
None or our directors or executive officers, and no associate or affiliate of any of our directors or executive officers, has any material interest,
direct or indirect, by way of beneficial ownership or otherwise, in any matter to be acted upon.
Voting Securities and Principal Holders Thereof
Voting Securities
Our authorized capital consists of 250,000,000 shares of common stock. As of the date hereof, there are 44,648,417 shares of our common
stock issued and outstanding, with each such share carrying the right to one vote. We have not issued any other class of voting securities.
Principal Holders of Voting Securities
As of the record date, to the best knowledge of our directors and officers, no persons or corporations beneficially own, directly or indirectly, or
exercise control or direction over, shares of our common stock carrying more than 10% of the voting rights attached to all outstanding shares of
our common stock.
Indebtedness of Directors and Executive Officers
At no time during the financial year ended December 31, 2011, and at any time from January 1, 2012 to the date hereof, were any of our
current or former executive officers or directors, any proposed nominee for election as a director, or any of their respective associates indebted
to us or any of our subsidiaries, or indebted to another entity where the indebtedness is the subject of a guarantee, support agreement, letter of
credit or other similar arrangement or understanding provided by us or any of our subsidiaries.
Interest of Informed Persons in Material Transactions
None of our directors or executive officers, none of the persons who have been our directors or executive officers since the commencement of
the Company’s last completed financial year, no person who beneficially owns, directly or indirectly, shares of our common stock carrying
more than 10% of the voting rights attached to all of our outstanding shares of common sotck, or any associate or affiliate of any of the
foregoing, has any material interest, direct or indirect, in any transaction since the commencement of our most recently completed financial
year or in any proposed transaction which has or will materially affect us.
Management Contracts
Our management functions are performed by our officers and we have no management agreements or arrangements in place under which
such management functions are performed by persons other than our officers.
56 -
PROPOSAL 1 — APPROVAL OF THE CONTINUATION
As discussed in this proxy statement/prospectus, we are asking our stockholders to approve the Continuation. Our stockholders should read
carefully this proxy statement/prospectus in its entirety for more detailed information concerning the Continuation. Please see the section
entitled “The Continuation” beginning on page 18 for additional information and a summary of the material terms of the Continuation. You are
urged to read carefully the Plan of Conversion included as Appendix A, before voting on this proposal.
Approval of this proposal is a condition to the completion of the Continuation.
Our Board of Directors recommends unanimously that our stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the Continuation.
PROPOSAL 2 — ADJOURNMENT OR POSTPONEMENT OF THE SPECIAL MEETING
If there are insufficient votes at the time of the special meeting to adopt the foregoing proposal, we intend to propose to adjourn the special
meeting for a period of not more than 30 days for the purpose of soliciting additional proxies in favor of the forgoing proposal. We do not intend
to propose adjournment or postponement at the special meeting if there are sufficient votes to adopt the foregoing proposal.
Our Board of Directors recommends unanimously that our stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to adjourn or postpone the
meeting, if necessary to solicit additional proxies.
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
We are engaged in the exploration of gold properties exclusively in Ghana, West Africa in the search for mineral deposits, mineral resources
and/or mineral reserves which could be economically and legally extracted or produced. Our exploration activities include the review of
existing data, grid establishment, geological mapping, geophysical surveying, trenching and pitting to test the areas of anomalous soil
samples and reverse circulation (RC) and/or diamond drilling to test targets followed by infill drilling, if successful, to define a mineral resource
and, perhaps ultimately, a mineral reserve.
Our interests in our projects are held by our Ghanaian subsidiary, XG Mining, through mining leases granted by the Government of Ghana and
registered to XG Mining for leased areas located within and upon concessions in Ghana. A concession is a grant of a tract of land made by a
government or other controlling authority in exchange for an agreement that the land will be used for a specific purpose. The mining lease
areas for our projects total approximately 226 square kilometers and are located at the northern extremity of the Kibi Gold Belt which is a
greenstone belt, as defined in all the geological publications in Ghana, and is one of the four main greenstone belts located in Ghana.
As at September 28, 2012, we have the following five projects all of which are in the exploration stage.
Kibi Project. Our Kibi project is located on the Apapam concession and is our only material project. This project consists of an over 5.5
kilometer long mineralized trend delineated from gold-in-soil anomalies, geophysical interpretations, trenching and drilling along the
northwest margin of the Apapam concession. Our company’s exploration efforts from January 1 to December 31, 2011, being the fiscal
year for which this proxy statement/prospectus is being filed, have been focused on our Kibi project. As at the date of this proxy
statement/prospectus, we have drilled more than 48,000 meters at this project. During the fiscal year, we completed a diamond drill
program including infill drilling on Zone 2 to define a potential mineral resource (see “Kibi Project – Phase III Drill Program” for the
results of this program). Also, see “VTEM Survey” commencing on page 63 and “Technical Reports” commencing on page 64 for other
work conducted on our Kibi project during the fiscal year. As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we have commenced a
further 30,000 meter diamond drill program and commissioned SEMS Exploration Services Ltd. to prepare an initial National Instrument
43-101 (“NI 43-101”) compliant mineral resource estimate on the Big Bend and East Dyke gold zones located within Zone 2 of this
project which will constitute the first ever mineral resource estimate generated on a gold project within the underexplored Kibi Gold Belt.
57 -
Kwabeng Project. Our Kwabeng project is located on the Kwabeng concession. During the fiscal year, we did not conduct any
exploration activities on this project, however we negotiated with independent Ghanaian contract miners and operators in connection
with their recovery of placer gold at the Kwabeng concession on fixed payment terms to our company (see “Description of Properties –
Recovery of Placer Gold”). As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we have not planned for any exploration activities during
the next 12 months, however, we may consider doing so at a later date. See “Kwabeng Project – 2009 to 2010 Exploration Programs”
commencing on page 107 for exploration activities conducted by our company during the two years preceding the fiscal year.
Pameng Project. Our Pameng project is located on the Pameng concession. During the fiscal year, we did not conduct any exploration
activities on this project, however we negotiated with independent Ghanaian contract miners and operators in connection with their
recovery of placer gold at the Pameng concession on fixed payment terms to our company (see “Description of Properties – Recovery of
Placer Gold”). There are no exploration activities currently being conducted on our Pameng project, however, a first pass work program
including soil geochemistry and scout trenching is currently under consideration for 2012. See “Pameng Project – 2009 to 2010
Exploration Programs” commencing on page 109 for exploration activities conducted by our company during the two years preceding the
fiscal year.
Banso Project. Our Banso project is located on the Banso concession. During the fiscal year, we entered into a letter of intent in
January 2011 with Buccaneer Gold Corp. (formerly Verbina Resources Inc.), a mineral resource company listed on the TSX Venture
Exchange (the “TSXV”), whereby Buccaneer Gold Corp. has an option to earn up to a 55% interest in our 90% interest of the mineral
rights in the Banso mining lease. As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we have not planned for any additional exploration
activities during the next 12 months and we may consider doing so at a later date. Buccaneer Gold Corp. commenced exploration
activities on this project during the fiscal year as part of the criteria to meet exploration expenditures to earn the 55% interest. As at the
date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Buccaneer Gold Corp. commenced an aggregate 5,000 meter core drilling program on this
project together with our Muoso project to test several drill targets identified on these concessions. See “Banso Project – 2012
Exploration Plans” commencing on page 110 for further details. See “Banso Project – 2009 to 2011 Exploration Programs” commencing
on page 110 for exploration activities conducted by our company during the two years preceding the Fiscal Year.
Muoso Project. Our Muoso project is located on the Muoso concession. During the fiscal year, we entered into the letter of intent with
Buccaneer Gold Corp. whereby Buccaneer Gold Corp. has an option to earn up to a 55% interest in our 90% interest of the mineral rights
in the Muoso mining lease. During the fiscal year, we did not conduct any exploration activities on this project. We have not planned for
any additional exploration activities during the next 12 months and may consider doing so at a later date. Buccaneer Gold Corp.
commenced exploration activities on this project in 2010. As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Buccaneer Gold Corp.
commenced the drill program on this project as noted above in the Banso project summary. See “Muoso Project – 2012 Exploration
Plans” commencing on page 112 for further details. See “Muoso Project – 2009 to 2011 Exploration Programs” commencing on page
111 for exploration activities conducted by our company during the two years preceding the fiscal year.
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we:
have received gross cash proceeds of CAD$10,925,001 (US$10,753,149) from an initial public offering completed in Canada in
November 2010;
have received net cash proceeds of $3,543,250 derived from the exercise of warrants to acquire common shares (2006 to 2011);
- 58 -
have received net cash proceeds of $6,843,965 derived from the recovery of gold of the mineralized material at our Kwabeng project
(2007 to 2009);
have received net cash proceeds of $2,613,281 derived from payments made to us by independent Ghanaian contract miners in
connection with their recovery of placer gold from the mineralized material at our Pameng and Apapam concessions;
have achieved losses since inception;
have minimal operations, and
rely upon the sale of our securities to fund our operations.
Our strategic plan, with respect to our mineral projects, is to:
advance the development of our Kibi project by focusing our efforts and dedicating our financial resources on our 2012 diamond drilling
program for the potential to drill out a mineral resource and, perhaps ultimately, a mineral reserve of this project;
define a mineral resource and, perhaps ultimately, a mineral reserve on our other exploration projects and we will also attempt to do this
by optioning to other qualified exploration entities;
enter into negotiations with independent Ghanaian contract miners and operators to assume our recovery of placer gold operations at
our Kwabeng project for fixed payments to our company;
acquire further interests in gold mineralized projects in strategic areas, by way of acquisition or joint venture participation, that fall within
the criteria of providing a geological basis for development of drilling initiatives that can enhance stockholder value by demonstrating the
potential to define mineral reserves; and
engage technical personnel under contract where possible as our management believes that at our company’s current level of
development, this will provide the best services available in the circumstances, lead to lower overall costs and provide the best flexibility
for our business operations.
We anticipate that, during 2012, we will spend an aggregate of approximately $6,000,000 comprised of $5,000,000 for exploration expenses
in connection with our 2012 drill program of our Kibi project and approximately $1,000,000 for general and administrative expenses (which
excludes approximately $500,000 in non-cash expenses).
Our company has historically relied on equity and debt financings to finance our ongoing operations. Existing working capital, possible debt
instruments, anticipated warrant exercises, further private placements and anticipated cash flow are expected to be adequate to fund our
company’s operations over the next year. During the future years, after 2012, to implement our plan of operations we will need to raise
additional capital through equity or convertible debt securities or from other available sources of financing. This may result in the dilution in the
equity ownership of stockholders in our common stock. There can be no assurance that additional financing will be available upon acceptable
terms, if at all. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, we may be unable to take advantage of
prospective new opportunities or acquisitions, which could significantly and materially restrict our operations, or we may be forced to
discontinue our current projects.
At June 30, 2012, we had working capital of approximately $2,459,936, comprised of current assets of $2,984,704 less current liabilities of
$524,768. Our current assets were comprised of $1,517,683 in cash and cash equivalents, $1,321,989 in trading securities, $18,080 due from
a related party and $126,952 in receivables and other assets.
59 -
Corporate History
Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. was originally incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada on September 1, 1998 under the name
Silverwing Systems Corporation. On October 31, 2003, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding shares of Xtra-Gold Resources, Inc., a
Florida corporation (“XGRI”) from its stockholders, all of which were unaffiliated third parties, in exchange for 10,070,000 shares of common
stock (approximately 80% of our then issued and outstanding shares of our common stock). This transaction resulted in a change of control of
our company and the formation of our being a holding company for XGRI, our then only wholly-owned subsidiary. On December 16, 2003, we
changed our name to Xtra-Gold Resources Corp.
In December 2004, our company entered into share purchase agreements with the trustees for the then former note and debenture holders of
the parent company of XG Mining to acquire 90% of its issued and outstanding capital stock. We exchanged shares of our common stock for
the shares of XG Mining that had been pledged as security to these holders. The remaining 10% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of
XG Mining is held by the Government of Ghana.
As a condition for our acquisition of XG Mining, two former officers and directors of our company agreed to return for cancellation 47,000,000
shares of our common stock issued to them in connection with our acquisition of XGRI. These shares were cancelled in May 2005.
Employees
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, our company has no salaried employees. Our President and Chief Executive Officer
provides our company with his consulting services and devotes approximately 60% of his time to our company. Our Chief Financial Officer
provides our company with his consulting services and devotes approximately 20% of his time to our company. Our Vice-President,
Exploration provides our company with his consulting services and devotes approximately 90% of his time in consulting services to our
company. We further engage the consulting services of our Vice-President, Ghana Operations for our Ghanaian subsidiaries, who devotes a
variable percentage of his time to our company on an “as needed” basis. We also engage the consulting services of our Secretary and
Treasurer with respect to corporate and administrative services, who devotes a variable percentage of his time to our company on an “as
needed” basis.
DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES
Except for the land upon which our field camp is located in Kwabeng, Ghana, we do not own any real property. We own the mineral rights on
our projects located in the Kibi Gold Belt where all of our exploration activities are currently conducted. Mining leases granted by the
Government of Ghana and registered to our Ghananian subsidiary, XG Mining, grant us the right to operate at our Kibi, Kwabeng, Pameng,
Banso and Muoso projects and are described elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus.
We currently conduct limited administrative activities from our corporate office located at Suite 301, 360 Bay Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5H
2V6, Canada, where we have leased 1,163 square feet for a 66 month term commencing on May 1, 2007 and expiring on October 31, 2012, at
approximately $4,404 (CAD$4,392) per month.
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, our technical and administrative activities are conducted at our field camp. We do not pay
any rent as we own our field camp.
Map of Properties and Operations
The map below shows the locations of our Kibi, Kwabeng, Pameng, Banso and Muoso projects all of which are described in further detail in
this proxy statement/prospectus.
60 -
Xtra-Gold Mining Concessions Located in the Kibi Gold Belt
61 -
Xtra-Gold Mining Leases Located in the Kibi Gold Belt
62 -
Description of Properties
All of our mineral exploration projects are currently at an early stage of evaluation. As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus:
no mineralized material or mineral resource or mineral reserve estimates have been made at any of our projects;
except for our 2012 drill program at our Kibi project located on the Kibi Gold Belt and the Buccaneeer drill program being carried out by
Buccaneer Gold Corp., there are no exploration activities currently being conducted on our other projects or have any such activities
been planned for the next 12 months, however, we may consider doing so at a later date; and
before the commencement of our fiscal year covered by this proxy statement/prospectus, we had completed preliminary lode gold
exploration programs at our Kibi, Banso and Muoso projects which results are noted hereunder.
Title to Properties
We hold 30-year mining leases expiring on July 26, 2019 on our Kwabeng and Pameng concessions, a 7-year mining lease on our Apapam
concession expiring on December 17, 2015, a 14-year mining lease on our Banso concession expiring on January 5, 2025 and a 13-year
mining lease on our Muoso concession expiring on January 5, 2024.
Recovery of Placer Gold
In 2007 and 2008, we recovered and sold placer gold from our Kwabeng project. We did not recover any placer gold during 2009. In July
2010, we entered into agreements with independent Ghanaian contract miners to recover placer gold and produce the mineralized material
from our Kibi and Pameng projects and an agreement with Ravenclaw Mining Limited, a Swiss company, to assist in overseeing the contract
miners to limit our involvement in the recovery of placer gold operations and enable our company to focus on lode gold exploration activities.
Our General Manager of XG Mining received compensation from RavenclawMining Limited for assisting it in fulfilling its contract with our
company (see “Executive Compensation – Summary Compensation Table” and “Related Party Transactions – Consulting Agreement with
Principal Stockholder” for further details).
VTEM Survey
In 2011, an airborne Versatile Time-domain Electromagnetic (“VTEM”), Magnetic and Radiometric survey (the “VTEM survey”) was
completed by our company on our projects which are all located in the Kibi Gold Belt and encompassed approximately 4,000 line-kilometers
at 200 meter line spacing, with approximately 490 line-kilometers of detail 100 meter line spacing coverage over our core Kibi project mining
lease area. The VTEM system is renowned for its superior penetration depth of greater than 400 meters, low base frequency for enhanced
penetration in conductive ground cover and high spatial resolution which permits the spotting of drill targets directly off the airborne anomalies.
The primary purpose of the VTEM survey was to delineate auriferous graphitic or sulphidic shears but resistivity-depth data may also help
further define and/or identify the granitoid bodies hosting the Kibi project mineralization In addition to helping map lithological contacts,
including the gold prospective granitoid bodies, the aeromagnetic survey will permit the detection of low-magnetic domains possibly reflecting
demagnetization resulting from intense gold-related hydrothermal alteration. The radiometric survey may also help further define and/or
identify the gold-hosting granitoid bodies.
The VTEM data was incorporated into the geological compilation following our receipt of the final survey interpretation data from Geotech
Airborne Limited (see “Technical Reports - Interpretation Report of VTEM Survey” below for further details). This integrated survey, in
combination with previous soil geochemistry and reconnaissance geology surveys will help further delineate known gold occurrences outside
Zone 2 of the Kibi project, and evaluate the remainder of the Apapam mining lease area for the hosting of granitoid-hosted and Ashanti style
shear zone gold mineralization. Similarly, the VTEM survey will help further define the extent and regional controls of the gold-bearing
structures discovered to date by scout trenching on the Ankaase Gold Trend, located on the Muoso concession, and Banso Area No. 3 gold-
in-soil anomalies; with the objective of guiding follow-up trenching designed to outline high priority, cost effective drill targets.
63 -
Technical Reports
Interpretation Report of VTEM Survey
In August 2011, Geotech Airborne Limited provided our company with a report setting forth its interpretation of approximately 4,027 line
kilometers of electromagnetic, magnetic and radiometric data for gold exploration in our Kibi project area.
The airborne geophysical datasets display a complex signals largely dominated by NE-SW to NNE-SSW structures that are interpreted as
shear zones and graphitic sediments. Metasediments, metavolcanics and granitoids units have been delineated from their geophysical
(magnetic, electromagnetic and radiometric) characteristics. The electromagnetic anomaly picks show elongated patterns of conductors
located in NE-SW to NNE-SSW trending areas interpreted as graphitic layers within the interpreted shear zone and graphitic sediments.
The available geological and geophysical data was interpreted in terms of gold potential within the area of interest. The geophysical
interpretation used the genetic model for stockworks/silicification gold emplacement and the genetic model of granitoid gold emplacement. A
total of 38 targets were delineated and ranked according to a priority level for ground follow-up. Geotech Airborne Limited suggested that
these targets should be further investigated in the field using geology and geochemistry before planning a drilling program.
Modified Gold Deportment Study
In October 2011, SGS South Africa (Pty) Ltd. provided our company with a mineralogical report relating to mineralogical test work consisting of
a modified gold deportment study to characterize the gold, in two samples, to recommend a process route to maximize gold recoveries.
Approximately 10 kilograms of sample G478923 sulphide material (drill core) and 10 kilograms of composite oxide (saprolite) material were
utilized for the test work. The composite oxide sample was created by SGS South Africa (Pty) Ltd. from trench samples that were crushed and
combined. The mineralogical test work included metallurgical and mineralogical tests and was done in conjunction with gravity test work
conducted by the Metallurgical Section of SGS South Africa (Pty) Ltd.. This report outlined the methodology as to how the different tests were
conducted, the results of the test work, conclusions and recommendations.
The objective of the modified gold deportment study was to gain an understanding of the nature and mode of occurrence of the gold in each
sample. The modified gold deportment study included the following:
test work to determine the amenability of the ore to gravity recovery;
gold distribution across size fractions (grading analysis);
heavy liquid separation to determine the amount of free gold or gold in heavy particles such as sulphides;
exposure and mineral association analysis of the particulate gold grains in the gravity concentrate;
chemical composition of the ore and metallurgical test products;
general mineralogical characterization of the ore;
identification and quantification of gold minerals including native gold, gold-tellurides, etc. in the gravity concentrates;
grain size distribution of the gold grains in the gravity concentrate;
test work to determine the gold recovery by direct cyanidation; and
diagnostic leach analysis of the gravity tailings to determine the gold deportment in the gravity tails.
64 -
SGS South Africa (Pty) Ltd. made the following preliminary gold recovery conclusions in their report:
The gold in the G478923 gold ore samples (3.49 g/t Au) is highly amenable to cyanidation leaching with ~97% recoverable by means of
direct cyanidation. This ore is also amenable to gravity upgrading, with ~67% of the gold recovered at a mass pull of ~3%. In the gravity
concentrate (97.5 g/t Au), a total of 143 particulate gold grains were observed in the gravity concentrate of this sample.
The grading analysis on the G478923 gold ore sample indicated a very high upgrading of gold in the +106µm size fraction (~69%). This
indicates that the gold is either large gold grains or locked in large gold-bearing particles. From the liberation and mineral association
characteristics determined by QEMSCAN, on the gravity concentrate, the gold was found to be ~63% liberated and ~25% was
associated with pyrite. This indicates that the gold is either large, liberated gold grains or locked in large gold-bearing pyrite particles.
The direct cyanidation and diagnostic leach indicates that the sample is highly amenable to cyanide leaching, with ~97% of the gold
recovered from the head sample at a grind of 80%-75µm by direct cyanidation and ~96% for the gravity tailings at a grind of~50%-75µm.
This is corroborated by the exposure and the mineral association characteristics as determined by QEMSCAN analysis of the gravity
concentrate. Approximately 90% of the particulate gold grains are ≥10% exposed and should be leachable.
The gold in the composite gold ore sample (7.28 g/t Au) is also highly amenable to cyanidation, with ~97% of the gold recoverable by
means of direct cyanidation. The ore is also amenable to gravity upgrading, to some degree, with only ~56% of the gold recovered at a
mass pull of ~3%. In the gravity concentrate (134.83 g/t Au) a total of 125 particulate gold grains were observed by QEMSCAN.
The grading analysis on the composite gold ore sample indicated a very high upgrading of gold in the +106µm size fraction (~74%). This
indicates that the gold is either large gold grains or locked in large gold-bearing particles. From the liberation and mineral association
characteristics determined by QEMSCAN analysis of the gravity tailings, it was found that the gold grains were moderately liberated
(~76%) and that ~10% was occurring in silicates and ~14% in oxides. This indicates that the gold is either large, liberated gold grains or
locked in large gold-bearing silicate/oxide particles.
The direct cyanidation and diagnostic leach tests indicated that the sample is highly amenable to cyanide leaching, with ~98% of the
gold recovered from the head sample at a grind of 80%-75µm and ~99% of the gold in the gravity tailings at a grind of 50%-75µm. This is
corroborated by the exposure and mineral association characteristics of particulate gold in the gravity concentrate, as determined by
QEMSCAN analysis. Approximately ~96% of the gold grains are ≥10% exposed and should be leachable.
The most simplistic processing option would be to mill the ore to ~80%-75µm followed by carbon-in-leach cyanidation. Another option,
which may result in somewhat lower operational cost is to mill the ore relatively coarsely (say 80%-106µm) followed by gravity
concentration and intensive cyanidation of the gravity concentrate. The gravity tailings could then be milled finer to ~80%-75 µm,
followed by carbon-in- leach cyanidation. Taking out the coarse gold and some of the sulphides by gravity, will allow shorter retention
times in the leach tanks and possibly even lower cyanide consumption.
Report on Structural Geological Investigations of Zone 2, Kibi Project
In November 2011, SRK Consulting (Canada) Inc. provided our company with a report of their structural geological investigations of Zone 2
(Big Bend zone, South zone and other zones including the Mushroom zone) on our Kibi project.
65 -
Objectives and Overview
to review geological mapping to date and to provide on-ground structural geological guidance; and
to conduct structural geological investigations of key exposures and drill core at Zone 2 with a focus on understanding:
the 3D geometry of diorite dykes;
structural controls on the distribution of gold mineralization (including ore plunge); and
kinematics of shear/fault zones and their influence on the distribution of gold mineralization.
SRK Consulting (Canada) Inc. Conclusions
The distribution of gold mineralization in the Big Bend zone is controlled by two NNE-trending shear zones that bound the auriferous
zone in a quartz diorite.
Auriferous quartz veins in the Big Bend zone comprise:
shear and extensional veins related to the development of NNE-trending shear zones; and
stockwork veins in a particular portion of the quartz diorite.
Vein geometry, rare kinematic indicators and steeply plunging mineral lineation imply that deformation associated with gold
mineralization in the Big Bend zone resulted from a protracted episode of reverse SE over NW movement.
The controls on gold mineralization at the South zone and other zones are not well understood and require further oriented core drilling
followed by structural geology investigations.
SRK Consulting (Canada) Inc. Recommendations
Big Bend Zone
complete infill drilling at the Big Bend zone to confirm gold grade continuity in preparation for resource estimation;
conduct detailed petrography studies to identify compositional variations in the quartz diorite and verify their potential control on the
distribution of gold mineralization;
include structural contours of auriferous diorite contacts on geological maps to investigate the relationship between the geometry of the
auriferous portion of the diorite body and the distribution of gold mineralization; and
define the continuation of (auriferous) shear zones to the north and south of the Big Bend diorite.
South Zone and Other Zones (including the Mashroom Zone)
undertake further oriented core drilling to verify the extent and potential presence of shear zones at the South zone (drill orientations to
SW and SE); and
determine the shear zone kinematics and controls on gold distribution.
66 -
Regional Structural Geology Interpretation of the Aeromagnetic Data from the VTEM Survey
In December 2011, SRK Consulting (Canada) Inc. provided our company with a report of their structural geological interpretation of
aeromagnetic data covering our Kibi Gold Belt mining concessions to assist in understanding the structural setting of gold mineralization in the
area and to provide a practical structural framework for future exploration targeting. The defined area of interest is ~705 square kilometers in
area and is located at the northern extremity of the Kibi Gold Belt. The area of interest was based on the extent of the VTEM Survey conducted
by Geotech Airborne Limited. The SRK Consulting (Canada) Inc. report documents the methodology, results, conclusion and
recommendations from the structural geological interpretation.
The scope of work included a desktop structural interpretation of the airborne geophysical data we acquired over the area of interest. Based
on the available airborne geophysical data, SRK Consulting (Canada) Inc. constructed form lines outlining the internal geometry of
stratigraphy within our area of interest. In general, form lines within our area of interest display a strong southwest-northeast trend, parallel to
the tectonic grain in the known greenstone belts of Ghana. Variations from this trend occur in a north-west-southeast-trending belt along the
lower portion of our area of interest.
SRK Consulting (Canada) Inc. Conclusions
A fault network was interpreted and subdivided in terms of age. The fault network comprises dominant southwest- northeast-trending
faults, subparallel to the dominant trend observed in the form lines that include early reactivated DE extensional faults. These faults are
interpreted to have developed (or reactivated) during the Eburnean Orogeny (D2 -D5 ) and are believed to be closely linked to gold
mineralization.
Two types of intrusions (belt and basin type granitoids) were identified in our area of interest, both of which were emplaced before the
culmination of the Eburnean Orogeny (D5 ) and therefore are overprinted by D5 deformation.
A late (D6 ) fault set is represented by east-west-rending faults that are linked by minor northwest-southeast- trending faults. These are
characterized by narrow, linear breaks in the magnetic data often with little to no visible offset in the magnetic stratigraphy. These late
faults are interpreted to have resulted from northeast- southwest compression that may have occurred at the final stages of the Eburnean
Orogeny or post-dated the Eburnean Orogeny.
Several areas of structural complexity were identified within our area of interest, including left and right- hand steps along the major fault
corridors, intersections between D2 -D5 faults and intersections between D2 -D5 and D5 faults, particularly in the vicinity of intrusions.
SRK Consulting (Canada) Inc. Recommendations
Regional ground-truthing of the regional structural interpretation should be conducted. This should aim to not only identify whether a
given fault is present, but also characterize each fault in terms of:
fault products (including the brittle/brittle-ductile/ductile nature of the fault);
orientation of associated foliations and lineations if present;
kinematics; and
alteration or gold mineralization present.
A confidence rating should be compiled for each interpreted fault identified as part of this interpretation. This may include using existing
geological mapping, satellite imagery, other geophysical datasets, or ground-truthing to produce a confidence rating based on the
number of datasets, a given fault is identified in, or based on the resolution of datasets a given interpreted fault is based on.
67 -
Regional ground-truthing of the regional lithological interpretation should be conducted. This should focus on the location of the
boundary between the basin and belt assemblages, as well as better defining the internal variation within both these assemblages,
including their known relationships with gold mineralization.
Conduct a regional geochemical survey to verify the validity of identified target areas and conduct close- spaced soil geochemical
sampling to guide exploration drilling in areas of positive results.
Note:
1 ppm = 1 gram per tonne (g/t) = 1,000 part per billion (ppb)
All gold results for our exploration programs are reported in parts per million gold (Au).
Our Prior Exploration Activities
Please refer to our annual reports on Form 10-K previously filed with the SEC for any exploration activities conducted by us before the three
years required by this proxy statement/prospectus.
Kibi Project
Overview
Our Kibi project is also referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus as the Apapam concession and is comprised of 33.65 square kilometers
of an over 5.5 kilometer long, NE-trending, anomalous gold-in-soil trend characterized by four extensive, higher grade zones ranging from
approximately 800 meters by 75 to 300 meters to 1,000 meters by 100 to 500 meters in area.
Our Kibi project land position also encompasses the following two land staking applications:
the Akim Apapam concession is a reconnaissance license contiguous to the southwest extremity of our Kibi project covering an area of
7.0 square kilometers (700 hectares); and
the Apapam concession extension is a ground extension along the northwest boundary of our Kibi project covering an area of 1.42
square kilometers (142 hectares).
The Akim Apapam concession was made to provide a buffer area. The Akim Apapam concession was covered by a first pass (200 meters x
25 meters) soil geochemistry survey in 2011; with the results still being compiled as at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus. There is no
current knowledge of past exploration activity or lode gold occurrences on this ground. The Apapam concession extension was made to cover
certain trench and drill gold intercepts. The applications for the Akim Apapam concession and the Apapam concession extension were
submitted by our company to the Minerals Commission of Ghana on January 15, 2008 and, as at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus,
approval of these applications is still pending and there is no assurance that either of them will be granted.
The Apapam concession contains two small scale mining licenses, comprising approximately 0.1012 square kilometers (10.12 hectares)
located within the northwest portion of the concession which were granted to third parties before our company’s application for the Apapam
concession. None of the in situ, lode gold mineralization occurrences, described in an independent NI 43-101 technical report prepared by
SEMS Exploration Services Ltd. in 2010, are located within and/or proximal to these third party small scale mining licenses, and there is no
current knowledge of any lode gold occurrences being present on these parcels. No information is available on past and/or current alluvial
gold mining activity on these small scale mining licenses (see “NI 43-101 Reports” hereunder).
68 -
Location and Access
Our Kibi project lies within the Kibi-Winneba area in the Eastern Region of Ghana and is located on the eastern flank of the Atewa Range
along the headwaters of the Birim River in the immediate vicinity of the district capital of Kibi, approximately 75 kilometers NNW of the nation’s
capital city of Accra. Access to our Kibi project is by driving northwest from Accra on the paved Accra-Kumasi Trunk Road, the main national
highway, for approximately 90 kilometers until the town of Kibi, marked by a road sign, is reached. One would make a left hand turn at the Kibi
sign and drive southwest for approximately 5 kilometers to arrive at our Apapam concession. A tarred road emanating from the Accra-Kumasi
Trunk Road, approximately 15 kilometers northeast of Kibi, dissects the north-central and south-eastern portions of our concession, while the
tarred road servicing the town of Apapam provides access to the concession’s south-western extremity. Our Kibi project is located
approximately 20 kilometers south-southeast from our field camp.
The Kibi-Winneba area is characterized by a narrow sequence of Birimian metavolcanics underlying most of the Atewa Range, which is
covered by an extensive laterite/bauxite capping, and surrounded by a thick package of Birimian metasediments dominating the flanks and the
lower lying areas. Our Kibi project covers the Birimian volcanic-sediment contact which we believe represents a highly favorable environment
for the hosting of lode gold deposits throughout Ghana.
Historic Work
Before the exploration work conducted by our company, very little systematic exploration work for bedrock gold deposits has been conducted
in the Kibi area since the 1930s.
Prior Exploration by Xtra-Gold
Phase I Drill Program
Our Phase I drill program carried out on our Kibi project from 2008 to 2009 encompassed 18 diamond drill holes (NQ2 core), ranging from 60
meters to 320.5 meters in length, and totaling 3,001 linear meters. This reconnaissance drilling was designed to test the depth continuity of
gold mineralization discovered in trenches excavated on Zone 2 and Zone 1 of our Kibi project. Our Phase I drill program was implemented
from August 30 to October 28, 2008 by Burwash Drilling of Cobble Hill, British Columbia, Canada.
This initial reconnaissance drilling program yielded very encouraging results and demonstrated that the granitoid-hosted gold mineralization
occurrences intersected along the Kibi gold-in-soil trend offers potential for shallow oxide mineralization amenable to bulk mining and heap
leaching, as well as large primary gold systems at depth.
The first 15 holes of our Phase II drill program targeted gold mineralization discovered in four trenches, TKB005, TKB004, TKB006, and
TKB009-010, spread out over an approximately 975 meter E-W distance on the Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly. Thirteen out of the 15 holes on
Zone 2 yielded significant gold intercepts, including 10 holes intersecting significant granitoid-hosted gold mineralization over 7 meters to 45
meters core lengths. Significant gold intercepts are presented in Table 1.
Mineralized material consists of altered quartz diorite and tonalite exhibiting quartz-iron carbonate veining, and disseminated sulphides.
Mineralization discovered by trenching and/or drilling on Zone 2 and Zone 3 appears to be hosted by swarms of granitoid bodies, ranging from
5.5 meters to 79 meters in core length, interpreted to be emplaced along splay structures off an inferred NE-trending regional structure.
Limited drilling to date traced the granitoid-hosted gold mineralization over a 200 meters strike length and to a vertical depth of 100 meters at
the trench TKB004 zone, including gold intercepts of: 2.11 parts per million gold over 25.4 meters; 0.87 parts per million gold over 15 meters
and 1.28 parts per million gold over 33 meters; 2.24 parts per million gold over 16 meters; and 2.78 parts per million gold over 15 meters in
holes KBD08012, KBD08013, KBD08014, and KBD08015. Similarly, mineralization at the trench TKB005 zone was traced over an
approximately 135 meters strike length and to a vertical depth of 76 meters in holes KBD08003 and KBD08004 and KBD08010 and
KBD08011, including significant intercepts of 8.49 parts per million gold over 12 meters and 4.83 parts per million gold over 7 meters in holes
KBD08004 and KBD08010.
69 -
Limited Zone 1 scout drilling (3 holes) intersected a typical “Ashanti” style shear zone setting developed proximal to a metavolcanic-
metasediment contact with a spatially associated granitoid body. Hole KBD08017 yielded intermittent, exploration significant, anomalous gold
values over a 60 meter core length, including encouraging intercepts of 1.43 parts per million gold over 13.5 meters, 1.04 parts per million gold
over 6 meters, and 1.02 parts per million gold over 8 meters. In addition, trench TKB012 excavated on a gold-in-soil anomaly, located
approximately 100 meters west of hole KBDD08017, returned a channel sample intercept of 2.51 parts per million gold over a 4 meter trench
length.
Recommended work to further advance our project includes:
additional mechanical trenching to further define the geological / structural nature and extent of the granitoid-host gold mineralization in
Zone 2 and 3; and
a 5,000 meter combined reverse circulation (RC) / diamond drilling program. The estimated cost of the follow-up exploration program is
approximately $800,000.
Phase II Drill Program
Our Phase II drill program on our Kibi project encompassed 50 reverse circulation (RC) holes, ranging from 40 meters to 150 meters in length,
and totaling 4,715 linear meters including 27 holes for 2,478 meters on Zone 2 and 23 holes totaling 2,237 meters on Zone 3. Fifteen initial
reverse circulation (RC) holes targeted the trench TKB005 and trench TKB004 gold zones located at the southeast extremity of Zone 2 of the
Kibi Gold Trend; an over 5.5 kilometer long, northeast trending, anomalous gold-in-soil trend characterized by four extensive higher grade
zones ranging from approximately 800 meters by 75 to 300 meters and 1,000 meters by 100 to 500 meters in area. Our Phase II drill program
was designed to:
test the dip and strike extensions of the four gold target zones identified in Zone 2 during the Phase I drill program;
assess the depth continuity of gold mineralization discovered in trenches excavated in Zone 3, an approximately 1,000 meters by 100 to
500 meters gold-in-soil anomaly located approximately 700 meterssouthwest of the Zone 2 drilling conducted under the Phase I drill
program in 2008; and
test induced polarization (IP) / Resistivity anomalies spatially associated with the Kibi gold-in-soil trend.
Our Phase II drill program was designed to build upon the 2008 Phase I diamond drill results and to continue to demonstrate that the
widespread, classical granitoid-hosted gold mineralization developed along our Kibi project offers potential for shallow oxide mineralization
amenable to bulk mining and heap leaching, as well as large primary gold systems at depth. Our Phase II drill program was implemented from
July 14, 2009 to September 26, 2009 by BLY Ghana Ltd., a subsidiary of Boart Longyear.
Drilling Results from Trenches TKB005 and TKB004 Zones (15 Holes) – Zone 2 – Kibi Project
Eleven out of the initial 15 of the 27 reverse circulation (RC) holes on Zone 2 yielded significant gold intercepts, with all mineralized intercepts
consisting of granitoid-hosted gold mineralization spanning from one meter to 78 meters in core length. Mineralization identified by trenching
and drilling on Zone 2 appears to be hosted by a series of sill-like granitoid bodies hosted within a folded metasediment-metavolcanic rock
sequence. Mineralized material consists of altered quartz diorite and tonalite exhibiting quartz-iron carbonate veining and disseminated
sulphides. Significant gold intercepts for the trench TKB005 and TKB004 zones are set forth in Table 1.
70 -
As at September 28, 2009, gold mineralization at the trench TKB005 zone has been traced over an approximately 220 meter strike length and
to a vertical depth of approximately 75 meters. Highlights from the present drilling includes intercepts of 6.29 g/t over 23 meters, including 8.55
g/t over 10 meters, in hole KBRC09047 and 2.97 g/t over 18 meters, including 6.32 g/t over 8 meters in hole KBRC09042. These two holes
tested the central portion of the zone in a scissor pattern designed to better characterize the lithological and structural controls of the gold
mineralization intersected in diamond drill holes KBD08003 and KBD08004 from our Phase I drill program. Field and trench mapping
indicates that the trench TKB005 zone mineralization is hosted by a moderate, easterly dipping granitoid body exhibiting an extensive,
shallow to moderate, westerly dipping, sheeted quartz vein system. Hole KBD09042 (270° AZ / -50° dip) intersected the host granitoid sill at
approximately right angles from a collar position on the eastern (hanging wall) flank of the granitoid body. While hole KBRC09047 (090° Az / -
55° dip) was drilled down the dip of the host granitoid sill to transect the westerly dipping, sheeted quartz veining at approximately right
angles, with the hole remaining within the confines of the host granitoid body to a down hole depth of 23 meters.
Drilling Results from Trenches TKB006 and TKB010 Zones (12 Holes) – Zone 2 – Kibi Project
Seven out of the 12 remaining drill holes on Zone 2 were designed to better define gold mineralization at trench TKB006 and trench TKB010
zones identified during the initial scout Phase I drill program at the northwest extremity of Zone 2 of our Kibi project; one hole targeted a new
gold zone exposed in recent trenching (trenches TKB014E and TKB014F); two holes probed previously untested gold-in-soil anomalies and
two holes tested an induced polarization (IP) / resistivity anomaly spatially associated with a gold-in-soil anomaly. In addition, a total of 960
linear meters of mechanized trenching (38 trenches) was also conducted on Zone 2 in conjunction with this drill program to better define the
surface trace of the host granitoid bodies, to test strike extension of known mineralization and to test gold-in-soil anomalies and geophysical
targets.
Five out of the above-noted seven holes targeting the trench TKB006, TKB010 and TKB014E-TKB014F zones yielded significant gold
intercepts, with all mineralized intercepts consisting of granitoid-hosted gold mineralization spanning from one meter to 76 meters in core
length. As at October 28, 2009, mineralization identified by trenching and drilling, spread out over an approximately 975 meters east-west
distance on the Zone 2 gold-in-soil trend, appears to be hosted by a series of sill-like granitoid bodies hosted within a folded metasediment-
metavolcanic rock sequence.
Mineralized material consists of altered quartz diorite and tonalite exhibiting quartz-iron carbonate veining and disseminated sulphides.
Drilling highlights include granitoid-hosted gold mineralization intercepts from surface of 39.0 meters grading 9.23 g/t gold uncut (3.54 g/t gold
cut) including 10.0 meters grading 33.15 g/t gold uncut (10.95 g/t gold cut) in drill hole KBRC09060 and 76.0 meters grading 1.62 g/t gold,
including 20.0 meters grading 3.36 g/t gold (and including 5.25 g/t gold over 9.0 meters) in hole KBRC09068. Significant gold intercepts for
holes KBRC09057 to KBRC09068 are set forth in Table 1.
Holes KBRC09057, KBRC09059 to KBRC09061 and KBRC09065 further tested the trench TKB006 gold zone situated in the north-central
portion of the approximately 1,000 meter long Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly. Additional mechanized trenching and geological mapping during
this drilling campaign appears to indicate that the trench TKB006 Zone is characterized by two, NNW-trending, approximately eight meters
and 40 meters wide, sill-like granitoid bodies lying approximately 25 meters apart within a metasediment rock sequence. Hole KBRC09060
targeting an extensive system of NE to SE trending quartz veining developed within the wider, eastern granitoid body returned an intercept
from surface of 39.0 meters grading 9.23 g/t gold uncut (3.54 g/t gold cut), including 10.0 meters grading 33.15 g/t gold uncut (10.95 g/t gold
cut). Drilling, including initial scout drill hole KBD08005, which returned intercepts of 1.18 g/t gold over 17.0 meters and 1.02 g/t gold over 15.0
meters, has traced the trench TKB006 gold zone mineralization over an approximately 160 meter strike distance.
71 -
Hole KBRC09062, designed to undercut gold mineralization discovered by trenching of a previously untested gold-in-soil anomaly lying
approximately 225 meters west-northwest of the Trench TKB006 zone, yielded a granitoid-hosted gold mineralization intercept of 4.03 g/t gold
over 4.0 meters, including one meter grading 9.32 g/t gold. The two target trenches positioned end to end on the same soil geochemical
anomaly line both returned significant channel sample intercepts separated by an approximately 20.5 meter distance, including 8.49 g/t gold
over a 5.0 meter trench-length, including 2.0 meters grading 14.85 g/t gold, in trench TKB014E and 6.86 g/t gold over an 8.0 meters trench-
length, including 1.0 meter grading 22.4 g/t gold, in trench TKB014F. This new gold zone is considered especially interesting given the values
defined at this early stage and the extent of the untested gold-in-soil anomalies present along lines 167N to L169N within the approximately
400 meter gap between the trench TKB006 and TKB010 zones.
Holes KBRC09067 and KBRC09068 further tested the trench TKB010 gold zone located at the north-western extremity of the approximately
1,000 meter long Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly. Hole KBRC09068 targeting an extensive system of NE to NW trending quartz veining exposed
in trench TKB010 returned a granitoid-hosted gold mineralization intercept from surface of 76.0 meters grading 1.62 g/t gold, including 20.0
meters grading 3.36 g/t gold (and including 5.25 g/t gold over 9.0 meters). Drilling and trenching to date, including initial scout drill hole
KBD08008, which returned an intercept of 1.01 g/t gold over 45.0 meters (including 2.01 g/t gold over 12.0 meters), have traced the trench
TKB010 gold zone mineralization over an approximately 150 meter distance along the inner, northern margin of an east to southeast trending
granitoid body.
Results from 23 Scout RC Holes – Zone 3–- Kibi Project
Drilling highlights for Zone 3 include granitoid-hosted gold mineralization intercepts of 30.0 meters grading 3.52 g/t gold, including 14.0 meters
grading 6.47 g/t gold, from a down hole depth of 8.0 meters in hole KBRC09019; 4.0 meters grading 4.86 g/t gold from a down hole depth of 26
meters in hole KBRC09023 and 8.0 meters grading 4.95 g/t gold, including 3.0 meters grading 12.89 g/t gold, from surface in hole
KBRC09024. Significant gold intercepts for holes KBRC09019 to KBRC09041 are set forth in Table 1.
Similarly to Zone 2, all Zone 3 mineralization targets are near surface, remain open in all directions and offer potential for shallow oxide
mineralization amenable to bulk mining and heap leaching, as well as large primary gold systems at depth. The limited scout drilling returned
several significant gold intercepts over an approximately 825.0 meter E-W distance across Zone 3. Zone 2 and Zone 3 drilling has traced the
granitoid-hosted gold mineralization over an approximately 2,100 meter distance along the NE-trending Kibi Gold Trend.
This initial Zone 3 scout drilling formed part of the 4,715 meter Phase II RC drill program which included 27 holes for 2,478 meters on Zone 2
and 23 holes totaling 2,237 meters on Zone 3; an over 5.5 kilometer long, NE-trending, anomalous gold-in-soil trend characterized by four
extensive higher grade zones ranging from approximately 800 meters by 75-300 meters to 1,000 meters by 100-500 meters in area. The
present drilling was designed to undercut surface gold mineralization exposed in reconnaissance trenches, and to test geophysical induced
polarization (IP) / resistivity and/or gold-in-soil anomalies on Zone 3; an approximately 1,000 meters by 100 to 500 meters, gold-in-soil
anomaly located approximately 700 meters to the southwest of the main Zone 2 drilling area.
As at February 11, 2010, drilling included five holes to test the trench TAD019 and TAD007 targets located at the southeastern extremity of the
Zone 3 gold-in-soil anomaly, and 18 holes to assess the trench TAD001 to TAD004, TAD015to TAD021 and TAD016 targets within the north-
central portion of the gold-in-soil anomaly. Fourteen out of the 23 scout holes returned significant gold intercepts, with an additional three
holes yielding anomalous gold intercepts. All mineralized intercepts consisted of granitoid-hosted and/or granitoid-associated gold
mineralization, with mineralized material typically consisting of altered quartz diorite and tonalite exhibiting quartz-iron carbonate veining and
disseminated sulphides.
Hole KBRC09019 targeting an extensive system of granitoid-hosted, NE-trending, moderately NW-dipping, sheeted quartz veins discovered
in trench TAD019 returned a significant mineralized intercept of 30.0 meters grading 3.52 g/t gold, including 14.0 meters grading 6.47 g/t gold,
from a down hole depth of 8.0 meters. For reference purposes, trench TAD019 yielded a channel sample intercept of 4.93 g/t gold over 45.0
meters, including 10.12 g/t gold over 12.0 meters. Hole KBRC09039, representing the second hole of a scissor drill pattern designed to
determine the dip attitude of the host granitoid body, returned an intercept of 39.80 g/t gold over 1.0 meter from a quartz vein in mafic
metavolcanic rock along the footwall flank of the granitoid body. Hole KBRC09020, targeting a zone of anomalous gold values in trench
TAD007 located approximately 65.0 meters to the west of the KBRC09019 collar, yielded granitoid-hosted mineralization intercepts of 1.01 g/t
gold over 3.0 meters and 4.10 g/t gold over 2.0 meters.
72 -
A total of 18 holes were drilled within the north-central portion of the Zone 3 gold-in-soil anomaly which is characterized by an approximately
800 meter long induced polarization (IP) chargeability anomaly exhibiting a spatial relationship with a geophysically inferred, NE-trending,
regional structural trend. Eleven of these holes tested the north-eastern, moderate chargeability / very high resistivity portion (200 meters) of
the induced polarization (IP) anomaly exhibiting a coincidental gold-in-soil signature and anomalous trench results (i.e. trench TAD001 –
TAD004 Zone).
The limited, shallow reverse circulation (RC) drilling outlined an approximately 135.0 meter wide, NE-trending, granitoid hosted, structural
corridor appearing to encompass at least five distinct, gold-bearing, sheeted vein zones ranging from 1.0 meter to 31.0 meters in core length.
Eight out of the 11 trench TAD001 to TAD004 zone holes returned significant gold intercepts, including seven holes yielding multiple
significant and/or anomalous gold intercepts.
The mineralized structural corridor is characterized by significant gold intercepts over 1.0 meter to 8.0 meter core lengths occurring within
more extensive, lower grade, mineralization envelopes attaining 15.0 meters to 31.0 meters in core length. Holes KBRC09024 and
KBRC0937, intersecting what appears to be the same sheeted vein zone approximately 35.0 meters horizontally apart within the central
section of the structural corridor returned mineralized intercepts of 8.0 meters grading 4.95 g/t gold, including 3.0 meters grading 12.89 g/t gold,
and 28.0 meters grading 0.87 g/t gold. Similarly, holes KBRC09023 and KBRC09038, drilled in a scissor pattern along the northern margin of
the structural corridor, yielded 4.0 meters grading 4.86 g/t gold and 31.0 meters grading 0.57 g/t gold, respectively from intercepts located
approximately 8.0 meters horizontally apart along the same mineralized structure.
Thirteen out of the 18 holes described above were drilled on open ground along the northern flank of the Apapam mining lease (see “Kibi
Project – Apapam Mining Lease” for details of this mining lease), with the drill traces extending from approximately 50.0 meters to 300.0
meters outside the concession boundary, and two additional holes straddle the concession boundary. Following the completion of a
professional land survey, the approximately 1.42 square kilometer wedge of open ground lying between the Apapam mining lease and the
Atewa Forest Reserve boundary was staked by us to cover the mineralization targets identified by the holes in question. The staking
application was formally received by the Minerals Commission of Ghana on November 19, 2009 and is currently being processed, thus
securing our priority staking status, however, as at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, the application is still pending and there is no
absolute assurance that this parcel of ground will be granted to our company. Refer to Table 1 for the claim status of individual Zone 3 drill
holes.
NI 43-101 Reports
In July 2010, SEMS Exploration Services Ltd. prepared an independent technical report consistent with the Canadian Securities
Administrators National Instrument 43-101 – Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects, Form 43-101F1 – Technical Report and Companion
Policy 43-101 CP on our Kibi project.
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we have commissioned SEMS Exploration Services Ltd. to prepare an initial NI 43-101
compliant mineral resource estimate on the Big Bend and East Dyke gold zones located within Zone 2 of our Kibi gold project. This will
constitute the first ever mineral resource estimate generated on a gold project within the underexplored Kibi Gold Belt.
73 -
Phase III Drill Program
Based on the results of our 2009 Phase II drill program, we commenced and completed our follow-up Phase III drill program on our Kibi project
during 2010 to:
further test the dip and strike extensions of the gold mineralization zones identified in our Phase I and Phase II drill programs; and
test IP / Resistivity anomalies spatially associated with the Kibi gold-in-soil trend. The Phase III drill program was implemented from July
2010 to December 15, 2010 by Burwash Drilling of Cobble Hill, British Columbia, Canada.
Results of Phase III Drill Program
Drilling highlights from the South Ridge granitoid of Zone 2 include surface or near surface granitoid-hosted gold mineralization intercepts of
19.5 meters grading 1.52 g/t gold in drill hole KBDD10085; 25.5 meters grading 1.50 g/t gold in hole KBDD10086 and 23 meters grading 1.74
g/t gold in hole KBDD10090. Hole KBDD10091 encountered a 17.0 meter intersection grading 2.42 g/t gold as noted in Table 1. These holes
yielded significant gold intercepts, with all mineralized intercepts consisting of granitoid-hosted gold mineralization spanning from 2 meters to
72 meters in core length. Drilling and trenching traced an extensive system of en echelon extension vein arrays across an approximately 440
meter distance along the SE-trending South Ridge granitoid body. Gold mineralization is associated with quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide
veining developed within a rock body of quartz diorite to tonalite composition. Additional trenching/drilling is required to further define the
extent and strike length of the quartz vein arrays, the structural controls of the mineralization and the contacts of the host granitoid body.
Ongoing diamond drilling has significantly expanded known gold mineralization down dip on the Zone 2 - Central granitoid at our Kibi project.
Three step-back holes (685 meters) successfully expanded the gold mineralization to a down dip depth of up to approximately 115 meters.
Drilling highlights include classical granitoid-hosted gold mineralization intercepts of 20 meters grading 2.43 g/t gold in KBDD10099; 58
meters grading 2.46 g/t gold, including 28 meters grading 3.67 g/t gold, in KBDD10101; 27 meters grading 1.98 g/t gold and 25 meters grading
1.76 g/t gold in KBDD10103.
The above-noted drill holes targeted the depth potential of the gold mineralization along the southeast portion of the Central Granitoid body
located at the south-eastern extremity of the approximately 1,200 meter long by 500 meter to 800 meter wide Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly. All
three holes were designed to test the down dip extension of gold mineralization along an approximately 100 meter strike extension of the host
granitoid body; with the drilling centered on a flexure or possible fold nose imparting a change from a northwesterly trend to an easterly trend
to the moderate, northerly dipping granitoid body. Gold mineralization is associated with quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining developed
within a rock body of quartz diorite to tonalite composition.
Hole KBDD10099 was drilled in a southwest direction on the NW-trending segment of the granitoid body. It was designed to undercut a
mineralized intercept of 27.0 meters grading 4.03 g/t gold in hole KBDD10069 and yielded two significant mineralization intercepts located
approximately 75 meters down dip of the KBDD10069 intercept, including: 20.0 meters grading 2.43 g/t gold from a down hole depth of 141
meters; and 7.0 meters grading 2.53 g/t gold from a down hole depth of 176 meters. Significant mineralization was traced over an
approximately 115 meters down dip distance from surface on the KBDD10069 – KBDD10074 – KBDD10099 drill section.
Hole KBDD10101, consisting of a south trending borehole designed to test the nose of the flexure in the granitoid body at depth below an
intercept of 25.4 meters grading 2.11 g/t gold yielded by scout diamond core hole KBD08012, returned a wide mineralized intercept of 58.0
meters grading 2.46 g/t gold from a down hole depth of 112 meters; approximately 45 meter down dip of the KBD08012 intercept. This 58
meter mineralized intercept encompasses an essentially barren, 11.0 meter core-length interval (130 meters to 141 meters) appearing to
reflect the truncation of the mineralization by a post mineralization dyke; with the mineralized section above the dyke yielding an intercept of
18.0 meters grading 2.18 g/t gold (112 meters to 130 meters), and the segment below the dyke returning 28.0 meters grading 3.67 g/t gold (142
meters - 170 meters), including 15 meters grading 5.42 g/t gold. Hole KBDD10103, also consisting of a south trending borehole collared
approximately 50 meters to the east of hole KBDD10101 along the northern, hanging wall flank of the easterly trending granitoid body, was
designed to undercut intercepts of 15.0 meters grading 0.87 g/t gold and 33 meters grading 1.28 g/t yielded by scout diamond core hole
KBD08013. Hole KBDD10103 returned two significant mineralization intercepts extending approximately 45 meters to 75 meters down dip
from the lower KBD08013 mineralized intercept, including: 27.0 meters grading 1.98 g/t gold from a down hole depth of 131.0 meters,
including 15.0 meters grading 3.23 g/t gold; and 25.0 meters grading 1.76 g/t gold from a down hole depth of 180.0 meters.
74 -
The 2010 drilling and trenching efforts traced significant gold mineralization within the southeastern segment of the Central Granitoid over an
approximately 300 meter strike extension of the host granitoid body and down to a maximum down dip distance 115 meters.
2011 Drill Program
On January 15, 2011, we commenced our 2011 drill program on our Kibi project. The drilling was primarily designed to expand known gold
mineralization along strike and at depth within the southeast portion of the Central Granitoid body located at the south-eastern extremity of the
approximately 1,200 meter long by 500 to 800 meter wide Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly.
Results of 2011 Drill Program
The first two diamond core holes from our 2011 drill program have significantly expanded known gold mineralization down plunge on the
Zone 2 – East Dyke granitoid at our Kibi project. The vertical fan pattern holes (379 meters) successfully expanded the gold mineralization to a
down plunge depth of approximately 200 meters.
Highlights of these holes include classical granitoid–hosted gold mineralization intercepts of:
15 meters grading 2.05 g/t gold, including 5 metersgrading 4.00 g/t gold, in KBDD11105; and
14 meters grading 2.36 g/t gold, including 5 meters grading 5.18 g/t gold, in KBDD11106.
At the time, drilling targeted the depth potential of the gold mineralization along the northern portion of the East Dyke granitoid body located at
the south-eastern extremity of the approximately 1,200 meter long by 500 to 800 meter wide Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly. The two west
trending, vertical fan pattern holes (-50o & -70o) were designed to undercut a mineralized intercept of 7 meters grading 4.83 g/t gold in scout
hole KBD08010 located at the northern extremity of the easterly dipping host granitoid body. Other drilling highlights from the North zone –
East Dyke granitoid include intercepts of: 8.49 g/t gold over 12 meters in hole KBD08004 and 6.29 g/t over 23 meters, including 8.66 g/t over
10 meters, in hole KBRC09047, and 2.97 g/t over 18 meters, including 6.32 g/t over 8 meters, in hole KBRC09042. Gold mineralization is
associated with quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining developed within a rock body of quartz diorite composition.
The upper KBDD11105 borehole (-50o dip) yielded a significant mineralized intercept of 15 meters grading 2.05 g/t gold, including 5 meters
grading 4.0 g/t gold, from a down hole depth of 105 meters, approximately 60 meters down dip from the scout hole KBD08010 intercept; and
the steeper KBDD11106 borehole (- 70o) returned a mineralized intercept of 14 meters grading 2.36 g/t gold, including 5 meters grading 5.18
g/t gold from a down hole depth of 141 meters, approximately 65 meters down dip of the KBDD11105 intercept. To date, significant gold
mineralization had been traced over an approximately 100 meter strike length and a 200 meter down plunge distance along the North zone of
the East Dyke granitoid. Drilling to date indicated that the North zone consists of a northerly plunging (approx. 65o) mineralized vein package
appeared to be developed at a flexure in the host granitoid body.
Geological mapping and trenching efforts appear to indicate that the four auriferous granitoid bodies discovered to date on Zone 2 may form
part of a continuous, folded granitoid body. To date, gold mineralization had been traced by drilling and trenching over an approximately 1,500
meter aggregate distance along the limbs and nose of this SE-trending fold structure. The mineralization remained open in all directions and
drilling/trenching to further define the extent and geological controls of the mineralization was ongoing.
75 -
In April 2011, a spectacular, coarse native gold-bearing, vein quartz clast was discovered by our local contracted placer gold miners along the
Birim River valley within the north-central portion of the Apapam mining lease area. A photograph of the gold specimen has been posted on
our website at www.xtragold.com. Although the complex geomorphologic setting and depositional history of the auriferous gravel deposits
present along the base of the Atewa Range make it difficult to determine conclusive bedrock sources for the widespread placer gold
occurrences, the high grade nature of this quartz vein gold mineralization renders it of considerable lode gold exploration significance.
A 3.5 kilometer long, NE-trending, chargeable/resistive induced polarization anomaly exhibiting a spatial relationship with a geophysically
inferred, NE-trending, regional structural trend, and characterized by coincidental gold-in-soil anomalies and/or auriferous floats, lying
approximately 1 kilometer northwest of the Birim River along the south-western margin of the approximately 5.5 kilometer long Kibi project
gold trend, represents a possible bedrock source for the vein gold material; based on the fact that the gold specimen was discovered at the
confluence of an alluvial gold-bearing, secondary stream dissecting this anomalous trend. Another possible bedrock source for the gold
mineralization is the southwest extension of the Kibi Old Mine structure inferred to pass to the south of the Birim River.
At the time, a mechanized trenching program targeting the 3.5 kilometer long geophysical/geochemical trend and an extensive soil sampling
program (75 line-kilometers) covering the possible southwest extension of the Kibi Old Mine structure within the central portion of the Apapam
concession was scheduled for initiation in mid May, 2011. See the NI 43-101 Technical Report entitled “Kibi Project, Eastern Region, Ghana”
dated July 12, 2010, filed under our company’s profile on SEDAR at www.sedar.com for further details regarding the aforementioned
geophysical/geochemical target, the Kibi Old Mine prospect, and the geology and geomorphology of the Kibi Gold Belt placer gold deposits.
Two additional diamond core holes (586 meters) were drilled on the newly named Big Bend Gold Zone - Central granitoid at our Kibi gold
project.
Highlights of these holes include classical granitoid–hosted gold mineralization intercepts of:
42 meters grading 2.39 g /t gold in KBDD11108 from 189 meters down-hole; and
27 meters grading 0.89 g/t gold in KBDD11107 from 127 meters down-hole.
The Big Bend gold zone was intersected approximately 215 meters down-plunge of previously identified mineralization; extending down-
plunge potential from surface to approximately 360 meters along a through-like flexure within the central granitoid body.
These two southwest (225o) trending, vertical fan pattern holes (-50o & -75o) targeting an embayment or wallrock protrusion developed along
the hanging wall of the Central granitoid body represent the first holes drilled on the Big Bend gold zone during the current 20,000 meter drill
campaign to follow up on the significant gold intercepts yielded by Phase III holes KBDD10101 and KBDD10103. Hole KBDD10101 collared
approximately 210 meters to the west of the present drill collars returned 2.46 g/t gold over 58 meters, including 3.67 g/t gold over 28 meters;
and KBDD10103 located 40 meters to the east of KBDD10101 yielded intercepts of 1.98 g/t gold over 27 meters and 1.76 g/t gold over 25
meters. To date, significant gold mineralization had been traced over an approximately 300 meter strike length and approximately 360 meters
down plunge distance from surface along the Big Bend gold zone hosted by the Central granitoid body. Drilling to date indicated that the Big
Bend zone consisted of northeasterly plunging, en echelon, mineralized vein packages appearing to be developed along a through-like
flexure within the Central granitoid body.
The upper KBDD11107 borehole (-50o dip) yielded a mineralized intercept of 27 meters grading 0.89 g/t gold from a down hole depth of 127
meters; and the steeper KBDD11108 borehole (-75o) returned a mineralized intercept of 42 meters grading 2.39 g/t gold, including 14 meters
grading 3.11 g/t gold and 9 meters grading 3.19 g/t gold from a down hole depth of 189 meters, approximately 100 meters down dip of the
KBDD11107 intercept. Gold mineralization is associated with quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining developed within a rock body of quartz
diorite composition.
76 -
Both boreholes also intersected mineralization spatially associated with a northerly trending shear zone cross-cutting the Central granitoid;
with KBDD11107 yielding a sheared diorite intercept grading 8.44 g/t gold over 3 meters from a down-hole depth of 60 meters; and sheared,
graphitic metasedimentary rocks in KBDD11108 returning mineralized intercepts grading 2.12 g/t gold over 4 meters and 2.36 g/t gold over 5
meters, including 5.36 g/t gold over 2 meters, from down-hole depths of 87 meters and 116 meters. This newly discovered gold-bearing shear
zone represented a very prospective target to be followed-up by additional trenching and drilling.
To date, we had completed 31 holes totaling 7,692 meters (KBDD11105 - KBDD11135) of our 2011 drill program (including KBDD11116
which was abandoned at 71 meters); with 15 out of the 31 holes (4,390 meters) targeting the Big Bend gold zone on the Central granitoid
body. At the time, ongoing drilling efforts were focused on the further delineation of the Big Bend gold zone.
Ongoing drilling on the Big Bend gold zone on our Kibi gold project continues to intersect significant gold mineralization, including 2.42 g/t
gold over 52 meters. At the time, assay results from six new diamond core holes (1,308 meters noted hereunder continued to confirm the
down-plunge continuity and the multiple en-echelon vein package structural style of the mineralization, and demonstrated the occurrence of
higher grade mineralization within the Big Bend gold system.
Highlights of the holes noted hereunder include classical granitoid – hosted gold mineralization intercepts of:
52 meters grading 2.42 g/t gold in KBDD11113 from 84 meters down-hole, including 27 meters grading3.58 g/t gold (and including 6.09
g/t gold over 12 meters);
50 meters grading 1.64 g/t gold in KBDD11110 from 158 meters down-hole, including 24 meters grading 2.45 g/t gold; and
50 meters grading 1.31 g/t gold in KBDD11114 from surface, including 20 meters grading 2.21 g/t gold.
To date, significant gold mineralization had been traced over an approximately 300 meter strike length and an approximately 360 meter down
plunge distance from surface along the Big Bend gold zone hosted by the Central granitoid body. Drilling to date indicated that the Big Bend
zone consisted of north-easterly plunging, en echelon, mineralized vein packages appearing to be developed along a through-like flexure
within the Central granitoid body. Gold mineralization is associated with quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining developed within a rock
body of quartz diorite composition. Irregularities or flexures in the geometry of the host diorite bodies appear to strongly influence the
development of veining and grade distribution; as is exemplified by the Big Bend zone on the Central granitoid and the East Dyke granitoid
zone. Similar flexures have potential to host mineralization elsewhere along the strike or down-dip extensions of the extensive dioritic bodies
characterizing our Kibi gold project.
Boreholes KBDD11109 – KBDD11110 and KBDD11111 – KBDD11112 consisting of a pair of south trending, vertical fan drill sections (-50o &
-75o), collared approximately 45 meters apart were designed to test the quartz diorite body at depth between holes KBDD10103 and
KBDD11108 which yielded significant gold intercepts located approximately 45 meters west and 50 meters east of the present drill sections,
respectively. With KBDD10103 returning mineralized intercepts of 1.98 g/t gold over 27 meters and 1.76 g/t gold over 25 meters; and
KBDD11108 returning an intercept of 42 meters grading 2.39 g/t gold.
The upper KBDD11109 borehole (-50o) of the KBDD11109 – KBDD11110 vertical fan pattern yielded a mineralized intercept of 2 meters
grading 5.75 g/t gold from a down-hole depth of 91 meters; and the steeper KBDD11110 borehole (-75o) returned a mineralized intercept of 50
meters grading 1.64 g/t gold, including 24 meters grading 2.45 g/t gold, from a down-hole depth of 158 meters, approximately 75 to 125 meters
down dip of the KBDD11109 intercept. The shorter KBDD11109 intercept appeared to represent the upper fringes of the north-easterly
plunging mineralization zone.
- 77 -
The upper KBDD11111 borehole (-50o) of the KBDD11111 – KBDD11112 vertical fan pattern yielded mineralized intercepts of 22 meters
grading 1.25 g/t gold and 18 meters grading 2.09 g/t gold, including 7 meters grading 4.18 g/t gold, from down-hole depths of 94 meters and
133 meters. The steeper KBDD11112 borehole (-75o) yielded three mineralized intercepts developed over a 115 meter core-length starting at
a down-hole depth of 130 meters, including: 47 meters grading 0.71 g/t gold, including 2.71 g/t gold over 6 meters; 18 meters grading 1.31 g/t
gold; and 17 meters grading 2.0 g/t gold, including 3.89 g/t gold over 7 meters. The KBDD11112 mineralization envelope extended from
approximately 55 meters to 120 meters down-dip of the upper KBDD11111 intercepts.
KBDD11113 and KBDD11114, consisting of vertical boreholes (-90o) collared approximately 35 meters apart at the western extremity of the
Big Bend gold zone, were designed to test the extensive system of shallowly dipping, extension (ladder) vein arrays associated with the
mineralized system; and to obtain additional information on the structural controls of the mineralization. Hole KBDD11113 returned a
mineralized intercept of 52 meters grading 2.42 g/t gold, including 27 meters grading 3.58 g/t gold (and including 6.09 g/t gold over 12 meters),
from a down-hole depth of 84 meters; and KBDD11114 yielded an intercept of 50 meters grading 1.31 g/t gold from surface, including 20
meters grading 2.21 g/t gold.
To date, we had completed 34 holes totaling 8,550 meters (KBDD11105 to KBDD11138) of our 2011 drill program (including KBDD11116
which was abandoned at 71 meters after encountering 7 meters of 2.57 g/t gold from 64-71 meters); with 18 out of the 31 holes (5,248 meters)
targeting the Big Bend gold zone on the Central granitoid body. Ongoing drilling efforts during that time frame focused on the further
delineation of the Big Bend gold zone.
In June 2011, field preparations were underway for exploration programs in the third quarter of the fiscal year designed to fully maximize the
discovery potential on our Kibi gold project.
The comprehensive and systematic field programs will include a combination of follow-up work to define drill targets on untested gold-in-soil
and induced polarization (IP) anomalies lying along the approximately 5.5 kilometer long Kibi project gold trend located along the north-
western margin of the Apapam mining lease; as well as first pass, grassroots exploration covering the southeastern portion (70%) of the
concession, and the contiguous Akim Apapam reconnaissance license area. The multi-faceted work programs, including first pass (200
meters x 25 meters) and in-fill (100 meters x 25 meters) soil sampling, geological mapping and prospecting, hand auger sampling, and
mechanized trenching, will also permit the prioritization and definition of geophysical anomalies produced by the completed, detail 100 meter
line-spacing, airborne VTEM, magnetic, and radiometric survey over the Apapam property area.
To date, only approximately 15% of the existing Kibi gold project soil geochemistry / induced polarization (IP) survey grid, covering
approximately 30% of the 33.65 square kilometer Apapam mining lease, had been subjected to follow-up work; with the ongoing 2011 drill
program focused on Zone 2 of our Kibi gold project only representing approximately 3% of the total concession area. Limited trenching and
scout drilling outside Zone 2 has traced the granitoid–hosted gold mineralization over an approximately 2,100 meter distance along the
approximately 5.5 kilometer NE – trending Kibi Gold Trend. In combination with VTEM/Mag/Radiometric survey, these target
generation/definition programs will enable our company to further define known gold occurrences outside Zone 2, and evaluate the remainder
of this very prospective land position for the hosting of granitoid-hosted and Ashanti style shear zone gold mineralization.”
Line cutting for the Apapam South control grid, to be followed by soil sampling, commenced on June 13, 2011. Hand auger sampling and
mechanized trenching will follow-up on untested gold-in-soil and induced polarization (IP) anomalies on the existing Kibi gold project grid and
was expected to start by the end of June. At the time, these target generation/definition work programs were scheduled to be implemented
concurrently over the next two to three months; with arrangements in progress for the booking of a second diamond drill rig to start testing high
priority targets towards the end of the third quarter of the fiscal year.
Regional government mapping indicated that the Apapam South / Akim Apapam soil geochemistry survey area covers highly prospective
terrain for the hosting of Ashanti style shear zone gold mineralization in the form of two major Birimian unit contacts, including the contact
between an extensive metavolcanic rock sequence, forming the core of the Kibi Gold Belt, and a metasedimentary/volcaniclastic rock
package; and a major north-east trending reverse fault along the eastern margin of the belt. The Kibi Old Mine historical lode gold prospect
located at the north-central extremity of the Apapam concession is spatially associated with this regional structure.
78 -
The first pass soil survey will cover an approximately 25 square kilometer area and encompass an estimated 5,450 samples to be collected at
a sampling density of 200 meters x 25 meters. Reconnaissance geology and prospecting will also be conducted along the approximately 136
kilometers of NW-SE trending cross-lines. Every second sample (50 meter stations) will initially be submitted for gold and arsenic analysis
(approximately 2,725 samples); with the “held – back” samples subsequently subjected for analysis where required to delineate / bracket
anomalous gold-in-soil anomalies. Detailed (100 meters x 25 meters) follow-up soils and hand auger sampling will be conducted upon
reception of analytical results to provide greater definition of gold-in-soil anomalies.
Untested gold-in-soil and IP anomalies lying within the existing Kibi gold project grid area will be followed-up by in-fill (100 meters x 25
meters) soil sampling and/or hand auger sampling, and mechanized trenching designed to identify high priority, cost-effective drill targets. Of
particular interest is a 3.5 kilometer long, NE-trending, chargeable/resistive induced polarization (IP) anomaly exhibiting a spatial relationship
with a geophysically inferred, NE-trending, regional structural trend, and characterized by coincidental gold-in-soil anomalies and/or
auriferous floats lying along the south-western margin of the approximately 5.5 kilometer long Kibi project gold trend.
See the NI 43-101 Technical Report entitled “Kibi Project, Eastern Region, Ghana” dated July 12, 2010, filed under our company’s profile on
SEDAR at www.sedar.com for further details regarding to the aforementioned Kibi Old Mine historical prospect and the high priority
geophysical/geochemical target.
In August 2011, ongoing drilling on our Kibi gold project continued to intersect significant gold mineralization, including 2.67 g/t gold over 38
meters on the Big Bend gold zone – Central hranitoid and 4.88 g/t gold over 16 meters on the newly defined Mushroom gold zone at the
southeastern extremity of the Upper Central Granitoid. Assay results from 19 new diamond core holes (5,055 meters), as noted hereunder,
continued to confirm the down-plunge continuity and the multiple en-echelon vein package structural style of the Big Bend gold zone, and
demonstrated the multiple gold deposit potential within Zone 2 of our Kibi gold project.
Highlights of the holes noted hereunder include:
16 meters grading 2.25 g/t gold and 38 meters grading 2.67 g/t gold in KBDD11133 from 152 meters and 182 meters down-hole,
respectively (Big Bend gold zone);
32 meters grading 2.41 g/t gold in KBDD11136 from 149 meters down-hole, including 17 meters grading 4.01 g/t gold (Big Bend gold
zone);
Big Bend gold zone now traced over approximately 325 meter strike length and 450 meters down plunge from surface within the Central
granitoid body;
16 meters grading 4.88 g/t gold, including 10 meters grading 7.38 g/t gold, from 67 meters down hole in KBDD11117, on the newly
defined Mushroom gold zone on the Upper Central granitoid (as noted below); and
3 newly defined shear targets, including 34.80 g/t gold over 1 meter in coarse visible gold-bearing shear zone in KBDD11133.
These drill results are part of 2011 drill program. Holes included nine holes (2,913 meters) on the Big Bend gold zone, 3 holes (612 meters) on
the newly defined Mushroom gold zone on the Upper Central granitoid, and 7 exploration holes (1,530 meters) on newly discovered shear and
induced polarization (IP) / soil geochemistry targets.
At the time, drilling included nine holes on the Big Bend gold zone, including 8 holes (2,446 meters) designed to further delineate/infill the gold
zone and 1 hole (KBDD11134; 467 meters) drilled down the plunge of the zone to obtain additional structural information on the multiple en-
echelon vein package system and to test the continuity of the mineralization down plunge. The delineation/infill holes, with the exception of
KBDD11115, consist of southerly trending boreholes (- 50o to -75o inclinations) collared on the northern, hanging wall flank of the easterly
trending host diorite body and drilled across the ESE-trending, northerly dipping mineralization sheets.
- 79 -
Holes KBDD11128, KBDD11133, and KBDD11135 to KBDD11137 were designed to further delineate/infill the Big Bend gold zone along
strike at vertical depths ranging from approximately 90 meters to 175 meters. Boreholes KBDD11138 and KBDD11139 tested the down
plunge extension of the zone at vertical depths of approximately 200 meters to 300 meters. Hole KBDD11115 consists of a vertical borehole (-
90o) collared at the western extremity of the Big Bend gold zone designed to test the extensive system of shallowly dipping, extension (ladder)
vein arrays associated with the mineralized system; and to obtain additional information on the structural controls of the mineralization.
All eight Big Bend gold zone delineation/infill holes returned significant gold mineralization, including: intercepts of 2.25 g/t gold over 16
meters and 2.67 g/t gold over 38 meters from down hole depths of 152 meters and 182 meters in hole KBDD11133; and 0.78 g/t gold over 7
meters and 2.41 g/t gold over 32 meters (including 4.01 g/t gold over 17 meters) from down hole depths of 134 meters and 149 meters in
KBDD11136. The KBDD11133 gold intercepts are located approximately 25 meters west and below mineralized intercepts of 1.98 g/t gold
over 27 meters and 1.76 g/t gold over 25 meters yielded by previously reported hole KBDD10103. The KBDD11136 gold intercepts are
located approximately 50 meters below mineralized intercepts of 22 meters grading 1.25 g/t gold and 18 meters grading 2.09 g/t gold in
previously reported hole KBDD11111, and approximately 40 meters above and east of mineralized intercepts of 47 meters grading 0.71 g/t
gold, 18 meters grading 1.31 g/t gold, and 17 meters grading 2.0 g/t gold in hole KBDD11112.
Hole KBDD11134 was drilled down the plunge of the Big Bend gold zone to obtain additional structural information on the multiple en-
echelon vein package system, to test the continuity of the mineralization down plunge, and to serve as a pilot hole to permit better targeting of
deeper holes along the down plunge extension of the zone. The NE-trending borehole (060o/-58o) was collared at the western, surface
expression, extremity of the Big Bend gold zone and allowed to run unaided down the plunge and diagonally across (down dip) the system of
stacked, approximately 70o northerly dipping, mineralization sheets. KBDD11134 remained within the confines of the host Central granitoid
body to its final depth of 467 meters; with the borehole stopped due to a shortage of drill rods.
Hole KBDD11134 yielded multiple mineralized intervals, ranging from 3 meters to 73 meters in core length, reflecting the en-echelon style
vein packages forming the Big Bend gold zone mineralization, including: 1.51 g/t gold over 26 meters from a down hole depth of 6 meters,
3.03 g/t gold over 41 meters from a down hole depth of 96 meters, 2.04 g/t gold over 42 meters from a down hole depth of 223 meters, and 1.06
g/t gold over 73 meters from a down hole depth of 312 meters (see Table 1). The array of mineralized intervals produced a length weighted
average grade of 1.62 g/t gold over a cumulative core length of 276 meters, and the hole returned 1.01 g/t gold, including internal dilution, over
its 464 meter core length (3 meters to 467 meters); exemplifying the down plunge continuity of the Big Bend gold zone mineralization.
To date, significant gold mineralization had been traced over an approximately 325 meter strike length and an approximately 450 meter down
plunge distance from surface along the Big Bend gold zone hosted by the Central granitoid body. Drilling to date indicated that the Big Bend
zone consisted of north-easterly plunging, en-echelon, mineralized vein packages appearing to be developed along a trough-like flexure
within the Central granitoid body. Gold mineralization is associated with quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining developed within a rock
body of quartz diorite composition.
Mushroom Gold Zone
Holes KBDD11117, KBDD11118 and KBDD11120 were designed to follow up on significant drill intercepts yielded by reverse circulation
(RC) hole KBRC09060 and diamond drill hole KBDD10081 within the southeastern portion of the Upper Central granitoid, i.e. the newly
defined Mushroom gold zone.
80 -
Hole KBDD11117 consisting of the re-drilling of hole KBDD11116, which returned 7 meters grading 2.57 g/t gold before being abandoned
due to technical difficulties at the 71 meter mark, was designed to follow up on scout hole KBRC09060 drilled down the dip of the host
granitoid body to transect an extensive system of westerly dipping, sheeted quartz veining; with the borehole returning an intercept from
surface of 39.0 meters grading 9.23 g/t gold uncut (3.54 g/t gold cut). The southeast trending KBDD11117 borehole designed to intersect the
Upper Central granitoid at right angles from a collar position on the northeastern, hanging wall flank of the host granitoid body returned a
mineralized intercept of 4.88 g/t gold over 16 meters, including 10 meters grading 7.38 g/t gold, from a down hole depth of 67 meters,
approximately at the same vertical depth as the bottom of the KBRC09060 intercept.
Hole KBDD11118 designed to undercut a mineralized intercept of 9 meters grading 3.60 g/t gold in KBDD10081, approximately 60 meters to
the northwest of KBDD11117, returned 2.57 g/t gold over 11 meters, including 5 meters grading 4.23 g/t gold, from a down hole depth of 84
meters, approximately 45 meters down dip of the KBDD10081 intercept. Drilling to date appeared to indicate that the Mushroom gold zone
consists of a northeast plunging vein system spatially related to a series of pinch and swells in the Upper Central granitoid body.
Irregularities or flexures in the geometry of the host diorite bodies appear to strongly influence the development of veining and grade
distribution; as is exemplified by the Big Bend gold zone on the Central granitoid, the East Dyke granitoid zone, and the newly defined
Mushroom gold zone on the Upper Central granitoid. Similar flexures have potential to host mineralization elsewhere along the strike or down-
dip extensions of the extensive dioritic bodies characterizing our Kibi gold project.
Shear Zone Targets
An approximately 0.5 meter wide, coarse visible gold bearing, quartz vein hosted within a fault breccia forming part of a prominent shear zone
spanning over an approximately 10 meter core length returned 34.80 g/t gold over a 1 meter core length at a down hole depth of 398 meters in
hole KBDD11133. This newly discovered northwest trending/northeasterly dipping shear zone represented a very prospective exploration
target due to its emplacement along the southern limb of the Central granitoid body.
Boreholes KBDD11122 and KBDD11123 consisting of a west trending, vertical fan drill section (-50o & -70o) was designed to further test the
northerly trending junction shear cross-cutting the Central granitoid; approximately 80 meters south of a 8.44 g/t gold over a 3 meter intercept
yielded from the same structure in hole KBDD11107. The upper KBDD11122 borehole (-50o) of the vertical fan pattern returned mineralized
intercepts of 3 meters grading 3.14 g/t gold, including 7.59 g/t gold over 1 meter, and 5.15 g/t gold over 1 meter from down hole depths of 78
meters and 92 meters, respectively; and the steeper KBDD11123 hole (-70o) returned an intercept of 2.45 g/t gold over 1 meter at a down hole
depth of 126 meters, approximately 50 meters down dip of the KBDD11122 intercept.
To date, we had completed 54 holes totaling approximately 14,825 meters (KBDD11105 - KBDD11158) in our 2011 drill program (including
KBDD11116 which was abandoned at 71 meters); with 24 out of the 54 holes (7,704 meters) targeting the Big Bend gold zone on the Central
granitoid body. Ongoing drilling efforts during that time frame are currently focused on the further delineation of the newly defined Mushroom
gold zone on the Upper Central granitoid.
In November 2011, ongoing drilling continued to confirm the down-plunge continuity and the multiple en-echelon vein package structural style
of the Big Bend gold zone, and demonstrated the multiple gold deposit potential within Zone 2 of our Kibi gold project.
Highlights of the 15 diamond core holes (5,714 meters) noted hereunder include:
62 meters grading 1.57 g/t gold, including 2.00 g/t gold over 42 meters (and including 2.76 g/t gold over 19 meters) in KBDD11141 from
232 meters down-hole (Big Bend zone);
41 meters grading 1.62 g/t gold, including 2.18 g/t gold over 20 meters, in KBDD11143 from 249 meters down- hole (East Dyke- North
zone);
81 -
Big Bend zone now traced over an approximately 325 meter strike length and 500 meter down plunge from surface within the Central
granitoid body;
South Ridge gold zone extended 170 meters further down dip than from 2010 drilling; gold mineralization now traced over distances of
approximately 440 meters along the strike and 400 meters down the dip of the South Ridge granitoid body;
New typical Kibi-type granitoid hosted vein system (i.e. Road Cut Zone) discovered in diorite body located 60 meters due south of the
Central granitoid’s Big Bend zone; and
Second diamond drill rig contracted to accelerate delineation/infill drilling of the Big Bend zone and East Dyke – North zone geared
towards an initial resource estimate.
The following drill results are part of our 2011 drill program designed to delineate/infill the Big Bend gold zone – Central granitoid; as well as
further test/delineate other prominent gold systems and geophysical / geochemical anomalies on the approximately 1,200 meter long by 500
to 800 meter wide Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly of our Kibi gold project. The 15 holes (KBDD11129 to KBDD11150) drilled at the time
included: 6 holes (2,327 meters) on the Big Bend zone, including KBDD11142 which tested both the East Dyke and Big Bend zones; 3 holes
(899 meters) on the East Dyke zone; 3 holes (1,211 meters) on the newly discovered Road Cut zone; 1 hole on the South Ridge granitoid
zone (578 meters); and 3 geology/exploration holes (699 meters) designed to further define the geometry of Zone 2 diorite bodies.
Big Bend Zone (Central Granitoid)
Drilling included 6 holes (2,327 meters) on the Big Bend zone, including 4 holes designed to further delineate/infill the gold zone and 2 holes
targeting the down plunge extension of the mineralized body. In addition, hole KBDD11146 targeting the southern diorite body hosting the
Road Cut zone was collared on the footwall margin of the Central granitoid (i.e. Big Bend zone) but exited the Central granitoid body at a
down-hole depth of 25 meters.
The Big Bend zone holes, with the exception of KBDD11142, consist of southerly trending boreholes
(- 60o to -77o inclinations) collared on the northern, hanging wall flank of the easterly trending host diorite body and drilled across the ESE-
trending, northerly dipping mineralization sheets. KBDD11142 consists of a WNW-trending borehole originally designed to test the East Dyke
zone but extended down to the Central granitoid to test the down plunge extension of the Big Bend zone and to obtain additional structural
information on the mineralized vein system.
Holes KBDD11140 and KBDD11141 were drilled in a vertical fan pattern (-60o and -72o) with the upper borehole designed as an infill hole
along the eastern portion of the Big Bend zone and the lower borehole targeting the down plunge extension of the mineralized body. The
upper KBDD11140 borehole (-60o) yielded mineralized intercepts of 7 meters grading 1.46 g/t gold and 15 meters grading 1.39 g/t gold from
down-hole depths of 162 meters and 192 meters, and the steeper KBDD11141 borehole (-72o) intersected 2.00 g/t gold over 42 meters from
241 meters down-hole, including a higher-grade core grading 2.76 g/t gold over 19 meters (251 meters to 270 meters), in a broader intercept
grading 1.57 g/t gold over 62 meters from a down-hole depth of 232 m; approximately 100 meters vertically below the KBDD11140 intercept.
This mineralization exhibited good continuity with an intercept of 42 meters grading 2.39 g/t gold, including 3.11 g/t gold over 14 meters and
3.19 g/t gold over 9 meters, in hole KBDD11108; approximately 50 meters above the KBDD11141 intercept.
Hole KBDD11142 initially targeted the East Dyke zone (see description below) but was extended down to the Central Granitoid to test the
down plunge extension of the Big Bend zone and to obtain additional structural information on the mineralized vein system. The westerly
trending (285o) borehole diagonally transected (down dip) the easterly trending, steep northerly dipping system of stacked, mineralized vein
sheets. This lower segment of KBDD11142 yielded multiple mineralized intervals, spanning from 350 meters to 468 meters down-hole,
reflecting the en-echelon style vein packages forming the Big Bend zone mineralization, including: 6 meters grading 1.98 g/t gold; 20.1 meters
grading 1.71 g/t gold; 3 meters grading 2.14 g/t gold; and 22 meters grading 1.43 g/t gold, including 3.19 g/t gold over 5 meters. The lowermost
KBDD11142 intercept (446 meters-468 meters) lies approximately 150 meters below the KBDD11141 mineralized intercept and
approximately 500 meters down plunge from the surface expression of the mineralized body.
82 -
Holes KBDD11130, KBDD11131, and KBDD11132 were designed to further delineate/infill the down-dip extension of the western portion of
the Big Bend gold zone, approximately 150 meters down-plunge from surface, at vertical depths ranging from approximately 150 meters to 280
meters. All 3 holes returned significant gold mineralization, including: intercepts of 1.75 g/t gold over 26 meters, including 12 meters grading
2.56 g/t gold, from a down-hole depth of 211 meters in hole KBDD11131; and 1.72 g/t gold over 6 meters, 3.21 g/t gold over 3 meters, and 0.81
g/t gold over 20 meters (including 5 meters grading 2.30 g/t gold) from down hole-depths of 237 meters, 264 meters, and 280 meters. The
KBDD11131 gold intercept is located approximately 70 meters vertically below mineralized intercepts of 27 meters grading 1.98 g/t gold and
25 meters grading 1.76 g/t gold in KBDD10103, and approximately 70 meters below and 22 meters west of intercepts of 16 meters grading
2.25 g/t gold and 38 meters grading 2.67 g/t gold in KBDD11133.
To date, significant gold mineralization had been traced over an approximately 325 meter strike length and an approximately 500 meter down
plunge distance from surface along the Big Bend gold zone hosted by the Central granitoid body. Drilling to date indicated that the Big Bend
zone consisted of north-easterly plunging, en-echelon, mineralized vein packages appearing to be developed along a trough-like flexure
within the Central granitoid body. Gold mineralization is associated with quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining developed within a rock
body of quartz diorite composition.
East Dyke – North Zone (KBDD11142 and KBDD11143)
Holes KBDD11142 and KBDD11143 consisting of a pair of west trending, vertical fan pattern holes (-55o and -70o) collared on the eastern
(hanging wall) flank of the northern segment of the East Dyke granitoid, targeted the down-plunge extension of significant gold mineralization
intersected earlier in the Fiscal Year by fan pattern holes KBDD11105 and KBDD11106; which returned 15 meters grading 2.05 g/t gold,
including 5 meters grading 4.0 g/t gold, and 14 meters grading 2.36 g/t gold, including 5 meters grading 5.18 g/t.
The upper KBDD11142 borehole (-55o dip) yielded a mineralized intercept of 26 meters grading 1.41 g/t gold, including 8 meters grading 2.37
g/t gold, from a down-hole depth of 200 meters, approximately 50 meters north and 25 meters below the KBDD11106 intercept; and the
steeper KBDD11143 borehole (-70o) returned a significant mineralized intercept grading 1.62 g/t gold over 41 meters, including 2.18 g/t gold
over 20 meters, from a down-hole depth of 249 meters, approximately 80 meters down dip of the KBDD11142 intercept.
To date, significant gold mineralization had been traced over an approximately 150 meter strike length and a 320 meter down plunge distance
along the north zone of the East Dyke granitoid (i.e. East Dyke – North zone). Drilling to date indicated that the north zone consisted of a
northerly plunging (approx. 65o) mineralized vein package appearing to be developed at a flexure in the host granitoid body.
Road Cut Zone (KBDD11144; New Zone)
Hole KBDD11144 (100o/-55o) returned a mineralized intercept of 30 meters grading 0.79 g/t gold (34 meters to 64 meters), including 19 meters
grading 1.05 g/t gold, across a NNE-trending system of typical Kibi-type granitoid hosted quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining. This new
gold zone (i.e. Road Cut zone) is emplaced within an easterly trending quartz diorite body lying approximately 60 meters south of the Central
granitoid; due south of the flexure along the Central granitoid appearing to control the Big Bend gold zone mineralization. Additional
trenching/drilling is planned to further define the geometry of the host diorite body and the structural controls of the mineralization.
South Ridge Zone (KBDD11148)
Hole KBDD11148 (225o/-55o) was drilled as a combination geology/exploration borehole designed to further delineate the western extensions
of the Central granitoid and South Ridge granitoid bodies, define the stratigraphy across the colluvium-filled valley separating the Central
granitoid and South Ridge granitoid, and test the down dip potential of the central portion of the South Ridge gold zone.
83 -
Hole KBDD11148 returned a significant, quartz diorite-hosted, mineralized intercept of 15 meters grading 1.40 g/t gold (452 meters to 467
meters), including 7 meters grading 2.53 g/t gold, appearing to correspond to the down dip extension of the South Ridge gold zone;
approximately 170 meters down dip of the lowermost intercept of 47 meters grading 0.58 g/t gold in hole KBDD10086. The borehole also
intersected two previously unmapped iron-carbonate altered quartz diorite bodies prospective for the hosting of Kibi-type granitoid hosted gold
mineralization.
Drilling and trenching to date had traced an extensive system of en-echelon extension vein arrays across an approximately 440 meter
distance along the SE-trending, moderately NE-dipping South Ridge granitoid body; with the present borehole appearing to extend the
mineralization to a down-dip depth of approximately 400 meters.
Drilling Progress and Exploration Outlook
At the time, 70 holes totaling 18,932 meters had been completed by our company in our 2011 drill program, of which, including the 15 holes
(5,714 meters) noted in the preceding paragraphs, 50 drill holes have been reported.
In November 2011, a new 20,000 meter drill contract, to be initiated following the completion of our 2011 drill program, had been signed with
Burwash Drilling Limited, and our company also contracted Global Drilling Services for a second diamond drill rig (10,000 meters minimum)
which commenced drilling on December 16, 2011.
One drill rig will be dedicated to the further delineation/infill drilling of the Big Bend zone and East Dyke – North zone geared towards an initial
resource estimate. The second drill rig will focus on the further testing/delineation of other prominent Zone 2 gold systems including the South
Ridge and Mushroom zones, the scout drilling of Zone 3 and Zone 4 trench showings and gold-in-soil anomalies, and the testing of priority
geophysical targets yielded by the airborne VTEM, magnetic, and radiometric survey completed earlier in the fiscal year.
The results from 26 additional diamond core holes totaling 6,713 meters from Zone 2 of our Kibi gold project are noted hereunder.
Highlights of the drill results include:
17 meters grading 5.47 g/t gold, including 12.66 g/t gold over 4 meters, in KBDD11172 from 127 meters down- hole (Big Bend zone);
24.5 meters grading 3.43 g/t gold, including 4.70 g/t gold over 17 meters, in KBDD11176 from 165.5 meters down-hole (East Dyke -
North zone);
20 meters grading 2.82 g/t gold in KBDD11157 from 92 meters down-hole (Mushroom zone – Upper Central granitoid);
North zone traced approximately 465 meters down plunge from surface within the East Dyke granitoid body (KBDD11175);
New typical Kibi-type granitoid hosted vein system discovered at depth within the apparent fold nose developed within the Central
granitoid (KBDD11161); and
Ongoing follow-up trenching on Double 19 zone within extensive Zone 3 gold-in-soil anomaly returns channel sample intercept of 2.27
g/t gold over 36 meters trench-length, including 2 meters grading 22.22 g/t gold, in trenches TAD022 to ADRS001.
These drill results are part of our 2011 drill program of our Kibi gold project. The 26 holes (KBDD11151 to KBDD11176) include: 6 holes
(2,148 meters) on the Big Bend zone; 5 holes (1,157 meters) on the East Dyke zone; 7 holes (1,290 meters) on the Mushroom zone – Upper
Central granitoid; 2 holes (433 meters) on the South Ridge granitoid zone; 2 holes (510 meters) on the recently defined Road Cut zone; and 4
geology/exploration holes (1175 meters) designed to further define the geometry of Zone 2 diorite bodies.
84 -
Big Bend Zone (Central Granitoid)
Drilling included 6 holes (2,148 meters) on the Big Bend zone, including: 3 holes designed to further delineate/infill the gold zone
(KBDD11160, KBDD11171, KBDD11172); 2 holes targeting the down plunge extension of the mineralization along the northwestern limb of
the trough-like flexure (i.e. Big Bend) developed within the Central granitoid body (KBDD11169 to 170); and 1 hole (KBDD11161) drilled
down the plunge of the zone to obtain additional structural information on the multiple en-echelon vein package system and to test the
continuity of the mineralization down plunge.
Hole KBDD11172 consisting of a southwest trending borehole designed to further delineate the western extremity of the Big Bend zone, along
the north-western limb of the trough-like flexure developed within the Central granitoid body, returned a high grade mineralized intercept
grading 5.47 g/t gold over 17 meters, including 4 meters grading 12.66 g/t gold, from a down-hole depth of 127 meters. This mineralization
exhibited good continuity with an intercept of 27.13 meters grading 2.12 g/t gold, including 4.01 g/t gold over 6.93 meters in KBDD10070, lying
approximately 40 meters above and 20 meters to the south of the KBDD11172 intercept.
Hole KBDD11170 consisting of a deep exploratory borehole targeting the down plunge extension of the mineralization along the north-
western limb of the trough-like flexure intersected several exploration significant intercepts distributed over an approximately 100 meter core-
length from a down-hole depth of 243 meters, including 8 meters grading 1.10 g/t gold; approximately 175 meters down plunge from the
KBDD11172 intercept.
Hole KBDD11161 was drilled down the plunge of the Big Bend zone, parallel to and approximately 75 meters to the southeast of similar
down-plunge hole KBDD11134; with these down-plunge boreholes designed to obtain additional structural information on the multiple en-
echelon vein package system, to test the continuity of the mineralization down plunge, and to serve as pilot holes to permit better targeting of
deeper holes along the down plunge extension of the zone. The ENE-trending borehole (070o/-55o) was collared along the inner footwall
margin of the host granitoid body, along the eastern limb of the trough-like flexure, and allowed to run unaided down the plunge and
diagonally across (down dip) the system of stacked, approximately 70o northerly dipping, mineralization sheets. KBDD11161 remained within
the confines of the host Central granitoid body for its entirety; with technical difficulties forcing the borehole to be abandoned within a new
mineralization zone at a down-hole depth of 537 meters.
Hole KBDD11161 yielded multiple mineralized intervals, ranging from 10 meters to 45 meters in core length, reflecting the en-echelon style
vein packages forming the Big Bend zone mineralization, including: 1.50 g/t gold over 28 meters from a down hole depth of 3 meters; 1.22 g/t
gold over 20 meters from a down hole depth of 116 meters; 2.0 g/t gold over 45 meters from a down hole depth of 159 meters; 1.57 g/t gold
over 35 meters from a down hole depth of 231 meters; and 1.40 g/t gold over 25 meters from a down hole depth of 283 meters (see Table 1).
The array of mineralized intervals produced a length weighted average grade of 1.60 g/t gold over a cumulative core length of 185 meters, and
the hole returned 1.03 g/t gold, including internal dilution, over a 305 meter core length (3 meters to 308 meters); exemplifying the down
plunge continuity of the Big Bend zone gold mineralization.
Technical difficulties forced KBDD11161 to be abandoned at the 537 meter mark within a zone of typical Kibi-type quartz-albite-carbonate-
sulphide veining; with the bottom 11 meters of the borehole returning 1.23 g/t gold, including 2 meters grading 2.79 g/t gold. This new
mineralization zone lies at a vertical depth of approximately 400 meters, approximately 160 meters east of the deepest down plunge extent of
the Big Bend zone, within the apparent fold nose developed within the Central Granitoid.
At the time, significant gold mineralization had been traced over an approximately 325 meter strike length and an approximately 500 meter
down plunge distance from surface along the Big Bend gold zone hosted by the Central granitoid body. Drilling to date indicated that the Big
Bend zone consisted of north-easterly plunging, en-echelon, mineralized vein packages appearing to be developed along a trough-like flexure
within the Central granitoid body. Gold mineralization is associated with quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining developed within a rock
body of quartz diorite composition.
85 -
East Dyke – North Zone
Drilling efforts on the East Dyke included a deep hole targeting the down plunge extension of the mineralized system and a delineation hole in
the upper portion of the zone. KBDD11175 consisting of a deep, westerly trending borehole collared on the eastern, hanging wall flank of the
East Dyke granitoid returned typical granitoid hosted quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining intercepts grading 0.88 g/t gold over 7 meters
and 1.14 g/t gold over 10 meters from down-hole depths of 359 meters and 385 meters; approximately 145 meters further down plunge than
the previous extent of the mineralization.
To date, significant gold mineralization had been traced over an approximately 150 meter strike length and a 465 meter down plunge distance
along the North zone of the East Dyke granitoid (i.e. East Dyke – North zone). Drilling to date indicated that the north zone consisted of a
northerly plunging (approx. 65o) mineralized vein package appearing to be developed at a flexure in the host granitoid body.
Hole KBDD11176 designed to further define the northern extent of the East Dyke – North zone at a vertical depth of approximately 160 meters
returned a significant mineralized intercept of 24.5 meters grading 3.43 g/t gold, including 4.70 g/t gold over 17 meters. This mineralization
exhibited good continuity with an intercept of 14 meters grading 2.36 g/t gold in KBDD11106, approximately 45 meters to the east; and
intercepts of 1.41 g/t gold over 26 meters and 1.62 g/t gold over 41 meters, including 20 meters grading 2.18 g/t gold, in holes KBDD11142
and KBDD11143, approximately 35 meters and 105 meters below the KBDD11176 intercept.
Mushroom Zone (Upper Central Granitoid)
Holes KBDD11151, KBDD11153 –KBDD11154, KBDD11157, and KBDD11158 were designed to further test the recently defined Mushroom
zone; following a significant, near surface intercept of 4.88 g/t gold over 16 meters yielded by hole KBDD11117. Drilling to date appeared to
indicate that the Mushroom zone consisted of a northeast plunging, en-echelon, vein system spatially related to a constriction in the south-
eastern portion of the Upper Central granitoid body; with present hole KBDD11154 tracing the mineralization to a down-plunge depth of
approximately 190 meters.
Hole KBDD11151 consisting of a southwest trending borehole targeting the down-plunge extension of the KBDD11117 intercept from a collar
position on the north-eastern, hanging wall flank of the host granitoid body returned a mineralized intercept of 2.45 g/t gold over 15 meters from
a down-hole depth of 110 meters, approximately 50 meters down plunge of the KBDD11117 intercept. The mineralization zone was also
tested in a west-northwest direction by KBDD11157 which yielded an intercept of 2.82 g/t gold over 20 meters from a down-hole depth of 92
meters, approximately 20 meters below and 10 meters west of the KBDD11151 intercept.
Hole KBDD11154 consisted of the re-drilling (i.e. twinning) of KBDD11153 which was abandoned at 128 meters due to technical difficulties;
with the boreholes having the same basic trace down to the 128 meter mark. KBDD11154 was drilled to a final depth of 344 meters. The
northeast trending boreholes, drilled down the dip extension of the host granitoid body to obtain additional information on the structural
controls of the mineralization, dissected the extensive system of south-westerly dipping, sheeted quartz veining in a down-plunge fashion
along the mineralization shoot. These holes were collared adjacent to hole KBRC09060, a due east trending scout reverse circulation (RC)
borehole, which returned an intercept from surface of 39.0 meters grading 9.23 g/t gold uncut (3.54 g/t gold cut). KBDD11154 returned a
mineralized intercept of 81 meters grading 1.52 g/t gold from a down-hole depth of 3 meters, including 2.94 g/t gold over 13.5 meters, 2.56 g/t
gold over 19 meters, and 2.21 gold over 10 meters. The borehole also yielded additional intercepts of 7 meters grading 2.20 g/t gold and 6.23
g/t gold over 1 meter from down-hole depths of 169 meters and 190 meters.
Double 19 Zone (Zone 3 Gold-In-Soil Anomaly)
Gold assay results for the first two trenches (109 meters) of an ongoing trenching program to follow-up on very encouraging 2008 trenching
and 2009 scout reverse circulation (RC) drilling results on the Double 19 zone, located at the south-eastern extremity of the approximately
1,250 meter long Zone 3 gold-in-soil trend; approximately 600 meters southwest of the South Ridge zone on the Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly,
are noted hereunder. The trenching program is designed to further define the geometry of the host diorite body and the structural controls of
the mineralization in preparation for diamond drilling in the first quarter of 2012.
86 -
Trench TAD022 (58 m) and road cut ADRS001 (51 meters) consisting of southeast and northwest trending excavations with a common start
point yielded a combined channel sample intercept of 2.27 g/t gold over a 36 meters trench-length, including 2 meters grading 22.22 g/t gold,
approximately 40 meters southwest of the TAD019 discovery trench. The Double 19 zone is characterized by an extensive system of
granitoid-hosted, NE-trending, moderately NW-dipping, sheeted quartz veins exhibiting a spatial relationship with northeasterly trending
shearing.
For reference purposes, reverse circulation (RC) hole KBRC09019 targeting the TAD019 trench returned a mineralized intercept of 30 meters
grading 3.52 g/t gold, including 6.47 g/t gold over 14 meters, from a down-hole depth of 8 meters; with the discovery trench yielding a channel
sample intercept of 4.93 g/t gold over a 45 meters trench-length, including 12 meters grading 10.12 g/t gold.
As at the year ended December 31, 2011, 80 holes totaling 21,795 meters have been completed by our company in our 2011 drill program.
2012 Diamond Drill Program
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, in connection with our 2012 drill program or our Kibi gold project, we have received the
assay results noted hereunder.
Initial Results of 2012 Drill Program
The 14 holes (KBDD11178 to KBDD12191) reported in Table 1 include: 2 holes (2,148 meters) on the East Dyke – North zone; Big Bend
zone; 5 holes (1,157 meters) on the East Dyke zone; 7 holes (1,290 meters) on the Mushroom zone – Upper Central granitoid; 2 holes (433
meters) on the South Ridge granitoid zone; 2 holes (510 meters) on the recently defined Road Cut zone; and 4 geology/exploration holes
(1,175 meters) designed to further define the geometry of Zone 2 diorite bodies.
Highlights of the drill results reported include:
25 meters grading 1.96 g/t gold, including 2.79 g/t gold over 9 meters, in KBDD12189 from 195 meters down- hole (Big Bend zone);
23 meters grading 1.50 g/t gold, including 2.80 g/t gold over 6 meters, in KBDD12187 from 331 meters down- hole (Big Bend zone);
Work on an initial NI 43-101 - compliant mineral resource estimate on the Big Bend and East Dyke gold zones of the Kibi project’s Zone
2 has commenced by SEMS Exploration Services Ltd of Accra, Ghana.
The above drill results correspond to boreholes drilled in the latter part of 2011 and January 2012, designed to delineate/infill the Big Bend
zone – Central granitoid and East Dyke –north zone; as well as to further test the southern portion of the East Dyke granitoid and a
coincidental geophysical/geochemical anomaly lying to the south of the approximately 1,200 meter long by 500 to 800 meter wide Zone 2
gold-in-soil anomaly of our Kibi gold project. Holes reported above encompass KBDD11177 to KBDD12189 and KBDD12191, including: 6
holes (1,932 meters) on the Big Bend zone; 3 holes (537 m) on the East Dyke - North zone; 2 holes (430 meters) on the southern extension of
the East Dyke granitoid; and 3 holes (435 meters) on the aforementioned induced polarization (IP) / gold-in-soil target. These 14 holes (3,334
meters) include 2 holes abandoned before reaching their targets due to technical difficulties, including: KBDD11182 (17.5 meters) which was
re-drilled by KBDD11183; and KBDD11185 (83.5 meters) re-drilled by KBDD12186.
87 -
The present drilling includes 6 holes (1,932 meters) on the Big Bend zone, including: 4 holes designed to further delineate/infill the lower
extension of the gold zone at vertical depths of approximately 190 meters to 315 meters, approximately 300 meters to 425 meters down plunge
from surface; and 1 structural modeling hole designed to further establish the geometry/attitude of the mineralized en-echelon vein package
system. Highlights from the down plunge delineation/infill drilling on the Big Bend zone include: 25 meters grading 1.96 g/t gold, including
2.79 g/t gold over 9 meters, from a down-hole depth of 195 meters in KBDD12189; and 23 meters grading 1.50 g/t gold, including 2.80 g/t gold
over 6 meters, from a down-hole depth of 331 meters in KBDD12187.
Hole KBDD11183 consisting of a NE-trending (055o/-73o) borehole collared within the central portion of the Big Bend zone was intentionally
drilled down dip between mineralized sheets to help further establish the apparent, steep (70o), northerly dipping, en-echelon vein package
geometry of the mineralized system. As designed KBDD11183 appears to have descended down dip between the mineralized sheets; with
the borehole appearing to intermittently skirt and/or obliquely pierce the footwall of the auriferous vein package to the north. KBDD11183
yielded multiple mineralized intercepts, ranging from 5 meters to 30 meters in core-length, extending from a down-hole depth of 28 meters to
224 meters, including: 1.84 g/t gold over 17 meters from a down-hole depth of 28 meters; 1.74 g/t gold over 26 meters, including 7 meters
grading 4.01 g/t gold, from a down-hole depth of 128 meters; and 2.01 g/t gold over 30 meters, including 9 meters grading 4.53 g/t gold, from a
down-hole depth of 195 meters.
To date significant gold mineralization has been traced over an approximately 325 meter strike length and an approximately 500 meter down
plunge distance from surface along the Big Bend gold zone hosted by the Central granitoid body. Drilling to date indicates that the Big Bend
zone consists of north-easterly plunging, en-echelon, mineralized vein packages appearing to be developed along a trough-like flexure within
the Central granitoid body. Gold mineralization is associated with quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining developed within a rock body of
quartz diorite composition.
The 10 holes (KBDD11178 to KBDD12191) reported in Table 1 total 2,293 meters from the Double 19 zone on Zone 3 of our Kibi gold project.
Highlights of the drill results and ongoing exploration activities reported include:
12 meters grading 10.32 g/t gold in KBDD12198 from 18 meters down-hole on newly defined Double 19 zone (Zone 3 – East);
26 meters grading 3.06 g/t gold, including 5.67 g/t gold over 10 meters, in KBDD12205 from 33 meters down- hole (Double 19 zone);
Drilling / trenching to date appears to indicate that the Double 19 zone consists of a ENE-plunging, en-echelon, mineralized vein system
traced to date over an approximately 165 meter strike length and an approximately 150 meter down plunge distance from surface;
Scout drilling on Zone 4 identifies prominent, pyritic/graphitic shear zone centred on quartz feldspar porphyry sill; mineralized shear
traced over an approximately 300 meter strike length and a 160 meter down-dip extension to date by 5 boreholes (Orange No. 5 zone);
Scout trenching and deep hand auger sampling scheduled to begin this week on newly defined 1,200 meter long by 150 to 250 meter
wide Akwadum South and Akim Apapam gold-in-soil anomalies identified by the ongoing Phase II soil program.
A map depicting the location of the Double 19 zone in connection with the mineralization zones can be viewed on our company’s website at
www.xtragold.com.
Double 19 Zone (Zone 3 – East Gold-In-Soil Anomaly)
The above drill results on the Double 19 zone correspond to a February 2012, 10 hole (2,293 meters) drill campaign designed to follow-up on
very encouraging trenching and 2009 scout reverse circulation (RC) drilling results. The Double 19 zone lies at the south-eastern extremity of
the approximately 1,250 meter long Zone 3 gold-in-soil trend, approximately 600 meters southwest of the South Ridge zone on the Zone 2
gold-in-soil anomaly. See the map depicting the location of the Double 19 zone in connection with the mineralization zones which is available
for viewing on our company’s website. The drilling was designed to further define the mineralization along strike and at depth, gain additional
insight on the mineralization’s structural setting, and further delineate the geometry of the host diorite body.
88 -
The above drilling tested the mineralized veining system over an approximately 100 meter strike distance and an approximately 80 meter
down plunge extension from surface. Drilling highlights include: a near surface, saprolite (oxide) intercept of 16.5 meters grading 4.35 g/t gold
from a down-hole depth of 4.5 meters in hole KBDD12208 designed to undercut the trench TKB022-ADRS003 mineralized intercept at the
WNW extremity of the zone; a saprolite (oxide) intercept of 12 meters grading 10.32 g/t gold from a down-hole depth of 18 meters in
KBDD12198 within the central portion of the zone; and intercepts of 19 meters grading 3.26 g/t gold and 26 meters grading 3.06 g/t gold from
down-hole depths of 36 meters and 33 meters in holes KBDD12203 and KBDD12205 at the ENE extremity of the zone (drill fence with 30
meter collar separation). All holes, with the exception of KBDD12204 (NW-trending), consist of SE-trending boreholes with -50o to -70o
inclinations. Gold mineralization is associated with quartz-albite-carbonate-sulphide veining developed within a rock body of quartz diorite
composition.
Current ongoing drilling has traced the mineralization an additional 50 meters to the ENE of the KBDD12201-KBDD12203-KBDD12205
section in holes KBDD12231, KBDD12233, and KBDD12234; with these holes still in the process of being logged and sampled. Drilling /
trenching to date appears to indicate that the Double 19 zone consists of a ENE-plunging, en-echelon, mineralized vein system traced to date
over an approximately 165 meter strike length and an approximately 150 meter down plunge distance from surface.
Orange No. 5 Shear Zone (Zone 4 Gold-In-Soil Anomaly)
Recent scout drilling efforts to test high priority geophysical, soil geochemical, and geological targets along the 3.5 kilometer long Zone 4 gold
trend located within the south-western portion of the Apapam mining lease identified a prominent sulphide-bearing shear zone centered on a
strongly iron-carbonate altered quartz feldspar porphyry sill emplaced along and/or proximate to the contact between intercalated
greywacke/siltstone and graphitic phyllite rock sequences.
The NE-trending, pyritic/graphitic, Orange No. 5 shear zone has thus far been traced over an approximately 300 meter strike length and an
approximately 160 meter down-dip extension from surface (approximately 125 meters vertical) by 5 boreholes. The mineralized structure
exhibits a high chargeability / high conductivity induced polarization signature and is spatially associated with a prominent Versatile Time
Domain Electromagnetic (VTEM) resistivity/conductivity break. The spatial relationship of the Orange No. 5 shear zone with a quartz feldspar
porphyry sill body constitutes a classical orogenic lode gold setting and demonstrates the multi-style mineralization potential of our Kibi gold
project. Assay results for the 5 holes are pending from the laboratory.
Akwadum South / Akim Apapam Gold-In-Soil Anomaly Proofing
The ongoing 2011 – 2012 Phase II Apapam soil sampling program has produced 2 prominent, tight/linear, gold-in-soil anomalies persistently
traceable over lengths of 1,200 meters and extending over widths of 150 meters to 250 meters, including: the Akwadum South anomaly
located at the southeast extremity of the Apapam mining lease; and the Akim Apapam anomaly located within the central portion of the
namesake reconnaissance license.
These gold-in-soil anomalies exhibit spatial relationships with areas of structural complexity identified by an aeromagnetic (+/- VTEM,
Radiometric) - based regional structure study conducted by SRK Consulting (Canada) Inc. in 2011 on behalf of Xtra-Gold; particularly with
intersections between major D2-D5 fault corridors and major, late, E-W trending D6 faults. A scout trenching and deep hand auger (5 meters)
sampling program designed to test
the subsurface geochemical signature and geological setting of the Akwadum South and Akim Apapam gold-in-soil anomalies is scheduled
for initiation on or around April 27, 2012.
A mineralization map is available on our company’s website at www.xtragold.com.
- 89 -
Double 19 Gold Shoot on Zone 3
Recent diamond drilling indicates good down-plunge continuity of gold grades on the Double 19 Shoot on Zone 3 of our Kibi gold project. The
assay results for a three hole (KBDD12231, KBDD12233 and KBDD12234) drill section totaling 489 meters successfully expanded the high
grade Double 19 gold shoot to a down-plunge distance of approximately 150 meters from surface.
Highlights of the drill results and ongoing exploration activities reported include:
50.5 meters grading 2.03 g/t gold, including 4.71 g/t gold over 14 meters, in KBDD12231 from 57.5 meters down-hole (Double 19 Shoot);
28 meters grading 3.14 g/t gold, including 5.01 g/t gold over 12 meters, in KBDD12233 from 39 meters down-hole (Double 19 Shoot);
drilling / trenching to date appears to indicate that the high grade Double 19 gold shoot consists of a moderately, ENE-plunging vein
system centred on an apparent fold nose developed within the host diorite body; with the gold shoot having an asymmetrical convex
geometry possibly reflecting a fold-hinge stockwork vein zone; and
2 new, typical Kibi-type, diorite – hosted, quartz stockwork systems discovered proximal to Double 19 gold shoot within Zone 3 – East
gold-in-soil anomaly.
The Double 19 gold shoot lies at the south-eastern extremity of the approximately 1,250 meters long Zone 3 gold-in-soil trend, approximately
600 meters southwest of the South Ridge zone on the Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly. A map depicting the location of the Double 19 shoot in
relation to the Zone 2 mineralization zones has been posted on our company’s website.
The present drilling located approximately 50 meters northeast of the KBDD12201-203-205 section was designed to further test the down-
plunge extension of the mineralization and gain additional insight on the geometry and structural controls of the gold shoot. The KBDD12201-
203-205 section yielded mineralized intercepts of 19 meters grading 3.26 g/t gold and 26 meters grading 3.06 g/t gold, including 5.67 g/t gold
over 10 meters in holes KBDD12203 and KBDD12205 (see Table 1).
The 3 hole, scissor-pattern, drill section encompasses a SE-trending borehole (KBDD12231) and a pair of NW-trending, vertical fan boreholes
(KBDD12233 to KBDD12234) collared approximately 80 meters to the southeast, and at a 30 meter lower elevation, than the KBDD12231
collar position. Hole KBDD12231 (-55o) returned a mineralized intercept of 50.5 meters grading 2.03 g/t gold, including 4.71 g/t gold over 14
meters, from a down-hole depth of 57.5 meters. The upper KBDD12233 borehole (-60o) of the KBDD12233-234 vertical fan pattern returned
an intercept of 28 meters grading 3.14 g/t gold, including 5.01 g/t gold over 12 meters, from a down-hole depth of 39 meters, and the steeper
KBDD12234 hole (-75o) yielded an intercept of 26.8 meters grading 2.69 g/t gold, including 4.73 g/t gold over 11 meters, from a down-hole
depth of 35.5 meters, with both these intercepts cross-cutting the lower portion of the KBDD12231 mineralized intercept. Borehole
KBDD12233 returned a second, deeper intercept of 10 meters grading 1.47 g/t gold from a down-hole depth of 138 meters but insufficient
drilling information is available at this time to determine if this mineralization forms part of the Double 19 shoot or reflects a new deeper gold
zone.
Drilling / trenching to date appears to indicate that the Double 19 shoot consists of a moderately, ENE-plunging vein system centred on an
apparent fold nose developed within the host diorite body; with the gold shoot having an asymmetrical convex geometry possibly reflecting a
fold-hinge stockwork vein zone. These drilling results extend the Double 19 shoot to a down-plunge distance of approximately 150 meters
from surface; with the relatively shallow vertical depths of the mineralized intercepts reflecting the position of the zone along a steep slope
exhibiting approximately 80 meters in topographical relief.
Recent trenching efforts on the Zone 3 – East gold-in-soil anomaly discovered two new, typical Kibi-type, diorite – hosted, quartz stockwork
systems located approximately 100 meters west-southwest (trench TAD031) and 250 meters north-northwest (trench TAD036) of the Double
19 gold shoot, respectively. Assay results for these trenches are pending from the laboratory. Mechanized trenching and geological mapping
is currently ongoing on these new prospective zones to further define the structural controls of the mineralization and the geometry of the host
diorite bodies.
90 -
Further Results of 2012 Drill Program
The 53 diamond core holes reported in Table 1 spanning from KBDD12190 to KBDD12256 (excluding holes KBDD12191-192, KBDD12194, KBDD12198, KBDD12200-201,
KBDD12203-206, KBDD12208, KBDD12231, and KBDD12233-234) total 8,810 meters and include 11 holes (1,598 meters) on the Double 19 shoot (Zone 3 – East); 6 holes
(801 meters) on the South Ridge zone (Zone 2); 7 holes (1,482 meters) on the Orange No. 5 shear (Zone 4); 22 holes (3,656 meters) to test geochemical / geophysical
targets in Zone 3 and Zone 4; 3 holes (782 meters) on Zone 1; and 4 holes (491 meters) on the Kibi Old Mine prospect.
Highlights of the drill results and ongoing exploration activities reported include:
45 meters grading 2.20 g/t gold, including 7.80 g/t gold over 7 meters, in KBDD12237 from 40 meters down-hole (Double 19 Shoot);
36 meters grading 2.85 g/t gold, including 7.06 g/t gold over 7.7 meters, in KBDD12253 from 42.5 meters down-hole (South Ridge zone);
Double 19 shoot extended to a down-plunge distance of approximately 205 meters from surface. Drilling / trenching to date appears to indicate that the high grade
Double 19 gold shoot consists of a moderately, ENE-plunging vein system centred on an apparent fold nose developed within the host diorite body; with the gold
shoot having an asymmetrical convex geometry possibly reflecting a fold-hinge stockwork vein zone;
South Ridge zone follow-up drilling returns high grade stockwork-type gold mineralization spatially associated with broad, auriferous shear zone (KBDD12253);
2 new, typical Kibi-type, diorite-hosted, quartz stockwork systems discovered by scout drilling within central portion Zone 3 gold-in-soil anomaly; extending trace of
granitoid-hosted gold mineralization to approximately 2.5 kilometers along the NE-trending Kibi gold trend; and
prominent, gold-bearing shear zone centred on quartz feldspar porphyry sill (“QFP”) discovered by scout drilling within Zone 4 gold-in-soil anomaly (Orange No. 5 Shear).
Spatial relationship with QFP
constitutes classical orogenic lode gold setting and demonstrates multi-style mineralization potential of our Kibi gold project.
Double 19 Gold Shoot (Zone 3 – East)
The present drilling encompasses 11 boreholes (1,598 meters) on the Double 19 zone designed to better define the apparent fold-hinge
structural setting of the gold shoot, further establish the continuity of the mineralization, and gain additional insight on the geometry of the host
diorite body. The Double 19 shoot lies at the south-eastern extremity of the approximately 1,250 meters long Zone 3 gold-in-soil trend,
approximately 600 meters southwest of the South Ridge zone on the Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly.
Borehole KBDD12237 designed as a 25 meter infill hole to test the continuity of the high grade mineralization between the KBDD12201-203-
205 and KBDD12231-233-234 drill sections returned a mineralized intercept of 45 meters grading 2.20 g/t gold, including 7.80 g/t gold over 7
meters, from a down-hole depth of 40 meters. The southeast trending (- 60o) borehole appears to have diagonally dissected the apparent fold-hinge and
upper, southern limb of the mineralization shoot from its collar position on the northern flank of the zone. KBDD12232 consisting of a southeast trending hole (-50o) collared
vertically above the fold-hinge returned an intercept grading 1.32 g/t gold over 8 meters from a down-hole depth of 70 meters; with the hole trace appearing to have clipped
the fringe of the fold-hinge at its convergence with the southern limb of the mineralization shoot. Other significant intercepts include 13 meters grading 1.40 g/t gold from a
down-hole depth of 76 meters in KBDD12241, extending the Double 19 shoot to a down-plunge distance of approximately 205 meters from surface; and 1.0 g/t gold over 9
meters from a down-hole depth of 105 meters, approximately 50 meters down dip along the northern limb of the mineralization shoot.
91 -
Drilling / trenching to date appears to indicate that the Double 19 shoot consists of a moderately, ENE-plunging vein system centred on an apparent fold nose developed
within the host diorite body; with the gold shoot having an asymmetrical convex geometry possibly reflecting a fold-hinge stockwork vein zone. Mechanized trenching is
currently ongoing to further define the structural controls of the mineralization and the geometry of the host diorite body.
South Ridge Zone (Zone 2 Gold-In-Soil Anomaly)
The South Ridge zone located at the north-western extremity of the approximately 1,200 meters long by 500 meters to 800 meters wide Zone 2 gold-in-soil anomaly was
targeted by 801 meters of follow-up drilling to further define the structural controls of the mineralization and the contacts of the host granitoid body. Previous drilling and
trenching traced an extensive system of en-echelon extension vein arrays over approximately 440 meter strike and 400 down-dip distances along the SE-trending,
moderately NE-dipping South Ridge granitoid body. The present drilling consisted of 6 vertical holes arranged in 2 staggered (50 meters apart), southeast trending arrays of 3
holes at 50 meter centres; designed to better target the combination of the moderate easterly dipping shearing and the shallow, westerly dipping extensional vein systems.
Five out of the 6 holes returned significant, near surface mineralized intercepts, including: 36 meters grading 2.85 g/t gold, including 7.06 g/t gold over 7.7 meters, from a
down-hole depth of 42.5 meters in KBDD12253; 20.5 meters grading 1.04 g/t gold from a down-hole depth of 13.5 meters in KBDD12210; and 4.46 g/t gold over 3.2 meters
from a down-hole depth of 68.5 meters in KBDD12254. Gold mineralization is associated with quartzalbite-carbonate-sulphide veining developed within a rock body of quartz
diorite to tonalite composition. The higher grade KBDD12253 intercept exhibits close spatial relationships with 2 mineralized intercepts from the 2010 drill program, including:
25 meters grading 0.73 g/t gold from a northeast trending, southeast dipping shear zone in KBDD10096; and 72 meters grading 0.93 g/t gold from an extensional vein
system in KBDD10090. Further trenching and drilling is required to further define the geometry and structural controls of this large footprint, near surface auriferous vein
system.
Zone 3 – Central (Gold-In-Soil Anomaly)
Scout drilling on gold-in-soil, geophysical, and geological targets within the central portion the approximately 2.5 kilometers long by 0.5 kilometers to 1.2 kilometers wide
Zone 3 gold-in-soil trend yielded 2 new typical Kibitype granitoid hosted gold mineralization occurrences. Hole KBDD12224 located approximately 1 kilometer southwest of
the Double 19 shoot in Zone 3 - East yielded a mineralized intercept of 19.5 meters grading 0.63 g/t gold, including 2.37 g/t gold over 1 meter, from a down-hole depth of 6
meters and KBDD12228 collared approximately 400 meters to the northeast returned 1.19 g/t gold over 10 meters from down-hole depth of 18 meters. Mechanized trenching
and geological mapping is currently ongoing on these new prospective zones to further define the structural controls of the mineralization and the geometry of the host diorite
bodies. To date, Zone 2 – Zone 3 drilling/trenching has traced the granitoid – hosted gold mineralization over an approximately 2.5 kilometers distance along the NE –
trending Kibi gold trend.
Orange No. 5 Shear Zone (Zone 4 Gold-In-Soil Anomaly)
Scout drilling efforts to test high priority geophysical and soil geochemical targets along the 3.5 kilometers long Zone 4 gold trend located within the south-western portion of
the Apapam mining lease identified a prominent northeast trending shear zone centred on a strongly iron-carbonate altered QFP emplaced along and/or proximate to the
contact between intercalated greywacke/siltstone and graphitic phyllite rock sequences.
The moderately southeast dipping, pyritic/graphitic, Orange No. 5 shear zone has been traced to date over an approximately 300 meter strike length and approximately 175
meters down-dip distance from surface by 7 boreholes (1,482 meters). A 3 hole NW-trending drill fence intersected the structural corridor over an approximately 100 meters
down dip distance; with holes KBDD12219, KBDD12220, and KBDD12251 returning 6 m grading 0.73 g/t gold from a down-hole depth of 85 meters, 19 meters grading 1.78
g/t gold from a down-hole depth of 134 meters, including 4.11 g/t gold over 6 meters, and 0.7 meters grading 41.40 g/t gold from a down-hole depth of 154.3 meters,
respectively. The shear zone also yielded a significant mineralized intercept grading 2.24 g/t gold over 8.5 meters, including 5.76 g/t gold over 3 meters, from a down-hole
depth of 99 meters in KBDD12252 located approximately 40 meters to the southwest of the aforementioned drill fence.
92 -
The mineralized structure exhibits a high chargeability / high conductivity induced polarization (IP) signature and is spatially associated with a prominent Versatile Time
Domain Electromagnetic (VTEM) resistivity/conductivity break. The spatial relationship of the Orange No. 5 shear zone with a QFP body constitutes a classical orogenic
lode gold setting and demonstrates the multi-style mineralization potential of our Kibi gold project.
Kibi Old Mine Prospect
The present drilling encompasses 4 holes (491 meters) designed to better characterize the gold grade and structural setting of the Kibi Old Mine prospect located at the
north-central extremity of the Apapam mining lease. The Kibi Old Mine structure was the focus of exploration and underground development work in the mid 1920’s and late
1930’s; including a main shaft sunk to a depth of 172 feet (~ 52.5 meters) with levels driven at depths of 65 feet and 150 feet (~20 meters and ~45.5 meters). Mineralization
is hosted by an east-northeast striking, moderate southerly dipping, quartz-rich, composite structure emplaced within Birimian metasedimentary rock; spatially associated
with a geophysically-interpreted dilational jog developed along a regional NE-trending structure.
Hole KBDD12199 consisting of a vertical hole intersected the “Main Reef” structure between the 65 foot and 150 foot levels at a depth of 26 meters; with a network of
structure-parallel and shallow dipping extensional veins developed along the hanging wall flank of the main structure. The main fault vein returned 4.92 g/t gold over a 1.2
meter core length (26 meters – 27.2 meters); and the subsidiary vein system yielded a 15.5 meter intercept grading 0.71 g/t gold (10.5 meters – 26 meters). Holes
KBDD12190, KBDD12193 and KBDD12195 targeted the down dip extension of the structure below the 150 foot level at vertical depths of approximately 60 meters to 145
meters; with the boreholes yielding mineralized intercepts grading 1.23 g/t gold over 6.3 meters, 0.94 g/t gold over 4.1 meters, and 0.62 g/t gold over 9 meters.
Table 1
Significant Drill Intercepts – Kibi Gold Project
Zone 1, 2, 3, 4 and Kibi Old Mine
(current to August 21, 2012)
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length(1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Phase I Drill Program: Zones 1 and 2 (gold-in-soil anomaly)
(Gold) Zone/Target
Comments
(1)  Reported intercepts are core-lengths;
true width of mineralization is unknown at
this time.
KBD08001
and
KBD08002
KBD08003
including
including
KBD08004
including
including
including
KBD08005
including
and
KBD08006
KBD08007
including
KBD08008
including
KBD08009
107
132
22.5
22.5
29
76
76
77
80
22
33
45
116
65
72
15
37
1
108
133
1
no significant results
35
12.5
1.5
24
3
32
12
88
77
1
1
78
5
85
17
39
6
39
60
15
1
117
13
78
4
76
60
45
49
12
no significant results
8.77
13.65
2.04
5.51
3.65
8.49
28.50
42.40
5.64
1.18
2.04
1.02
31.30
1.02
2.06
1.01
2.01
GRD (2)
GRD (2)
(2)  GRD     granitoid hosted/associated 
 VG       visible gold noted
East Dyke
 
East Dyke
East Dyke
 
 
East Dyke
 
 
 
Mushroom
 
 
Mushroom
Mushroom
 
South Ridge
 
South Ridge
GRD (2)
VG (2)
GRD (2)
GRD (2)
VG (2)
GRD (2)
KBD08009
KBD08010
and
KBD08011
including
KBD08012
including
and including
47
58
106
115
46.6
63
63
no significant results
54
7
1
59
10
116
116
1
72
72
64
9
1
25.4
4.83
9.58
1.01
4.53
2.11
3.95
13.60
South Ridge
East Dyke
 
East Dyke
 
Big Bend
GRD (2)
GRD, VG (2)
- 93 -
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length(1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
Comments (2)
72
96
98.3
122
115
116
20
27
32
42
63
KBD08013
and
including
including
KBD08014
including
KBD08015
including
and including
and
and
KBD08016
KBD08017
and
and
KBD08018
Zone 3 – Reverse circulation (RC) holes KBRC09019 to KBRC09041
KBRC09019
15
87
33
129
6.7
105
6
128
16
131
10
126
15
35
7
34
1
33
3
45
64
1
no significant results
96
13.5
6
121
143
8
no significant results
30
82.5
115
135
12
42
including
and including
and including
and including
and including
KBRC09020
and
KBRC09021
including
and
KBRC09022
KBRC09023
KBRC09024
including
and
and
KBRC09025
KBRC09026
KBRC09027
including
and
KBRC09028
and
KBRC09029
16
26
16
26
29
36
58
5
5
30
26
0
0
24
73
22
27
34
62
48
76
5
30
30
17
27
30
39
60
14
14
4
1
1
1
3
2
9
1
6
36
6
no significant results
30
8
1
46
74
29
4
8
1
22
1
7
no significant results
42
37
68
60
85
35
15
3
6
12
9
30
0.87
1.28
2.40
2.70
2.24
3.23
2.78
5.06
9.48
2.37
16.40
1.43
1.04
1.02
3.52
6.47
14.27
15.00
19.10
25.10
1.01
4.10
0.94
4.92
0.74
4.86
4.95
32.90
0.29
3.12
0.91
1.18
4.09
1.03
0.25
0.52
0.84
Big Bend
 
 
 
Big Bend
 
Big Bend
 
 
 
 
Zone 1
Zone 1
 
 
Zone 1
Zone 3 – East - Trench
TAD007
 
 
 
 
 
Zone 3 – East - Trench
TAD007
 
Trench TAD001-004
Trench TAD014
Trench TAD001-004
Trench TAD001-004
Trench TAD014
Trench TAD001-004
Trench TAD001-004
Trench TAD001-004
Trench TAD001-004
GRD (2)
GRD (2)
GRD (2)
VG (2)
GRD (2)
GRD (2)
GRD (2)
mining lease
mining lease
staking
application (3)
staking
application (3)
staking
application (3)
staking
application (3)
staking
application (3)
staking
application (3)
staking
application (3)
staking
application (3)
- 94 -
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length (1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
Comments (2)
30
31
59
68
19
22
126
126
4
1
5
3
47
47
61
61
62
23
KBRC09030
including
and
including
KBRC09031
including
KBRC09032
including
KBRC09033
KBRC09034
KBRC09035
KBRC09036
including
KBRC09037
and
including
KBRC09038
including
and including
KBRC09039
KBRC09040
KBRC09041
43
13
36
5
70
11
70
2
26
7
24
2
146
20
132
6
no significant results
0.67
1.21
0.42
1.59
0.74
1.63
0.33
0.66
Trench TAD016
 
 
 
Trench TAD015-021
 
Trench TAD015-021
 
Trench TAD016
9
5
0.54
gold-in-soil anomaly
no significant results
20
13
10
75
53
92
70
63
24
19
8
7
28
6
31
9
1
1
no significant results
no significant resultst
0.67
1.00
0.36
0.87
1.99
0.57
1.01
3.64
39.80
Trench TAD001-004
Trench TAD001-004
Trench TAD001-004
Trench TAD001-004
Zone 3 – East – Trench
TAD019
Zone 3 – East – Trench
TAD007
Zone 3 – East – Trench
TAD007
mining lease
mining lease
mining lease
staking
application (3) 
mining lease
staking
application (3) 
mining lease
staking
application (3)
staking
application (3)
staking
application (3)
staking
application (3)
mining lease
mining lease
mining lease
Note: 
(3) Staking application formally received by the Minerals Commission of Ghana on November 19, 2009 and is currently being
processed, thus securing our priority staking but there is no absolute assurance that this parcel of ground will be granted to us.
Zone 2 – Reverse circulation (RC) holes KBRC09042 to KBRC09056
KBRC09042
2.97
18
19
37
including
and including
and including
KBRC09043
including
KBRC09044
KBRC09045
including
KBRC09046
including
KBRC09047
including
and including
and including
23
23
28
23
25
25
22
22
41
41
0
0
0
1
31
24
29
34
29
27
32
26
54
44
23
10
1
2
8
1
1
11
4
2
10
4
13
3
23
10
1
1
- 95 -
6.32
13.90
12.70
2.27
5.27
2.29
2.48
4.05
1.04
2.24
6.29
8.66
10.90
11.60
Zone 2 – East Dyke –
Trench TKB005
 
 
 
Zone 2 – East Dyke –
Trench TKB005
 
Zone 2 – East Dyke –
Trench TKB005
East Dyke – Trench
TKB005
East Dyke – Trench
TKB005
 
East Dyke – Trench
TKB005
Hole ID
From
To
Core
Gold
Zone/Target
Comments (2)
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length (1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
Comments (2)
3
8
9
13
52
63
51
51
28
31
and including
and including
and including
including
KBRC09048
KBRC09049
and
KBRC09050
including
KBRC09051
including
KBRC09052
KBRC09053
KBRC09054
1
4
1
9
1
10
14
1
no significant results
53
65
56
52
37
1
2
5
1
9
35
4
no significant results
no significant results
no significant results
KBRC09055
including
and including
and including
including
and including
KBRC09056
including
and
including
Zone 2 – Reverse circulation (RC) holes KBRC09057 to KBRC09068
KBRC09057
78
13
4
1
20
3
18
6
20
6
4
22
22
22
56
72
25
37
58
71
82
35
26
23
76
75
43
43
78
77
anomalous
KBRC09058
KBRC09059
including
KBRC09060
29
29
1
no significant results
38
9
32
40
3
39
12.65
14.30
13.50
11.15
7.53
3.48
1.98
4.31
2.69
4.09
1.44
3.26
6.28
11.15
2.27
4.83
1.33
3.08
2.01
4.29
0.65
1.05
3.54
Central granitoid – Trench
TKB004
Big Bend – Trench TKB004
 
Big Bend – Trench TKB004
 
East Dyke – Trench
TKB005
 
Gold-in-soil anomaly –
Trench TKB005
Central granitoid – Trench
TKB004
Central granitoid – Trench
TKB004
Big Bend – Trench TKB004
 
 
 
 
 
Big Bend – Trench TKB004
Mushroom – Trench
TKB006
Gold-in-soil anomaly
Mushroom – Trench
TKB006
 
* Mushroom – Trench
TKB006
Notes: 
* Gold values cut to 50 grams per tonne (g/t). 
“Significant Intercepts” satisfy following criteria: greater than (>) 5.0 grams gold x meter product and >0.5 g/t gold. 
“Anomalous” signifies at least one intercept >2.0 grams gold x meter product and >0.25 g/t gold.
including
and including
and including
and including
and including
KBRC09061
24
28
10
14
1
7
1
9
1
10
no significant results
5.29
10.95
10.85
22.60
272.00
4
4
6
8
9
*
*
 
 
 
Mushroom – Trench
TKB006
Central granitoid – Trench
TKB014E-F
uncut
KBRC09062
including
9
9
13
10
4
1
- 96-
4.03
9.32
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length (1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
Comments (2)
KBRC09063
KBRCO9064
KBRC09065
including
and
KBRC09066
KBRC09067
5
6
54
14
no significant results
no significant results
3
8
1
7
1
55
no significant results
19
5
Geophysical target
Geophysical target
Mushroom – Trench
TKB006
 
 
Gold-in-soil anomaly
South Ridge – Trench
2.40
4.87
3.98
1.16
including
and
including
KBRC09068
15
30
30
0
16
34
31
76
4
4
4
4
41
46
61
45
24
13
5
42
40.47
52.40
22.5
including
and including
and including
and including
(and including)
Phase III Diamond Drilling Program – Zone 2
KBDD10069
including
KBDD10070
including
KBDD10071
KBDD10072
KBDD10073
KBDD10074
including
KBDD10081
KBDD10085
including
and
including
and
and
including
and
and
Note: * Gold values cut to 30 grams per tonne (g/t).
KBDD10086
including
and
and
including
and
23
24
30
3
9
52
54
106
146
146
186
232
28.5
22.5
72
121
103
158
58.5
91
92
148
3
3
1
4
1
76
41
20
9
1
1
27
1
25.5
19.5
13.5
30
11
10
- 97 -
73
62
67.60
59.33
2
9
27.13
6.93
29
6.5
no significant results
no significant results
35.5
12.5
26
39
22.5
16.5
59
55
107
177
163
195
244
19.5
7.5
7
1
1
31
17
9
12
3.86
1.99
5.76
1.62
2.15
3.36
5.25
19.50
10.40
3.45 *
45.50
2.12
4.01
3.99
1.70
5.64
3.60
1.52
2.83
6.18
29.50
6.08
1.37
2.13
0.57
0.75
1.50
1.91
1.12
0.93
1.50
0.88
TKB010
 
 
 
South Ridge – Trench
TKB010
Big Bend
 
Big Bend
 
Big Bend
Central granitoid
Central granitoid
Big Bend
 
Mushroom
South Ridge
South Ridge
uncut
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length (1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
Comments (2)
and
and
and including
KBDD10090
including
and
including
and
and
including
including
including
and
including
KBDD10091
including
and including
KBDD10095
KBDD10096
and
KBDD10099
including
and
including
KBDD10101
including
168
186
215
0
0
49
59
77
111
111
133
174
220
229
10.5
114
118
29
60
90
141
145
176
179
112
112
176
233
226
23
15
69
69
82
183
120.5
140
183
250
244.5
122
121
119
31
64
115
161
156
183
191
170
130
8
47
11
23
15
20
10
5
72
9.5
7
9
30
15.5
17
7
1
2
4
25
20
11
7
2
58
18
1.27
0.58
0.92
1.74
2.50
0.95
1.41
1.78
0.93
1.57
1.80
1.64
0.73
1.00
2.42
4.96
16.55
3.97
4.84
0.73
2.43
3.52
2.53
5.21
2.46
2.18
South Ridge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
South Ridge
 
 
South Ridge
South Ridge
 
Big Bend
*
18
28
23
15
6
1
130
170
166
159
150
145
112
142
143
144
144
144
2.18
3.67
4.40
5.42
10.39
29.70
including
including
(and including)
(and including)
(and including)
(and including)
Note: 
* Intercept encompasses 11.0 meters essentially barren interval (0.03 g/t Au) appearing to reflect a post mineralization dyke (130
meters to 141 meters).
KBDD10103
including
(and including)
and
including
Note: 
Intercepts constrained with a 0.25 g/t gold minimum cut-off grade at top and bottom of intercept, with arbitrarily set 30 g/t gold upper
cut-off grade applied, and maximum of five consecutive meters of internal dilution (less than 0.25 g/t gold). All internal intervals
above 15 g/t gold indicated.
Big Bend
1.98
2.51
3.23
1.87
2.11
131
137
137
180
180
158
158
152
205
199
27
21
15
25
19
- 98 -
To
Core
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
(meters)
Length (1) 
(meters)
Phase III Diamond Drilling Program – Zone 2 – East Dyke granitoid
KBDD11105
including
KBDD11106
including
and
including
Phase III Diamond Drilling Program – Big Bend gold zone
KBDD11107
105
107
141
144
162
163
120
112
155
149
164
164
15
5
14
5
2
1
60
63
3
including
and
including
KBDD11108
and
including
and
including
including
KBDD11109
and
KBDD11110
including
and including
KBDD11111
including
and
including
and
KBDD11112
including
and including
and
including
and
including
KBDD11113
including
and including
and including
62
127
128
87
116
119
189
196
221
15
91
158
175
198
94
99
133
139
202
130
148
148
202
202
228
228
84
89
93
100
63
154
129
91
121
121
231
210
230
16.5
93
208
199
199
116
105
151
146
203
177
168
154
220
206
245
235
136
116
105
101
1
27
1
4
5
2
42
14
9
1.5
2
50
24
1
22
6
18
7
1
47
20
6
18
4
17
7
52
27
12
1
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
Comments (2)
2.05
4.00
2.36
5.18
15.53
25.20
8.44
15.20
0.89
5.06
2.12
2.36
5.36
2.39
3.11
3.19
13.10
5.75
1.64
2.45
17.75
1.25
2.70
2.09
4.18
7.35
0.71
1.17
2.71
1.31
3.04
2.00
3.89
2.42
East Dyke – North zone
 
East Dyke – North zone
 
East Dyke – North zone
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
 
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
 
 
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
3.58
6.09
20.40
and including
KBDD11114
including
and including
100
3
21
32
101
53
41
40
1
50
20
8
- 99 -
20.40
1.31
2.21
3.41
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length (1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
Comments (2)
Big Bend gold zone (Central granitoid) / Mushroom gold zone (Upper Central granitoid)
KBDD11115
4.09
156
163
7
18.35
1.31
2.37
4.88
7.38
45.70
2.57
4.23
10.55
9.30
3.14
7.59
5.15
32.50
0.93
4.15
5.92
2.21
2.36
10.10
2.43
3.46
0.98
3.12
1.75
2.56
4.48
1.72
3.21
0.81
2.30
2.25
3.67
2.67
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
 
Mushroom
Mushroom – Upper central
granitoid
(newly defined zone)
 
Mushroom – Upper central
granitoid
 
 
Mushroom – Upper Central
granitoid
IP chargeability/Gold-in-soil
anomaly
Central granitoid/Junction
shear
 
 
Central granitoid/Junction
shear
Central granitoid/SE
defomation zone
Central granitoid/SE
defomation zone
 
Central granitoid/SE
defomation zone
East Dyke/SE deformation
zone
East Dyke/Big Bend -
Central
granitoid
East Dyke/Big Bend
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
3.88
34.80
new shear zone
including
and
including
KBDD11116
KBDD11117
including
and including
KBDD11118
including
and
KBDD11119
KBDD11121
KBDD11122
including
and
KBDD11123
KBDD11124
KBDD11125
including
KBDD11126
KBDD11127
KBDD11128
156
172
186
67
68
69
84
90
146
60
78
79
92
173
27
33
98
137
160
157
196
195
1
24
9
abandoned and re-drilled by KBDD11117
83
78
70
95
95
147
61.5
16
10
1
11
5
1
1.5
no significant results
81
80
93
174
3
1
1
1
no significant results
34
34
99
140
166
7
1
1
3
6
1
3
2
17
2
26
12
5
6
3
20
5
16
7
38
11
1
including
and
Big Bend gold zone (Central granitoid) / East Dyke gold zone
KBDD11129
KBDD11130
261
212
263
229
160
181
161
184
including
KBDD11131
including
and
KBDD11132
and
and
including
KBDD11133
including
and
including
and
221
211
214
221
237
264
280
287
152
154
182
194
398
223
237
226
226
243
267
300
292
168
161
220
205
399
and
398
399
1
- 100 -
34.80
new shear zone
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length (1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
Note:
Gold intercepts for KBDD11134 drilled down the plunge of Big Bend en-echelon vein package system
KBDD11134
1.51
26
32
6
6
67
96
96
110
133
134
147
173
201
223
226
249
284
285
312
323
394
432
435
including
and
and
including
including
including
and including
and
and
and including
and
including
including
and
including
and
including
and
and
including
Length Weighted Average Grade of all Intercepts (over 276 meters
cumulative core length)
and
Note: 
* Length weighted average grade for entire hole including internal dilution, i.e. no internal waste criteria applied.
Big Bend gold zone (Central granitoid) / Mushroom gold zone (Upper Central granitoid)
KBDD11135
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
2.45
1.49
3.03
3.81
3.46
10.71
15.90
1.46
1.01
1.92
2.04
2.79
3.31
8.70
20.10
1.06
1.80
0.75
1.01
1.97
1.62
15
74
137
106
124
136
135
152
215
211
265
235
261
287
286
385
342
404
459
442
9
7
41
10
14
3
1
5
42
10
42
9
12
3
1
73
19
10
27
7
1.01*
1.07
464
467
155
3
187
32
including
and
KBDD11136
and
including
KBDD11137
including
and
including
KBDD11138
and
including
and
171
207
134
149
163
154
154
180
187
170.5
201
207
222
181
213
141
181
180
170
161
195
194
172
214
213
223
10
6
7
32
17
16
7
15
7
1.5
13
6
1
- 101 -
1.97
2.32
0.78
2.41
4.01
1.22
2.44
1.84
2.73
5.18
2.21
3.43
25.00
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
and
including
and
KBDD11139
and
Note:
230
242
264
228
292.5
253
247
265.5
236
305
Core
Length (1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
23
5
1.5
8
12.5
1.12
2.80
14.50
2.83
1.98
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
Comments (2)
Comments (2)
Note: 
Intercepts constrained with a 0.25 g/t gold minimum cut-off grade at top and bottom of intercept, with arbitrarily set 30 g/t gold upper
cut-off grade applied, and maximum of five consecutive meters of internal dilution (less than 0.25 g/t gold). All internal intervals
above 15 g/t gold indicated.
Big Bend gold zone (Central granitoid) / East Dyke gold zone
KBDD11140
1.46
162
169
7
and
including
KBDD11141
including
and including
KBDD11142
including
and
and
and
and
including
KBDD11143
including
KBDD11144
including
KBDD11146
192
192
232
241
251
200
218
350
387
415
446
457
249
258
34
45
3
207
199
294
283
270
226
226
356
407.1
418
468
462
290
278
64
64
13.5
15 `
7
62
42
19
26
8
6
20.1
3
22
5
41
20
30
19
10.5
and
KBDD11148
including
Mushroom gold zone / Big Bend gold zone / East Dyke gold zone
KBDD11151
15
73
452
452
74
467
459
1
15
7
110
125
1.39
2.48
1.57
2.00
2.76
1.41
2.37
1.98
1.71
2.14
1.43
3.19
1.62
2.18
0.79
1.05
2.14
8.23
1.40
2.53
2.45
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
East Dyke/Big Bend -
Central granitoid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Easy Dyke
 
 
Road Cut zone (new zone)  
 
 
Big Bend – Central
 
granitoid
 
South Ridge
Mushroom – Upper Central
granitoid
Mushroom – Upper Central
granitoid
Mushroom – Upper Central
granitoid
Note: 
KBDD11153, KBDD11154 and KBDD11161 drilled down the plunge of Mushroom and Big Bend gold zones en-
echelon vein package system
KBDD11153
3
1.35 *
83
86
including
3
18
15
4.13 *
Note: KBDD11153 abandoned at 128 meters due to technical difficlties
KBDD11154
81
84
3
including
including
including
3
37
68
16.5
56
78
13.5
19
10
- 102 -
1.52
2.94
2.56
2.21
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length (1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
and
and
Note: KBDD11154 (344 meters) re-drilling of KBDD11153 with holes having same trace over upper 128 meters
KBDD11157
2.20
6.23
169
190
176
191
2.82
112
7
1
20
92
KBDD11158
KBDD11160
and
KBDD11161
and
and
and
and
including
and
and
108
13.5
45
3
77
116
144
159
176
214
231
122
28
61
31
95
136
150
204
177
224
266
14
14.5
16
28
18
20
6
45
1
10
35
Mushroom – Upper Central
granitoid
Mushroom – Upper Central
granitoid
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
1.07
1.70
1.51
1.50
0.84
1.22
2.40
2.00
17.00
2.07
1.57
extended to 344
meters
Comments (2)
and
and
and
including
231
283
526
527
266
308
537
529
35
25
11
2
1.57
1.40
1.23
2.79
Central granitoid – New
Zone
3
308
305
1.60
Note: KBDD11161 abandoned in mineralization at 537 meters due to technical problems
Length Weighted Average Grade of all Big Bend zone
Intercepts in KBDD11161 (over 185 meters cumulative core length form 3 meters to 308 meters)
 
* Length weighted average grade for KBDD11161 (3 meters to 308 meters) including internal dilution (no internal waste criteria
applied)
KBDD11163
including
KBDD11164
and
and
KBDD11167
KBDD11168
and
and
KBDD11170
1.50
3.71
3.13
2.34
40.80
4.40
7.11
3.40
1.27
1.10
79
80
36
109
177
40
28.5
42
92.5
243
96
84
39
112
178
44
30
43
98
251
17
4
3
3
1
4
1.5
1
5.5
8
1.03
*
including
and
and
KBDD11171
including
and
KBDD11172
including
and including
248
269
342
150
158
183
127
129
129
250
272
350
166
159
184
144
133
130
2
3
8
16
1
1
17
4
1
- 103 -
3.43
1.37
0.69
2.38
18.53
7.05
5.47
12.66
19.11
South Ridge
 
South Ridge
 
 
East Dyke
East Dyke
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
 
 
Big Bend – Central
granitoid
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length (1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
Comments (2)
133
18
64
366
395
190
184
171
1
15
4
7
10
24.5
17
1
132
3
60
359
385
165.5
167
170
21.43
0.79
2.14
0.88
1.14
3.43
4.70
23.50
Road Cut zone
 
East Dyke
 
East Dyke
and including
KBDD11174
and
KBDD11175
and
KBDD11176
including
and including
Zone 2: Big Bend gold zone / East Dyke gold zone
KBDD11178
KBDD11179
including
and
KBDD11180
including
and
KBDD11183
including
and
and
including
and
including
and including
Note: KBDD11183 intentially drilled down dip between en-echelon veie packages to further establish geometry/attitude of
mineralized sheets; with the borehole appearing to intermittently skirt and/or obliquiely pierce the footwall of the vein package to the
north.
KBDD11184
East Dyke – North
East Dyke – North
 
 
East Dyke – South
 
 
Big Bend
11.40
0.95
2.11
10.20
1.02
2.96
2.21
1.84
8.49
1.52
1.74
4.01
2.01
4.53
29.40
146
92
104
124
77
80
145
28
28
71
128
142
195
215
222
147
107
106
125
86
82
149
45
31
76
154
149
225
224
223
1
15
2
1
9
2
4
17
3
5
26
7
30
9
1
Big Bend
0.80
323
358
35
including
351
358
7
1.81
including
and
KBDD11185
KBDD12186
including
KBDD12187
including
and
KBDD12188
including
KBDD12189
including
and including
KBDD12191
351
373
68.6
182
182
331
332
360
31.6
31.6
195
203
211
322
358
386
73.1
193
184
354
338
373
43.6
36.1
220
220
220
327
7
13
4.5
11
2
23
6
13
12
4.5
25
17
9
5
- 104 -
1.81
0.44
1.41
1.46
3.36
1.50
2.80
0.54
0.95
1.52
1.96
2.36
2.79
1.75
Gold-in-soil / IP anomaly
Gold-in-soil / IP anomaly
 
Big Bend
 
 
Gold-in-soil / IP anomaly
 
Big Bend
 
 
Big Bend
Hole ID
From 
(meters)
To
(meters)
Core
Length (1) 
(meters)
Gold 
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
56
110
33
41
4.5
15
18
24
19.5
86
88.3
112
36
46
73
Double 19 Zone (Zone 3 – East)
KBDD12192
and
KBDD12194
KBDD12198
including
KBDD12200
KBDD12201
including
and
KBDD12203
including
and
KBDD12204
KBDD12205
including
KBDD12206
KBDD12208
including
Double 19 Gold Shoot (Zone 3 – East)
KBDD12231
including
and including
KBDD12233
including
and
including
KBDD12234
including
KBDD12190
KBDD12193
KBDD12195
KBDD12199
and
KBDD12209
KBDD12210
KBDD12211
KBDD12213
and
including
and
KBDD12214
including
and including
KBDD12218
KBDD12219
including
57.5
69
73
39
54
138
139
35.5
38
70.7
72.9
93
10.5
26
30
13.5
12
82.5
112
112
162
83
94
95
79.5
85
85
KBDD12220
including
134
140
63
7
111
1
no significant results
12
30
1.5
24.5
24
4.5
4
90
0.7
89
1
113
19
55
55
9
74
1
no significant results
26
59
51
10
no significant results
16.5
21
4.5
19.5
108
96
87
67
66
148
142
62.3
49
77
77
102
26
27.2
42
34
22
84
138
113
163
98
98
96
81
91
86
153
146
50.5
27
14
28
12
10
3
26.8
11
6.3
4.1
9
15.5
1.2
12
20.5
10
1.5
26
1
1
15
4
1
1.5
6
1
19
6
2.00
23.45
10.32
16.93
1.82
5.85
20.50
5.11
3.26
4.16
5.39
3.06
5.67
4.35
7.11
2.03
3.15
4.71
3.14
5.01
1.47
3.05
2.69
4.73
1.23
0.94
0.62
0.71
4.92
1.33
1.04
0.86
7.17
0.40
1.66
1.92
2.63
8.91
32.30
3.11
0.73
1.90
1.78
4.11
saprolite (oxide)
 
transition zone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transition zone – fresh
 
 
saprolite (oxide)
fresh rock (sulphide)
 
 
fresh rock (sulphide)
 
 
 
fresh rock (sulphide)
 
Kibi Old Mine
Kibi Old Mine
Kibi Old Mine
Kibi Old Mine
 
South Ridge – Zone 2
South Ridge – Zone 2
South Ridge – Zone 2
Orange No. 5 – Zone 4
 
 
 
Zone 1
 
 
Orange No. 5 – Zone 4
Orange No. 5 – Zone 4
Orange No. 5 – Zone 4
Comments (2)
6
1
19.5
1.5
1.5
10
8
45
7
0.7
0.8
- 105 -
Core
Length (1)
(meters)
4.11
22.10
0.63
2.37
2.50
1.19
1.32
2.20
7.80
27.99
15.40
Zone 3 West
 
Zone 3 West
Zone 3 West
Double 19 – Zone 3 East
Double 19 – Zone 3 East
Gold
Grams
Per Tonne
Zone/Target
Comments (2)
including
and including
KBDD12224
including
KBDD12227
KBDD12228
KBDD12232
KBDD12237
including
and including
and including
Hole ID
140
145
6
10.5
45
18
70
40
42
44.5
45.2
146
146
25.5
12
46.5
28
78
85
49
45.2
46
From
(meters)
To
(meters)
76
116
130
126
105
154.3
99
102
102
42.5
43.3
47.7
50.5
68.5
89
123
141
127.5
114
155
107.5
105
103
78.5
51
48.2
51
71.7
KBDD12241
KBDD12243
and
KBDD12246
KBDD12250
KBDD12251
KBDD12252
including
and including
KBDD12253
including
and including
and including
KBDD12254
Notes: 
Reported intercepts are core - lengths; true width of mineralization is unknown at this time.
Unless otherwise indicated intercepts constrained with a 0.25 g/t gold minimum cut-off grade at top and bottom of intercept, with no
upper cut-off applied, and maximum of five consecutive meters of internal dilution (less than 0.25 g/t gold). All internal intervals
above 15 g/t gold indicated.
Double 19 – Zone 3 East
Double 19 – Zone 3 East
 
Zone 3 East
Double 19 – Zone 3 East
Orange No. 5 – Zone 4
Orange No. 5 – Zone 4
 
 
South Ridge – Zone 2
 
 
 
South Ridge – Zone 2
1.40
0.81
1.04
3.57
1.00
41.40
2.24
5.76
14.85
2.85
7.06
33.25
17.33
4.46
13
7
11
1.5
9
0.7
8.5
3
1
36
7.7
0.5
0.5
3.2
Gold Intercept Reporting Criteria
Unless otherwise indicated, “Reported Intercepts” represent core-lengths; true width of mineralization is unknown at this time. Individual
sample results were length weighted to yield average composite interval grades as reported. Unless otherwise indicated “Significant
Intercepts” satisfy following criteria: greater than (>) 5.0 gram gold x meter product and > 0.5 g/t gold. “Anomalous” signifies at least one
intercept > 2.0 gram gold x meter product and > 0.25 g/t gold. Unless otherwise indicated intercepts are constrained with a 0.25 g/t gold
minimum cut-off grade at the top and bottom of the intercept, with no upper cut-off grade applied, and a maximum of five consecutive meters of
internal dilution (less than 0.25 g/t gold). All internal intervals yielding above 15 g/t gold are indicated within the intersection.
Quality-Control Program
We have implemented a quality-control program to ensure best practice in the sampling and analysis of the drill core, reverse circulation (RC)
samples and trench channel samples. Drill core is HQ diameter (63.5 millimeters) in upper oxidized material (regolith) and NQ diameter (47.6
millimeters) in the lower fresh rock portion of the hole. Drill core is saw cut and half the core is sampled in standard intervals. The remaining
half of core is stored in a secure location. Reverse circulation (RC) samples are taken at one meter intervals under dry drilling conditions by
experienced geologists, with all samples weighed on site. Trench samples consist of continuous, horizontal channels collected from a canal
excavated along the bottom sidewall of the trench (~ 0.10 meter above floor). All samples are transported in security-sealed bags to ALS
Ghana Limited, an ISO 9001:2000 certified laboratory. As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, a 250 gram split of the sample is
pulverized to better than 85% passing 75 microns, and analyzed by industry standard 50 gram fire assay fusion with atomic absorption
spectroscopy finish. Samples with observed visible gold and/or exhibiting typical Kibi-type granitoid hosted mineralization characterized by
liberated, particulate gold grains are pulverized in their entirety to better than 85% passing 75 microns, and analyzed four times by industry
standard 50 gram fire assay fusion with atomic absorption spectroscopy finish; with the arithmetic average of the four assays reported. Our
company inserts a certified reference standard (low to high grade), analytical blank, and field duplicate sample in every batch of 20 drill core /
reverse circulation (RC) chip / trench channel samples. Validation parameters are established in the database to ensure quality control.
- 106 -
Future Exploration Plans
We plan to continue our 2012 drill program throughout 2012 at an estimated cost of $5,000,000.
Resources and Reserves
No mineral resources or mineral reserves have been identified on our Kibi project. As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we have
commissioned SEMS Exploration Services Ltd. to prepare an initial NI 43-101-compliant mineral resource estimate on the Big Bend and East
Dyke gold zones located within Zone 2 of our Kibi project.
Apapam Mining Lease
XG Mining’s interest in our Kibi project was previously held by a prospecting license granted by the Government of Ghana on March 29, 2004
covering a licensed area of 33.65 square kilometers. In May 2008, XG Mining applied to the Government of Ghana to convert the prospecting
license to a mining lease. When our application received parliamentary approval, the Government of Ghana granted and registered the
Apapam mining lease to XG Mining on the following terms and conditions.
The Apapam mining lease is dated December 18, 2008 and is owned and controlled by our company, as to a 90% interest; and is registered
to our subsidiary, XG Mining, while the remaining 10% free carried interest in XG Mining is held by the Government of Ghana. The Apapam
mining lease covers a lease area of 33.65 square kilometers and is located in the East Akim District of the Eastern Region of Ghana. The
Apapam mining lease has a seven year term expiring on December 17, 2015 and can be renewed for a further 30 year term in accordance
with the Mining Act (Ghana), by making application not less than six months before the expiration of this mining lease. We have been granted
surface and mining rights by the Government of Ghana to work, develop and produce gold in the Apapam lease area (including the
processing, storing and transportation of ore and materials).
With respect to the Apapam mining lease, we are:
required to pay applicable taxes and annual rental fees to the Government of Ghana in the amount of approximately $19 (GH¢32.80);
and
committed to pay a royalty in each quarter to the Government of Ghana, through the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, based on the
production for that quarter within 30 days from the quarter end as well as a royalty on all timber felled in accordance with existing
legislation;
required to:
- 107 -
commence commercial production of gold within two years from the date of the mining lease;
conduct our operations with due diligence, efficiency, safety and economy, in accordance with good commercial mining practices and in
a proper and workmanlike manner, observing sound technical and engineering principles using appropriate modern and effective
equipment, machinery, materials and methods and paying particular regard to the conservation of resources, reclamation of land and
environmental protection generally; and
mine and extract ore in accordance with preceding paragraph, utilizing methods which include dredging, quarrying, pitting, trenching,
stoping and shaft sinking in the Apapam lease area.
We are further required to furnish to the government authorities of Ghana, comprised of the Minister of Lands, Forestry and Mines, the Head of
the Inspectorate Division of the Minerals Commission, the Chief Executive of the Minerals Commission and the Director of Ghana Geological
Survey, with technical records which include:
a report in each quarter not later than 30 days after the quarter end to the government authorities in connection with quantities of gold
won in that quarter, quantities sold, revenue received and royalties payable;
a report half-yearly not later than 40 days after the half year end to the government authorities summarizing the results of operations
during the half year and technical records, which report shall also contain a description of any geological or geophysical work carried out
by our company in that half year and a plan upon a scale approved by the Head of the Inspectorate Division of the Minerals Commission
showing dredging areas and mine workings;
a report in each financial year not later than 60 days after the end of the financial year summarizing the results of our operations in the
lease area during that financial year and the technical records, which report shall further contain a description of the proposed operations
for the following year with an estimate of the production and revenue to be obtained;
a report not later than three months after the expiration or termination of the Apapam mining lease, to the government authorities giving
an account of the geology of the lease area including the stratigraphic and structural conditions and a geological map on scale
prescribed in the Mining Regulations;
a report not less than 21 days in advance of the proposed alteration, issuance or borrowing to the government authorities (except for the
Head of the Inspectorate Division of the Minerals Commission and the Director of Ghana Geological Survey) of any proposed alteration
to our regulations,
a report not less than 21 days in advance of the proposed alteration, issuance or borrowing to the government authorities (except for
Head of the Inspectorate Division of the Minerals Commission and the Director of Ghana Geological Survey) on the particulars of any
fresh share issuance or borrowings in excess of an amount equal to the stated capital of XG Mining;
a copy of XG Mining’s annual financial reports to the Government Authorities (except for the Head of the Inspectorate Division of the
Minerals Commission and the Director of Ghana Geological Survey) including a balance sheet, profit and loss account and notes thereto
certified by a qualified accountant, who is a member of the Ghana Institute of Chartered Accountants, not later than 180 days after the
financial year end; and
such other reports and information in connection with our operations to the government authorities as they may reasonably require.
We are entitled to:
- 108 -
surrender all of our rights in respect of any part of the lease area not larger in aggregate than 20% of the lease area by providing not less
than two months’ notice to the Government of Ghana;
surrender a larger part of the lease area by providing not less than 12 months’ notice; and
terminate our interest in the Apapam mining lease if the mine can no longer be economically worked, by giving not less than nine
months’ notice to the government authorities, without prejudice to any obligation or liability incurred before such termination.
The Government of Ghana has the right to terminate our interest in the Apapam mining lease if we:
fail to make payments when due;
contravene or fail to comply with terms and conditions of the mining lease (however, we have 120 days to remedy from the notice of such
event);
become insolvent or commit an act of bankruptcy; or
submit false statements to the government authorities.
The Apapam mining lease further provides that XG Mining shall report forthwith to the government authorities if it discovers any other mineral
deposits apart from gold and silver in the lease area, who in turn will provide XG Mining with the first option to prospect further and to work the
said minerals subject to satisfactory arrangements made between XG Mining and the government authorities.
Kwabeng Project
Our Kwabeng Project is also referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus as the Kwabeng Concession and is comprised of 44.76 square
kilometers.
Location and Access
The Kwabeng concession is located in the East Akim District of the Eastern Region of Ghana, along the western, lower flank and base of the
Atewa Range, approximately 8.5 kilometers north-northwest of our Kibi project which is located on the Apapam concession. The eastern
boundary of the Kwabeng concession is demarcated by the Atewa Forest Reserve.
Access to our Kwabeng project can be gained by driving northwest from Accra on the Accra-Kumasi Trunk Road, for approximately 110
kilometers until arrival at Anyinam, making a left hand turn at the road sign that reads “Kwabeng” in the middle of the Town of Anyinam and
driving in a southwesterly direction approximately 10 kilometers until arriving at a sign reading “Xtra-Gold Mining” before reaching the town of
Kwabeng.
Historical Work
There has been very little exploration for lode source gold deposits at our Kwabeng and Pameng projects; however, there has been detailed
exploration for placer gold deposits. Our Kibi, Kwabeng and Pameng projects contain approximately 12,583,000 bank cubic meters with an
average grade of 0.568 grams of gold/bank cubic meters. In addition to the mineralized material, there is potential to define reserves with
further exploration.
The placer gold deposit currently located at our Kwabeng concession was mined by the former owner in the early 1990’s for 15 months and
produced approximately 16,800 ounces of gold before operations were ceased due to mining difficulties as noted hereunder. The placer gold
is contained in a gravel deposit distributed across the floor of the river valleys west of the Atewa Range which can easily be excavated.
- 109 -
2009 to 2011 Exploration Programs
No significant work program was carried out by our company on the Kwabeng concession during 2009 through to 2011.
Future Exploration Plans for 2012
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we have not planned for any additional exploration activities during the next 12 months,
however, we may consider doing so at a later date. A mechanized trenching and/or first pass drilling program to further evaluate the Kwabeng
Old Mine prospect on our Kwabeng project is currently under consideration for 2012.
Recovery and Sale of Placer Gold
In January 2007, we commenced an early stage pre-production mining process whereby a sample area of ore was processed, the results of
which assisted us in determining the best way and most profitable manner in which to mine the placer gold to be recovered from the
mineralized material at our Kwabeng project. The foregoing process was internally referred to by our company as a “bulk test”. We tested
32,906.70 bank cubic meters of mineralized material at our Kwabeng project that we processed through our floating placer gold washing
processing plant and recovered 608.50 ounces of placer gold. Following completion of the bulk test, our company made modifications to our
wash plant. We recovered placer gold from the mineralized material at our Kwabeng project since January 19, 2007. In October 2008, we
temporarily suspended our operations at the Kwabeng project while our management considered a more economic and efficient manner in
which to extract and process the placer gold recovered from the mineralized material at this project. As at December 31, 2011, we have sold
an aggregate of 8,814.82 ounces of placer gold recovered from the mineralized material at our Kwabeng project, however we did not conduct
any recovery of placer gold operations at this project during the fiscal year. We did not have an exclusive agreement with any company or
entity to buy the placer gold that we recovered.
Resumption of Recovery of Placer Gold Operations at our Kwabeng Project
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we have not resumed recovery of placer gold operations at our Kwabeng project. As stated
elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus, we plan to focus our efforts and our financial resources primarily on planned exploration
activities on our Kibi project (see “Kibi Project – 2012 Diamond Drilling Program”). With respect to any mineralized material at our Kwabeng
project, we plan to enter into negotiations with independent Ghanaian contract miners and operators to assume such operations at this project
on fixed payment terms to our company. Also, the gold price on August 15, 2012 (approximately $1,603 per ounce) is significantly greater
compared to the gold price during the previous mining effort by the former operator of this project (approximately $300 per ounce). On the
basis of an annual recovery of placer gold of approximately 360,000 bank cubic meters, we anticipate that recovery of placer gold operations
at this project could be sustained for 20 years, however, this will depend upon numerous factors including the grade and commercial
recoverability of the mineralized material and the selling gold price at the relevant time.
Former Ownership
In the early 1990’s, the former mining lessee invested approximately $24,000,000 to open and operate a mine at the Kwabeng concession.
The mining operation lasted for 15 months and 16,800 ounces of gold was produced before the mine was shut down due to a poor gold price,
mining methodology and a lack of funds to continue mining operations.
Resources and Reserves
No mineral resources or mineral reserves have been identified on our Kwabeng project.
- 110 -
Kwabeng Mining Lease
The Kwabeng mining lease is dated July 26, 1989 and is owned and controlled by our company, as to a 90% interest; and is registered to our
subsidiary, XG Mining, while the remaining 10% free carried interest in XG Mining is held by the Government of Ghana. The Kwabeng mining
lease covers a lease area of 44.76 square kilometers and has a 30 year term expiring on July 26, 2019. We have been granted surface and
mining rights by the Government of Ghana to work, develop and produce gold in the lease area (including processing, storing and
transportation of ore and materials). See “Kibi Project – Apapam Mining Lease” for identical mining lease terms for the Kwabeng mining lease,
except for the name of the mining lease, the lease registration particulars, the lease area and annual rental fees payable in the amount of
approximately $19 (GH¢32.80) .
The Kwabeng mining lease further provides that XG Mining shall report forthwith to the government authorities if we discover any other
minerals in the Kwabeng lease area and will provide XG Mining with the first option to prospect further and to work the said minerals subject to
satisfactory arrangements made between XG Mining and the government authorities.
Ancillary Operations
Field Camp at Kwabeng Project
Our company possesses our fully operational and well maintained field camp comprised of an administrative office, living quarters and
workshop facilities located on our Kwabeng concession which is accessible by paved road located approximately two hours drive from the
capital city of Accra. Our field camp is the base of operations for the majority of our administrative activities and all of our exploration activities.
All of our senior Ghanaian staff are accommodated in the field camp with our junior staff located in the surrounding towns and villages. XG
Mining has rehabilitated the field camp which included installation of a communication system for Internet access, electronic mail, telephone
and facsimile service and minor construction repairs. Our field camp is within cell phone coverage and is supplied with electricity from the
national power grid, which lines run along the road accessing our field camp.
Fuel and Spare Parts Supply
We deliver fuel from Accra by tanker and discharge the fuel into and store the fuel in the fuel tank facility located within our field camp. We
purchase spare parts for all of our equipment either locally or from suppliers overseas and store such parts in the secure spare parts
warehouse located at our field camp.
Workspace
There is adequate office space at our field camp to accommodate our administrative, geology, surveying, equipment maintenance and other
departments, as well as their technical support and our laborers.
Equipment Maintenance
Any maintenance of our excavators or other equipment which we may own will be carried out in the workshops located within our field camp.
Capital Expenditures
We do not anticipate any significant capital expenditures in the next 12 months in connection with recovery of placer gold operations as we
have not planned to conduct such operations during this period. As stated elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus, we plan to negotiate
with independent Ghanaian contract miners and operators to assume such operations.
Pameng Project
Our Pameng project is also referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus as the Pameng concession and is comprised of 40.51 square
kilometers.
- 111 -
The Pameng concession is located in the East Akim District of the Eastern Region of Ghana, along the western, lower flank and base of the
Atewa Range, approximately 2 kilometers west-northwest of our Kibi project which is located on the Apapam concession. Access to our
Pameng project can be gained by driving northwest from Accra on the Accra-Kumasi Trunk Road for approximately 125 kilometers until arrival
at the village of Pameng where there is a road sign reading “Pameng”. Make a left hand turn at the Pameng sign and drive southwest
approximately 2 kilometers to reach our Pameng concession. Our Pameng concession is located approximately 15 kilometers south-
southwest from our field camp.
Historical Work
To the best of our knowledge, the Pameng concession has never been subjected to modern, systematic exploration for lode gold
mineralization.
Prior Exploration by Xtra-Gold
2009 to 2011 Exploration Programs
No significant work program was carried out in 2009 through to 2011. Lode gold exploration efforts to date by our company on our Pameng
project have been limited to a few reconnaissance geology/prospecting traverses. No significant lode gold exploration work was conducted in
2011 on this project.
Future Exploration Plans for 2012
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we have not planned for any additional exploration activities during the next 12 months,
however, we may consider doing so at a later date. A first pass work program including soil geochemistry and scout trenching is currently
under consideration for 2012.
Recovery and Sale of Place Gold
During the fiscal year, we negotiated with independent Ghanaian contract miners and operators in connection with their recovery of placer
gold operations on fixed payment terms to our company.
Resources and Reserves
No mineral resources or mineral reserves have been identified on our Pameng project.
Pameng Mining Lease
The Pameng mining lease is dated July 26, 1989 and is owned and controlled by our company, as to a 90% interest; and is registered to our
subsidiary, XG Mining, while the remaining 10% free carried interest in XG Mining is held by the Government of Ghana. The Pameng mining
lease covers a lease area of 40.51 square kilometersand has a 30 year term expiring on July 26, 2019. We have been granted surface and
mining rights by the Government of Ghana to work, develop and produce gold in the lease area (including processing, storing and
transportation of ore and materials). See “Kibi Project – Apapam Mining Lease” for identical mining lease terms for the Pameng mining lease,
except for the name of the mining lease, the lease registration particulars, the lease area and annual rental fees payable in the amount of
approximately $19 (GH¢32.80) .
The Pameng mining lease further provides that XG Mining shall report forthwith to the government authorities if we discover any other
minerals in the Pameng lease area, and will provide XG Mining with the first option to prospect further and to work the said minerals subject to
satisfactory arrangements made between XG Mining and the government authorities.
Banso Project
Our Banso Project is also referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus as the Banso Concession and is comprised of 55.28 square
kilometers.
- 112 -
Location and Access
The Banso concession is located in the East Akim District of the Eastern Region of Ghana, approximately 11 kilometers south-southeast from
our field camp.
Both of the Banso concession and the Muoso concession lie in the Kibi-Winneba Gold Belt on the western flanks of the prominent Atewa
Range, which is underlain by Birimian greenstone, phyllites, meta-tuffs, epi-diorite, meta-greywacke and chert. The valleys, over which this
concession is located, are underlain by thick sequences of Birimian metasediments. The north-western end of the Atewa Range is the type-
locality for the Birimian metasediments and metavolcanics. The area where both of our Banso and Muoso projects are located is one of the
oldest placer gold mining areas of Ghana, dating back many centuries.
Access to the Banso concession is gained by driving northwest approximately 136 kilometers from Accra on the paved Accra-Kumasi Trunk
Road.
Historic Work
Historical exploration and mining has mainly focused on placer gold. Before the acquisition of our interest in the Banso concession, to the best
of our knowledge and based on mining records in Ghana, there has never been a detailed documented bedrock exploration program
conducted on this concession.
Prior Exploration by Xtra-Gold
2009 to 2011 Exploration Programs
Our Banso project is at an early stage of evaluation and no mineralized material or mineral resource or mineral reserve estimates have been
made. Before the period covered by this proxy statement/prospectus, we had completed preliminary lode gold exploration programs including
grid establishment, soil sampling, prospecting/geological mapping, pitting/trenching and geophysics, aimed at identifying lode gold (hardrock)
mineral occurrences at our Banso project, the results of which are noted hereunder.
No significant lode gold exploration work was conducted by our company in 2009 to 2011 on our Banso project, however, Buccaneer Gold
Corp. carried out exploration work during the fiscal year in preparation for the Buccaneer drill program noted hereunder.
Future Exploration Plans for 2012
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we have not planned for any additional exploration activities during the next 12 months,
however, we may consider doing so at a later date.
Exploration Activities by Buccaneer Gold Corp. in 2011 and 2012
Buccaneer Gold Corp. commenced exploration activities on this project during the fiscal year as part of the criteria to meet the required
exploration expenditures to earn the 55% interest. As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Buccaneer Gold Corp. has commenced
the Buccaneer drill program on this project and on our Muoso project. The Buccaneer drill program is designed to test several drill targets
identified on the Banso and the Muoso concessions.
Resources and Reserves
No mineral resources or mineral reserves have been identified on our Banso project.
- 113 -
Banso Mining Lease
The Banso mining lease is dated January 6, 2011 and is owned and controlled by our company, as to a 90% interest; and is registered to XG
Mining, while the remaining 10% free carried interest in XG Mining is held by the Government of Ghana. The Banso mining lease covers a
lease area of 51.67 square kilometers and has a 14 year term expiring on January 5, 2025. We have been granted surface and mining rights
by the Government of Ghana to work, develop and produce gold in the lease area (including processing, storing and transportation of ore and
materials). See “Kibi Project – Apapam Mining Lease” for identical mining lease terms for the Banso mining lease, except for the name of the
mining lease, the lease registration particulars, the lease area and annual rental fees payable in the amount of approximately $148
(GH¢260.00) .
The Banso mining lease further provides that XG Mining shall report forthwith to the government authorities if we discover any other minerals
in the Banso lease area, and will provide XG Mining with the first option to prospect further and to work the said minerals subject to satisfactory
arrangements made between XG Mining and the government authorities.
Muoso Project
Our Muoso project is also referred to in this proxy statement/prospectus as the Muoso Concessionand is comprised of 55.28 square
kilometers.
Location and Access
The Muoso concession is located in the East Akim District of the Eastern Region of Ghana, approximately 10 kilometers south-southeast from
our field camp.
Access to our Muoso project is gained by driving northwest approximately 80 kilometers from Accra on the paved Accra-Kumasi Trunk Road.
This highway passes through the easternmost portion of the Muoso concession and shares a common boundary with the Kwabeng
concession. From the town of Osino, one would drive northwest approximately 5 kilometers to the town of Anyinam, from which an all weather
direct road heads south through the centre of the Muoso concession and onto the Banso concession, approximately 15 kilometers south of the
Accra-Kumasi Trunk Road. The town of Muoso is approximately 10 kilometers from Anyinam. A number of dirt roads, trails and footpaths offer
additional access to this concession.
Historic Work
Historical exploration and mining has mainly focused on placer gold. Before the acquisition of our interest in the Muoso concession, to the
best of our knowledge and based on mining records in Ghana, there has never been a detailed documented bedrock exploration program
conducted on this concession.
Prior Exploration by Xtra-Gold
2009 to 2010 Exploration Programs
Our Muoso project is at an early stage of evaluation and no mineralized material or mineral resource or mineral reserve estimates have been
made.
2009 and 2010 Trenching Program
From December 1, 2009 to February 20, 2010, we conducted a 546 linear-meter trenching program at our Muoso project. Details of the
trenching program are noted below under “Ankaase Trench 2009-2010 Trenching Program”.
- 114 -
Ankaase Trend Auger Sampling
As a follow up to our 2006 Phase II soil geochemistry survey, a hand-auger program was implemented on the Ankaase gold-in-soil anomaly
located at the eastern extremity of the Muoso concession. The auger sampling was designed to test the geochemical signature of the gold-in-
soil anomalies at depth within the saprolite horizon to better define trenching targets. A total of 99 sites, totaling 371 linear-meters, were
augered to an average depth of approximately 3.75 meters (5 meter max.). A one meter sample was collected from the saprolite horizon at the
bottom of each hole. Auger hole spacing was typically at 25 meters, with some 12.5 meter infilling.
The anomalous threshold for the auger sample results was set at 0.10 parts per million gold based on past work experience in the Kibi Belt.
Twenty-one out of the 99 auger samples returned gold values greater than the 0.10 parts per million anomalous threshold; including four
samples over 0.5 parts per million and a maximum value of 2.46 parts per million. The auger sampling proved to be an efficient trench target
definition method.
Ankaase Trend 2009-2010 Trenching Program
The 2009-2010 trenching program encompassed 12 hand dug trenches, ranging from 30 meters to 68 meters in length and from 1.2 meters to
3.5 meters in depth, and totaling 546.0 linear meters. This trenching program commenced on December 1, 2009 and was completed on
February 20, 2010. By the end of 2009, five trenches totaling approximately 208.0 meters had been excavated and channel sampled. The
reconnaissance follow-up trenching was designed to better define the structural controls of the mineralization identified during the initial 2008
scout trenching program.
2011 Exploration Program
No significant lode gold exploration work was conducted by our company in 2011 on our Muoso project, however, Buccaneer Gold Corp.
carried out exploration work in 2011 in preparation for the Buccaneer drill program noted hereunder.
Future Exploration Plans for 2012
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, we have not planned for any additional exploration activities during the next 12 months,
however, we may consider doing so at a later date.
Exploration Activities by Buccaneer in 2011 and 2012
Buccaneer Gold Corp. commenced exploration activities on this project during the fiscal year as part of the criteria to meet the required
exploration expenditures to earn the 55% interest, including building a road in preparation for drilling and some limited trenching. As of the
date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Buccaneer Gold Corp. has commenced the Buccaneer drill program on this project and on our Banso
project. The Buccaneer drill program is designed to test several drill targets identified on the Banso and the Muoso concessions.
Buccaneer Drill Program
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Buccaneer Gold Corp. has commenced the Buccaneer drill program on this project and on our Banso project. The
Buccaneer drill program is designed to test several drill targets identified on the Banso and the Muoso concessions.
The initial drill target on the Muoso concession is a mineralized shear zone identified in trenches, over strong soil geochemical anomalies combined with geophysical
interpretations.
2012 Drill Program
The 2012 drill program was designed to test the presence of gold mineralization indicated by anomalous samples in soil and trenches in several drill targets identified on the
Muoso and Banso concessions.
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, 30 drill holes totaling 5,123.2 meters of drilling have been completed from January 3 to May 21, 2012 by Buccaneer Gold
Corp. on the Muoso and Banso concessions.
Three zones were selected; namely Muoso East, Banso South and Banso North.
Muoso East:
Banso North:
Banso South:
quartz stockwork systems hosted in diorite and hanging wall volcano-sedimentary units, typical of Kibi mineralization.
The three drill targets tested in Muoso East encountered a similar type of mineralization over 1.8 kilometer strike length.
 
gold bearing shear zone in a quartz feldspar porphyry intrusion containing disseminated sulphide and sulphide bearing
quartz veins.
 
sedimentary hosted gold mineralization in sandstone, conglomerate and phyllite units, with minor quartz veining and
pyrite stringers.
- 115 -
Kibi Gold Project - Significant Drill Intercepts
Muoso and Banso Concessions
Hole #
Including
AN12-01
AN12-02
AN12-04
 
 
 
 
AN12-05
 
 
 
AN12-06
 
AN12-07
AN12-08
AN12-09
AN12-10
AN12-11
AN12-12
AN12-13
AN12-15
AK12-18
Including
Including
Including
Including
Including
Including
From 
(m)
69.2
72.6
86.3
.3
82.3
128.3
132.3
133.3
137.3
74.5
87
89
153
40.0
46.0
5.3
66.8
18.4
30.4
41.6
67.1
124.8
192.5
53.1
64.5
64.6
71.3
100.6
116
77.7
125.7
137.7
48.3
32.5
81.4
93.4
96.4
125.8
To 
(m)
75.6
74.6
90.3
87.3
85.2
130.3
138.3
135.3
138.3
76
92
90
154
59.5
47.5
9.9
68.4
20.9
31.4
43.1
68.1
125.5
194.5
55.1
67.1
65.3
73
101.6
117.5
78.7
127.7
138.7
60.3
34.5
82.4
94.4
97.4
126.8
Interval
(m)
6.4
2
4
1
3
2
6
2
1
1.5
5
1
1
19.5
1.5
4.6
1.6
2.5
1
1.5
1
0.7
2
2
2.6
0.7
1.7
1
1.5
1
2
1
12
2
1
1
1
1
Mineralized Zone
Muoso East Z1
Muoso East Z1
Muoso East Z1
Muoso East Z1
Muoso East Z1
Muoso East Z1
Muoso East Z1
Muoso East Z1
Muoso East Z3
Muoso East Z3
Muoso East Z3
Muoso East Z3
Muoso East Z2
Banso North
g/t 
Au
0.91
1.81
1.6
2.98
2.32
1.17
2.56
3.36
3.90
1.2
1.54
3.19
2.88
1.93
7.52
2.98
1.23
6.27
3
1.53
 1.01
 0.77
 0.63
 1.05
 1.89
       1
 1.48
 8.74
 3.65
 0.54
44.76
 0.76
 1.7
 1.23
 1.22
1.31
 1.46
 2.24
AK12-19
AK12-21
AK12-22
AK12-23
AK12-24
AB12-25
AB12-27
AB28-28
Note
151.3
30.5
63.5
85.5
93.5
143.5
158.5
184.5
145
174
193
247
2.8
70
84
93
98
126
138
200
210
246
128.7
165.2
79.5
4
32.2
57.7
72.7
90.7
92.7
5
140
202
152.8
31.5
64.5
90.9
94.5
144.5
159.5
185.5
146
175
195
249
4.1
71
85
- 116 -
94
99
127
139
201
211
247
130.2
166.2
80.5
5.2
35.2
58.7
73.7
91.7
93.7
6.5
141
203
1.5
1
1
5.4
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1.3
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1.5
1
1
1.2
3
1
1
1
1
1.5
1
1
Banso North
Banso North
Banso North
Banso North
Banso North
Banso South
Banso South
Banso South
1.29
 1.6
 1.69
 3.12
 1.19
 1.11
 5.94
 3.33
 3.72
 4.33
 3.72
 3.15
 1.14
 1.46
 1.52
7.49
 4.2
1.64
29.31
1.58
27.78
3.39
0.58
1.47
0.74
1.26
0.96
1.24
5.26
1.11
2.18
1.74
30.39
2.87
The main mineralized intersections are shown above, with a cutoff grade of 0.5 g/t Au, including a maximum of five
consecutive meters of internal dilution (less than 0.5 g/t gold). No upper cut-off grade was applied. All thicknesses are
apparent thickness.
Assay results are still pending for four holes, two holes have no significant results, and two short holes, respectively lost and abandoned, are
not to be assayed.
The samples were analyzed by Fire Assay at Intertek Laboratory, in Tarkwa, Western Ghana. Buccaneer Gold Corp. has implemented a
rigorous quality assurance / quality control (QA/QC) program to ensure best practices in sampling and analysis of drill core.
This first phase of exploration drilling demonstrated the presence of multi-style mineralization in the Banso and Muoso concessions, including
the structurally controlled lode gold deposit, typical for the Kibi Gold Belt.
Exploration Program Update
Soil Geochemistry
Gold soil geochemical surveys were undertaken on selected areas.
A  total  of  2,746  soil  samples  have  been  taken  to  date  (1,866  samples  from  the  Muoso  concession  and  880  samples  from  the  Banso
concession).
The  spacing  between  samples  was  25  meters,  along  the  sampling  lines.  The  interval  between  lines  was  100  meters  on  the  Muoso
concession. The interval between lines in the Banso concession was 200 meters, in order to cover larger zones. A total of 46 kilometers of
lines were cut and marked on the soil sampling grids.
- 117 -
Trenching
Trenches were dug at four different areas in Muoso East and Banso South, to confirm soil anomalies and the orientation of the veins before
drilling was commenced. Chip samples were taken at the wall bottom of the trench. Sample length was 2 meters, or adjusted to the thickness
of specific veins. A total of 330 meters of trenches were made and 169 samples were taken.
Current Exploration Program
Buccaneer Gold Corp.’s current exploration program consists of compilation and interpretation of available data and ongoing field work,
including geological mapping, soil geochemistry, trenching and ground magnetic survey. This program is designed to define the next drilling
program that will include follow-up drilling on the known mineralization and testing of new selected exploration drill targets.
The gold mineralization encountered in Ankaase is typical for the Kibi Gold Belt and exhibits many similar features to Ghana’s main gold belt,
the Ashanti Belt. It consists of lode gold deposit, with structurally controlled mineralization.
Typical mineralization occurs in dioritic sills and in meta-volcanic host units, and is characterized by the presence of quartz-carbonate veining
and sulphide mineralization.
Resources and Reserves
No mineral resources or mineral reserves have been identified on our Muoso project.
Muoso Mining Lease
The Muoso mining lease is dated January 6, 2011 and is owned and controlled by our company, as to a 90% interest; and is registered to XG
Mining, while the remaining 10% free carried interest is held by the Government of Ghana. The Muoso mining lease covers an area of 55.28
square kilometers and has a 13 year term expiring on January 5, 2024. We have been granted surface and mining rights by the Government of
Ghana to work, develop and produce gold in the Muoso lease area (including processing, storing and transportation of ore and materials). See
“Kibi Project – Apapam Mining Lease” for identical terms for the Muoso mining lease, except for the name of the mining lease, the lease
registration particulars, the lease area and annual rental fees payable in the amount of approximately $159 (GH¢280.00) .
The Muoso mining lease further provides that XG Mining shall report forthwith to the government authorities if we discover any other minerals
in the Muoso lease area, and will provide XG Mining with the first option to prospect further and to work the said minerals subject to
satisfactory arrangements made between XG Mining and the government authorities.
- 118 -
Assignment of Interest
Edum Banso Project
We previously held an interest, from 2005 through the fiscal year, in the Edum Banso project, which is also referred to in this proxy
statement/prospectus as the Edum Banso concessionand is comprised of 20.60 square kilometers. This concession lies at the southern
extremity of the Ashanti gold belt in the Western Region of Ghana and is located approximately 235 kilometers west of Accra and 15
kilometers northwest of Takoradi, the regional capital. The north-western extremity of this concession falls within the grounds of the Banso Oil
Palm Plantation.
In October, 2005, our wholly-owned subsidiary, XGEL, entered into an option agreement with Adom Mining Limited to acquire 100% of its
right, title and interest in and to a prospecting license on the Edum Banso concession. Adom Mining Limited further granted XGEL the right to
explore, develop, mine and sell mineral products from this concession. The prospecting license was renewed by Adom Mining Limited for a
two year period expiring on July 21, 2013.
We paid $15,000 for the option agreement with additional payments of $5,000 to be paid on the anniversary date of the option agreement in
each year during its term which was extended to November 11, 2013. Further net smelter royalty payments, based on proven and probable
reserves and gold production, was also payable to Adom Mining Limited.
Assignment of Interest
During August 2011, we assigned our interest in the Edum Banso project to Norman Cay Development, Inc. for cash of $125,000 (paid in the
fiscal year), 1,000,000 shares of Norman Cay Development, Inc., valued at $260,000 on the date of issuance (issued to our company in the
fiscal year), and a final option payment of $135,000 payable in six months from the date of assignment of the option interest (paid after the
fiscal year). If Norman Cay Development, Inc. did not exercise its six-month option, the project reverted to our company. Of the payments
received, $20,000 reduced the carrying value of the Edum Banso project on the balance sheet and the balance reduced exploration spending
in the third quarter of 2011.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
Our company or any of our subsidiaries is not a party to, and our property is not the subject of, any material pending legal proceeding, other
than ordinary routine litigation incidental to our business. Our company is also not aware of any such proceeding being contemplated by a
government authority.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the consolidated financial statements and results of our operations should be read in conjunction
with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing later in this proxy statement/prospectus. Our results could differ
materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements set out herein. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences
include, but are not limited to those discussed below and as contained elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus.
Overview
We are a gold exploration company engaged in the exploration of gold properties in the Republic of Ghana, West Africa. Our mining portfolio
currently consists of 225.87 square kilometers comprised of 33.65 square kilometers for our Kibi project, 51.67 square kilometers for our
Banso project, 55.28 square kilometers for our Muoso project, 44.76 square kilometers for our Kwabeng project, and 40.51 square kilometers
for our Pameng project, or 55,873 acres, pursuant to the leased areas set forth in our respective mining leases.
- 119 -
Our strategic plan is, with respect to our mineral projects:
to focus our efforts and dedicate our financial resources toward the potential to drill out a mineral resource and, perhaps ultimately, a
mineral reserve of our Kibi project located on the Kibi Gold Belt;
to define a mineral resource and, perhaps ultimately, a mineral reserve on our other exploration projects and, in this regard, we will also
attempt to do this by optioning to other qualified exploration entities;
to enter into negotiations with independent Ghanaian contract miners and operators to assume our recovery of gold operations at our
Kwabeng project with a view to these contractors conducting recovery of placer gold operations for fixed payments to our company; and
to acquire further interests in gold mineralized projects that fall within the criteria of providing a geological basis for development of
drilling initiatives that can enhance shareholder value by demonstrating the potential to define mineral reserves.
As part of our current business strategy, we plan to continue engaging technical personnel under contract where possible as our management
believes that this strategy, at our company’s current level of development, provides the best services available in the circumstances, leads to
lower overall costs, and provides the best flexibility for our business operations. We anticipate that our ongoing efforts will continue to be
focused on the exploration and development of our projects and completing acquisitions in strategic areas.
In October 2008, we temporarily suspended our placer mining operations at our Kwabeng project while our management evaluated a more
economic and efficient manner in which to extract and process the gold from the mineralized material at this project. Our operations resumed
in 2010, which focused primarily on reclamation. As of August 16, 2012, operations at our Kwabeng project have not resumed. During the next
12 months, we plan to:
enter into negotiations to contract out the recovery of placer gold operations at this project, as noted above;
advance the development of our Kibi project by carrying out our 2012 drill program; and
acquire further interests in mineral projects by way of acquisition or joint venture participation.
We anticipate that, during 2012, we will spend an aggregate of approximately $6,000,000 comprised of $5,000,000 for exploration expenses
in connection with our 2012 drill program of our Kibi project located on the Kibi Gold Belt to identify a potential mineral resource and
approximately $1,000,000 for general and administrative expenses, which excludes approximately $500,000 in non-cash expenses.
Our company has historically relied on equity and debt financings to finance its ongoing operations. Existing working capital, possible debt
instruments, anticipated warrant exercises, further private placements and anticipated cash flow are expected to be adequate to fund our
company’s operations over the next year. During and after 2012, we require additional capital to implement our plan of operations. We
anticipate that these funds primarily will be raised through equity and debt financing or from other available sources of financing. If we raise
additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, it may result in the dilution in the equity ownership of investors in
our common stock. There can be no assurance that additional financing will be available upon acceptable terms, if at all. If adequate funds are
not available or are not available on acceptable terms, we may be unable to take advantage of prospective new opportunities or acquisitions,
which could significantly and materially restrict our operations, or we may be forced to discontinue our current projects.
Trends
In 2011, many commodity and stock market indices continued to experience historically high levels of volatility in the face of the global
economic uncertainty.
During 2011, the U.S. dollar was generally in decline, primarily from concerns about the level of U.S. government borrowings and the growing
U.S. deficit and from the low interest rates offered on U.S. dollar deposits. The EURO also weakened against the Canadian dollar as a result
of low interest rates, concerns about the solvency of certain European economies and the level of sovereign debt in those countries. During
the six months ended June 30, 2012, the U.S. dollar strengthened against the Ghanaian Cedi and stayed roughly even against the Canadian
dollar.
- 120 -
Gold price volatility in 2011 remained high with the price reaching a high of U.S.$1,895 per ounce. During the second quarter of 2012, the gold
price continued to increase and to be volatile, reaching a high of $1,677.50 per ounce on April 2, 2012 during the June 2012 quarter. The
average market price for the second quarter of 2012 was $1,610.76 per ounce and for the second quarter of 2011 was U.S.$1,543.00 per
ounce. The tone for the precious metals market in the near future will depend on whether the U.S. dollar will be supported, and if the central
banks will continue to maintain interest rates at low levels to support economic growth. The continued global easing of monetary policy could
lead to higher inflation and further U.S. dollar depreciation in the coming years. This dollar depreciation could have a positive impact on gold
prices in the future and the long–term upward trend in prices may continue. Conversely, subdued inflation rates and the recovering global
economy could put downward pressure on the gold price in the future. Additionally, recent events in Europe could continue to have a positive
effect on the gold price.
Overall, a lower U.S. dollar should lead to higher costs in U.S. dollar terms to identify and explore for gold but could be more than offset by
higher gold prices, resulting in greater interest in gold exploration companies. Conversely, if the U.S. dollar strengthens, interest in the gold
exploration sector could be reduced.
Results of Operations
Three months ended June 30, 2012 as compared to the three months ended June 30, 2011.
Highlights
During the quarter, we announced results from our 2012 drill program on our Kibi project, including:
25 meters at 1.96 g/t gold (April 4)
12 meters at 10.32 g/t gold (April 24)
50.5 meters at 2.03 g/t gold (June 19)
Used $1,628,296 cash in the quarter
Cash of $1,517,683 at June 30, 2012
Our company’s loss for the three months ended June 30, 2012 was $2,804,931 as compared to a net loss of $1,423,584 for the three months
ended June 30, 2011, an increase of $1,381,347.
Our company’s basic and diluted loss per share for the three months ended June 30, 2012 was $0.06 compared to a net loss of $0.03 per
share for the three months ended June 30, 2011. The weighted average number of shares outstanding was 44,658,703 for the three months
ended June 30, 2012 compared to 43,668,909 for the three months ended June 30, 2011. The increase in the weighted average number of
shares outstanding can be attributed to the exercise of warrants in the second half of 2011 and of stock options in the first quarter of 2012,
partly offset by our repurchase and cancellation of 4,500 shares of common stock pursuant to our normal course issuer bid.
We incurred expenses of $2,351,173 in the three months ended June 30, 2012 as compared to $1,493,374 in the three months ended June
30, 2011, an increase of $857,799. The increase in expenses in the three months ended June 30, 2012 can be primarily attributed to an
increase of $528,993 in exploration costs to $1,651,464 as compared to $1,122,471 for the three months ended June 30, 2011 resulting from
drilling and other exploration activities conducted at our Kibi project. All exploration costs for the three months ended June 30, 2012 were
booked as exploration expenses.
General and administrative expenses (“G&A”) were $623,505 for the three months ended June 30, 2012, as compared to $321,739 for the
three months ended June 30, 2011, included consulting fees, stock-based compensation, legal, auditor and regulatory filing fees, travel and
promotional expenses. The increase mostly resulted from a non-cash charge of $315,194 as the term to maturity of certain stock options was
extended. Other G&A expenses were in line with the previous year. The remaining $65,644 non-cash charge for stock-based compensation in
the three months ended June 30, 2012 was in line with the $78,111 in the three months ended June 30, 2011, represented the expense with
respect to stock options vested during the period.
- 121 -
Amortization for the three months ended June 30, 2012 was $76,204 as compared to $49,164 for the three months ended June 30, 2011, an
increase of $27,040, due to equipment additions in 2011.
Exploration results during the quarter were primarily focused on our Kibi project including drilling of 4,444 meters and trenching of 1,352
meters, while 7,883 drill assays and 758 trenching assays were received from the lab.
Other items totaled a loss of $625,824 for the three months ended June 30, 2012 compared to a loss of $45,345 for the three months
ended June 30, 2011. During the three months ended June 30, 2012, our company had a foreign exchange loss of $185,167
compared to a loss of $271,641 in the three months ended June 30, 2011 which loss can be attributed to currency fluctuations. There
was no recovery of gold during the three months ended June 30, 2012 as compared to $260,904 for the three months ended June 30,
2011 as efforts in the 2012 quarter were focused on land remediation rather than production. Our company’s portfolio of marketable
securities had an unrealized loss of $466,565 in the three months ended June 30, 2012 compared to an unrealized loss of $47,481 in
the three months ended June 30, 2011 which loss can be attributed to extreme volatility in the public equity markets this reporting
period. Our company had a realized loss of $26,962 in the three month period ended June 30, 2012 from the sale of trading securities
as compared to no sales of trading securities in the three months ended June 30, 2011. Other income, primarily derived from
dividends and interest earned and other miscellaneous items, reported a gain of $54,572 in the three months ended June 30, 2012 as
compared to a gain of $12,873 in the three months ended June 30, 2011.
During the three months ended June 30, 2012, no placer gold operations were conducted. These placer gold operations have been
contracted to local Ghanaian groups which pay a portion of their gold receipts to us for the right to work on our projects. We pay all
government royalties due on all of the production. This method promotes the local economy while avoiding illegal workings on our
projects.
Six months ended June 30, 2012 compared to the six months ended June 30, 2011
Our company’s loss for the six months ended June 30, 2012 was $4,456,814 as compared to a net loss of $1,855,046 for the six
months ended June 30, 2011, an increase of $2,601,768. Increased exploration spending and a significant G&A non-cash expense
related to a change in terms of stock options was partly offset by options receipts from the transfer of exploration rights. Gold
recovery was significantly reduced in the first half of 2012 compared to the first half of 2011 as operations were halted in 2012. A gain
on sale of equipment was recorded in 2011.
Our company’s basic and diluted loss per share for the six months ended June 30, 2012 was $0.10 compared to net loss of $0.04 per
share for the six months ended June 30, 2011. The weighted average number of shares outstanding was 44,663,002 at June 30, 2012
compared to 43,322,266 for the six months ended June 30, 2011. The increase in the weighted average number of shares
outstanding can be mostly attributed to the issuance of shares in connection with the conversion of warrants and the exercise of
stock options during the period.
Exploration spending for the six months ended June 30, 2012 was $3,845,765 as compared to $2,691,449 for the six months ended
June 30, 2011, an increase of $1,154,316. Exploration work was focused primarily on our Kibi project in the six-month period. We
drilled 12,984 meters and trenched 1,749 meters.
General and administrative expenses for the six months ended June 30, 2012 were $817,449 as compared to $577,084 for the six
months ended June 30, 2011, an increase of $240,365. Most of the 2012 expense reflects a non-cash stock-based compensation
charge of $421,491 (6 months to 2011 - $99,422). Consulting and director fees were $110,753, while legal expenses were $87,373. The
balance of the general and administrative expense of $197,882 related to rental and office expense, auditor, regulatory and
marketing fees.
- 122 -
Amortization for the six months ended June 30, 2012 was $128,530 as compared to $79,566 for the six months ended June 30, 2011,
an increase of $48,964. We purchased equipment at a cost of $946,956 in 2011 ($nil in 2012), which increased the comparative
expense in 2012.
During the six months ended June 30, 2012, we received 72 ounces of gold from our share of the placer gold operations, all in the
first quarter. These placer gold operations have been contracted to local Ghanaian groups which pay a portion of their gold receipts
to us for the right to work on our projects. We pay all government royalties due on all of the production. This method promotes the
local economy while avoiding illegal workings on our projects. Our gold receipts, after royalties, generated a profit of $70,557.
Unrealized investment portfolio losses for the six months ended June 30, 2011 were $229,907 as compared to an unrealized loss of
$66,990 for the six months ended June 30, 2011, an increase of $162,917. Most of the unrealized loss in 2012 related to a mark-to-
market valuation of shares received from property options negotiated with other parties.
Year ended December 31, 2011 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2010
Highlights
Kibi project
On February 21, 2011, we announced 58 meters at 2.46 g/t gold.
In May 2011, we announced 52 meters at 2.42 g/t gold (May 31), 50 meters at 1.62 g/t gold (May 31) and 42 meters at 2.39 g/t gold
(May 17).
In August 2011, we announced 38 meters at 2.62 g/t gold, 16 meters at 2.25 g/t gold, 32 meters at 2.41 g/t gold and 16 meters at
4.88 g/t gold.
In November 2011, we announced 62 meters at 1.57 g/t gold, 42 meters at 2.00 g/t gold and 41 meters at 1.62 g/t gold.
In December 2011, we announced 17 meters at 5.47 g/t gold and 24.5 meters at 3.43 g/t gold.
In October 2011, we announced positive initial metallurgical results with a 97% gold recovery.
Banso and Muoso projects
We completed an agreement with Buccaneer Gold Corp. for its exploration of our Banso and Muoso projects while our
company maintains a 45% interest in these projects.
Edum Banso project
We completed an assignment of our interest in the Edum Banso project with Norman Cay Development, Inc. in September 2011
for:
$125,000 cash;
1,000,000 Norman Cay Development, Inc. shares; and
a six-month option payment for $135,000 (received after December 31, 2011).
Our company’s loss for the year ended December 31, 2011 was $5,794,927 as compared to a loss of $2,976,645 for the year ended
December 31, 2010, an increased loss of $2,818,282. Increased exploration spending over a full year of operations was partly offset
by gold recovery and a gain on disposition of equipment, especially in the first quarter of 2011. Gold recovery was reduced in the
balance of 2011. The investment portfolio posted an unrealized gain from shares held and a small gain from the sale of other shares.
Our company recognized value in optioning non-strategic properties in Ghana during 2011.
Our company’s basic and diluted loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2011 was $0.12 compared to net loss of $0.09 per
share for the year ended December 31, 2010. The weighted average number of shares outstanding was 43,815,678 for the year
ended December 31, 2011 compared to 35,160,827 for the year ended December 31, 2010. The increase in the weighted average
number of shares outstanding can be mostly attributed to the issuance of 8,092,593 shares in the November 2010 placement and the
issuance of 1,608,038 shares in connection with the conversion of warrants and finders’ warrants during 2011.
- 123 -
We incurred expenses of $7,713,627 in the year ended December 31, 2011 as compared to $4,463,116 in the year ended December
31, 2010, an increase of $3,250,511. The increase in expenses in the year ended December 31, 2011 can be primarily attributed to an
increase of $3,472,705 in exploration costs to $6,465,637 (2010 - $2,992,932) resulting from drilling and other exploration activities
conducted at our Kibi project. All exploration costs for the year ended December 31, 2011 were booked as exploration expenses.
General and administrative expenses of $1,278,577 for the year ended December 31, 2011, as compared to $1,355,399 for the year
ended December 31, 2010, can be primarily attributed to the legal, regulatory and marketing costs associated with the TSX listing of
our company’s shares. Stock-based compensation, a non-cash component of general and administrative expenses, was of $361,239
in 2011 (2010 - $411,507), representing the expense with respect to stock options vested during the period. Other general and
administrative costs included consulting fees, legal, auditor and regulatory filing fees, travel and promotional expenses.
Amortization for the year ended December 31, 2011 was $284,413 as compared to $114,785 for the year ended December 31, 2010,
an increase of $169,628. We added two excavators, two bulldozers, a flatbed trailer for transporting equipment between exploration
sites, two vehicles, and purchased a 50% interest in an additional excavator and bulldozer, at a purchase cost of $946,956 to the
assets, which increased the comparative amortization expense in 2011. During the final quarter of 2011, we sold a 50% interest in an
excavator and a bulldozer to another company. Costs and usage is shared.
Exploration work was focused primarily on our Kibi project in the year ended December 31, 2011. Exploration spending in 2011
reflected the funds available from our initial public offering completed in November 2010 while spending in 2010 reflected
conservation of cash available at that time.
Exploration results from the 2011 year included drilling of 21,877 meters, and 18,853 drill assays received from the lab. Other items
totaled a gain of $1,918,700 for the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to a gain of $1,486,471 for the year ended December 31,
2010. During the year ended December 31, 2011, our company had a foreign exchange gain of $16,028 compared to a gain of
$179,124 in the year ended December 31, 2010 which can be attributed to a stronger U.S. dollar in 2011. Gold recovery during the
year ended December 31, 2011 was $1,316,330 as compared to $1,227,394 for the year ended December 31, 2010. Gold recovery
efforts in the final three quarters of 2011 were focused on land remediation rather than production while the 2010 results reflected a
startup of gold recovery efforts in the third quarter of 2010. Our company’s portfolio of marketable securities had an unrealized gain
of $212,073 in the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to an unrealized loss of $98,290 in the year ended December 31, 2010.
Our company recognized a $60,317 realized gain on sale of securities in the year ended December 31, 2011 compared to a gain of
$170,422 from the sale of securities in the year ended December 31, 2010. Other income, primarily derived from interest earned and
other miscellaneous items, reported a gain of $53,894 in the year ended December 31, 2011 as compared to a gain of $34,104 in 2010.
During the year ended December 31, 2011, we sold a placer gold recovery plant with book value of $27,942 for $288,000 for a net gain
of $260,058. Our decision to use local Ghanaian contractors for placer gold operations made the plant a non-core asset to us. Most
of the cash received was used to purchase a bulldozer and excavator which we will use in our continuing exploration efforts.
During the year ended December 31, 2011, we received 1,375 ounces of gold from our share of the placer gold operations. These
placer gold operations have been contracted to local Ghanaian groups which pay a portion of their gold receipts to us for the right to
work on our projects. We pay all government royalties due on all of the production. This method promotes the local economy while
avoiding illegal workings on our projects.
During the first half of 2011, our company granted Buccaneer Gold Corp. the option to earn a 55% interest in our minerals rights of
our Banso and Muoso projects on completion of certain commitments and cash payments totaling $5,000,000 over a five-year
period. The value of the cash option payments ($425,000) and shares ($411,440) received to date reduced the carrying value of the
mineral properties on the December 31, 2011 balance sheet and a further $300,000 cash payment reduced our exploration spending
during 2011. Also during 2011, we assigned our interest in the Edum Banso project to Norman Cay Development, Inc. and reduced
the carrying value of the mineral properties on the balance sheet by $20,000 for cash and recognized the remaining $340,000 for
cash and shares received in the income statement as options received in excess of property value. Our company paid a $25,000 fee
to a broker who provided an introduction to Norman Cay Development, Inc. After December 31, 2011, Norman Cay Development, Inc.
remitted the final option payment of US$135,000 for our Edum Banso project, completing the requirements for transfer of our interest
in this project to Norman Cay Development, Inc.
- 124 -
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our activities, principally the exploration and acquisition of properties for gold and other metals, may be financed through joint
ventures or through the completion of equity transactions such as equity offerings and the exercise of stock options and warrants.
In November 2010, our company issued 8,092,593 shares of common stock for proceeds of $10.8 million and 566,482 broker
warrants in conjunction with our initial public offering.
At June 30, 2012, accounts payable and accrued liabilities decreased to $524,768 (December 31, 2011 - $745,860), due to general
business payables. Our cash and cash equivalents as at June 30, 2012 were sufficient to pay these liabilities.
At June 30, 2012, we had total cash of $1,517,683 (December 31, 2011 - $4,498,753). Working capital as of June 30, 2012 was
$2,459,936 (December 31, 2011 - $6,629,046).
The decrease in cash mostly reflects exploration and administrative spending. During the June 2012 quarter, our company sold
$939,832 in tradeable securities, including $509,656 of interest-bearing debt instruments.
During the six months ended June 30, 2012, we received a final payment of $135,000 from Norman Cay Development, Inc. for
assignment of our interest in the Edum Banso project and $110,000 for the exercise of 110,000 stock options by a consultant of our
company.
As we do not have operating revenues; we must utilize our current cash reserves, income from placer gold sales, income from
investments, funds obtained from the exercise of stock options and warrants and other financing transactions to meet our planned
exploration programs or to fund any further development activities. There is no certainty that future financing will be available to us
in the amounts or at the times desired on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
Our shares of common stock, warrants and stock options outstanding as at September 26, 2012, March 31, 2012, and December 31,
2011 were as follows:
Shares of common stock
Warrants
Stock Options
Fully diluted
September 26, 2012 March 31, 2012 December 31, 2011
44,569,217
566,482
2,067,000
47,202,699
44,679,217
566,482
1,957,000
47,202,699
44,610,917
566,482
1,957,000
47,134,399
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, the exercise of all outstanding warrants and options would raise approximately
$2.9 million, however such exercise is not anticipated until the market value of our shares of common stock increases in value.
We remain debt free and our credit and interest rate risk is limited to interest-bearing assets of cash and bank or government
guaranteed investment vehicles. Accounts payable and accrued liabilities are short-term and non-interest bearing.
Our liquidity risk with financial instruments is minimal as excess cash is invested with a Canadian financial institution in government-
backed securities or bank-backed guaranteed investment certificates.
Our fiscal 2012 budget to carry out our plan of operations is approximately $6.0 million as disclosed under the heading “Description
of Business”. These expenditures are subject to change if management decides to scale back or accelerate operations.
- 125 -
We expect to be adequately capitalized to fund ongoing operations at the current level in the short-term for fiscal 2012. As is typical
for junior exploration companies, we will require additional funds from equity sources to maintain the current momentum on our
projects.
Material Commitments
Mineral Property Commitments
Our company is committed to expend, from time to time fees payable:
to the Minerals Commission for:
an extension of an expiry date of a prospecting license (currently $15,000 for each occurrence);
a grant of a mining lease (currently $35,000);
an extension of a mining lease (currently $100,000);
annual operating permits; and
the conversion of a reconnaissance license to a prospecting license (currently $20,000);
to the Environmental Protection Agency of Ghana for:
processing and certificate fees with respect to EPA permits;
the issuance of permits before the commencement of any work at a particular concession; or
the posting of a bond in connection with any mining operations undertaken by our company; and
for a legal obligation associated with our mineral properties for clean up costs when work programs are completed, we are
committed to expend
an aggregate of less than $500 in connection with annual ground rent and mining permits to enter upon and gain access to the
area covered by our mining leases and future reconnaissance and prospecting licenses for our following concessions and
such other financial commitments arising out of any approved exploration programs in connection therewith:
the Apapam concession (Kibi project);
the Kwabeng concession (Kwabeng project);
the Pameng concession (Pameng project);
the Banso concession (Banso project); and
the Muoso concession (Muoso project).
Upon and following the commencement of gold production at any of our projects, a royalty of the net smelter returns is payable
quarterly to the Government of Ghana as prescribed by legislation.
Purchase of Significant Equipment
We consider the availability of equipment to conduct our exploration activities. Due to demand from the mining and exploration
industry, at this time it is difficult to source resources for exploration work in Ghana, including drills, excavators and bulldozers. We
will consider the further acquisition of equipment pieces to allow work to expand on our projects.
- 126 -
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our company has no off balance sheet arrangements.
Significant Accounting Applications
As of June 30, 2012, there was no change in significant accounting policies from those used in the December 31, 2011 audited
financial statements, unless noted below in this section.
Generally accepted accounting principles
The unaudited financial statements for the three and six months ended June 30, 2012 have been prepared by our company in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America applicable to interim financial information
and with the rules and regulations of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. Accordingly, certain information and
note disclosures normally included in financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles
have been condensed, or omitted, pursuant to such rules and regulations. In the opinion of management, the unaudited interim
financial statements include all adjustments necessary for the fair presentation of the results of the interim periods presented. All
adjustments are of a normal recurring nature, except as otherwise noted below. These financial statements should be read in
conjunction with our company’s audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto for the year ended December 31, 2011,
included in this proxy statement/prospectus. The results of operations for the interim periods are not necessarily indicative of the
results of operations for any other interim period or for a full fiscal year.
Cash and cash equivalents
Our company considers highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. At June 30,
2012 and December 31, 2011, cash and cash equivalents consisted of cash held at financial institutions and highly liquid
investments with original maturities of less than three months.
Loss per share
Basic loss per common share is computed using the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the year. To
calculate diluted loss per share, our company uses the treasury stock method and the if converted method. As of June 30, 2012,
there were 566,482 warrants (December 31, 2011 – 566,482) and 1,957,000 stock options (December 31, 2011 – 2,067,000) exercisable
into common shares, none of which have not been included in the weighted average number of common shares outstanding as
these were anti-dilutive.
Fair value of financial assets and liabilities
Our company measures the fair value of financial assets and liabilities based on GAAP guidance which defines fair value,
establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. Effective January 1,
2008, our company adopted the provisions for financial assets and liabilities, as well as for any other assets and liabilities that are
carried at fair value on a recurring basis. Effective January 1, 2009, our company adopted the provisions for non-financial assets and
liabilities that are required to be measured at fair value.
Our company classifies financial assets and liabilities as held-for-trading, available-for-sale, held-to-maturity, loans and receivables
or other financial liabilities depending on their nature. Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognized at fair value on their
initial recognition, except for those arising from certain related party transactions which are accounted for at the transferor’s
carrying amount or exchange amount.
Financial assets and liabilities classified as held-for-trading are measured at fair value, with gains and losses recognized in net
income. Financial assets classified as held-to-maturity, loans and receivables, and financial liabilities other than those classified as
held-for-trading are measured at amortized cost, using the effective interest method of amortization. Financial assets classified as
available-for-sale are measured at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses being recognized as other comprehensive income
until realized, or if an unrealized loss is considered other than temporary, the unrealized loss is recorded in income.
- 127 -
Financial instruments, including due from related party, receivables, accounts payable and accrued liabilities are carried at cost,
which management believes approximates fair value due to the short term nature of these instruments. Cash and cash equivalents,
Investments in trading securities and restricted cash are classified as held for trading, with unrealized gains and losses being
recognized in income.
The following table presents information about the assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of June 30, 2012,
and indicates the fair value hierarchy of the valuation techniques our company utilized to determine such fair value. In general, fair
values determined by Level 1 inputs utilize quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets. Fair values determined
by Level 2 inputs utilize data points that are observable such as quoted prices, interest rates and yield curves. Fair values
determined by Level 3 inputs are unobservable data points for the asset or liability, and included situations where there is little, if
any, market activity for the asset:
Assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
Restricted cash
Trading securities
Total
in Active
Markets
(Level 1)
June 30, 2012  
 
   
   
 
$
 
 
$
Quoted Prices  
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 1,517,683  $
 
220,961 
1,321,989 
 
 3,060,633  $
Other
Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant
 
 
 
  Observable  
 
 
 
   
   
 1,517,683  $
 
220,961 
1,321,989 
 
 3,060,633  $
Significant
 
  Unobservable 
 
 
 
   
   
 —  $
 
— 
— 
 
 —  $
— 
— 
— 
 —
Inputs
(Level 3)
The fair values of cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and investments are determined through market, observable and
corroborated sources.
Concentration of credit risk
The financial instrument which potentially subjects our company to concentration of credit risk is cash. Our company maintains
cash in bank accounts that, at times, may exceed federally insured limits. As of June 30, 2012 and December 31, 2011, our company
has exceeded the federally insured limit. Our company has not experienced any losses in such accounts and believes it is not
exposed to any significant risks on its cash in bank accounts.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
Fair Value Accounting
In May 2011, the ASC guidance was issued related to disclosures around fair value accounting. The updated guidance clarifies
different components of fair value accounting including the application of the highest and best use and valuation premise concepts,
measuring the fair value of an instrument classified in a reporting entity’s shareholders’ equity and disclosing quantitative
information about the unobservable inputs used in fair value measurements that are categorized in Level 3 of the fair value
hierarchy. The update is effective for our company’s fiscal year beginning January 1, 2012. Our company’s January 1, 2012 adoption
of the updated guidance had no impact on our company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
MARKET FOR COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Market information
Our common stock has traded on the TSX under the trading symbol “XTG” since November 23, 2010, following the completion of
our initial public offering in Canada. Bid and ask prices for our common stock are quoted from broker dealers on the OTC Bulletin
Board under the symbol “XTGR”.
- 128 -
The following table sets forth the range of high and low bid prices for our common stock on the TSX and OTC Bulletin Board for
each full quarterly period within the two most recent fiscal years and any subsequent interim period for which financial statements
are included, or are required to be included by Article 3 of Regulation S-X. The quotations reflect inter-dealer prices and do not
include mark-ups or mark-downs or commissions and do not represent actual transactions.
PERIOD
April 1, 2012 through June 30, 2012
January 1, 2012 through March 31, 2012
October 1, 2011 through December 31, 2011
July 1, 2011 through September 30, 2011
April 1, 2011 through June 30, 2011
January 1, 2011 through March 31, 2011
October 1, 2010 through December 31, 2010 (1)
July 1, 2010 through September 30, 2010
April 1, 2010 through June 30, 2010
January 1, 2010 through March 31, 2010
TSX
HIGH BID
LOW BID
OTC BULLETIN BOARD
HIGH BID
LOW BID
CAD$
$1.37
$1.50
$1.76
$1.84
$2.11
$2.35
$2.55
N/A
N/A
N/A
CAD$
$1.01
$1.23
$1.34
$1.60
$1.64
$1.70
$1.90
N/A
N/A
N/A
US$
$1.41
$1.49
$1.71
$2.04
$2.20
$2.37
$2.51
$1.70
$1.26
$1.28
US$
$1.01
$1.21
$1.30
$1.63
$1.65
$1.58
$1.50
$1.10
$0.97
$0.91
(1)
Shares of our common stock commenced trading on the TSX on November 23, 2010.
The last reported closing price of our common stock on the TSX on September 25, 2012 was CAD$0.90 (USD$0.92) and the last
reported sales price of our common stock on OTC Bulletin Board on September 25, 2012 was $0.90.
Holders
As of September 26, 2012, we have 137 stockholders of record holding 44,610,917 issued and outstanding shares of our common
stock having a par value of $0.001 per share.
Dividends
We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on shares of our common stock. We intend to retain future earnings, if any, to
finance the expansion of our business, and we do not anticipate that any cash dividends will be paid in the foreseeable future. Any
future determination to pay dividends will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend on our earnings, capital
requirements, expansion plans, financial condition and other relevant factors. Our retained earnings deficit currently limits our ability
to pay dividends.
Penny Stock
Our common stock is considered a “penny stock” under the rules of the SEC under the Exchange Act. The SEC has adopted rules
that regulate broker-dealer practices in connection with transactions in penny stocks. Penny stocks are generally equity securities
with a price of less than $5.00, other than securities registered on certain national securities exchanges, provided that current price
and volume information with respect to transactions in such securities is provided by the exchange or quotation system. The penny
stock rules require a broker-dealer, before a transaction in a penny stock, to deliver a standardized risk disclosure document
prepared by the SEC, that:
contains a description of the nature and level of risk in the market for penny stocks in both public offerings and secondary
trading;
contains a description of the broker’s or dealer’s duties to the customer and of the rights and remedies available to the
customer with respect to a violation to such duties or other requirements of securities laws;
- 129 -
contains a brief, clear, narrative description of a dealer market, including bid and ask prices for penny stocks and the
significance of the spread between the bid and ask price;
contains a toll-free telephone number for inquiries on disciplinary actions;
defines significant terms in the disclosure document or in the conduct of trading in penny stocks; and
contains such other information and is in such form, including language, type, size and format, as the SEC shall require by rule
or regulation.
The broker-dealer also must provide, before effecting any transaction in a penny stock, the customer with:
bid and offer quotations for the penny stock;
the compensation of the broker-dealer and its salesperson in the transaction;
the number of shares to which such bid and ask prices apply, or other comparable information relating to the depth and
liquidity of the market for such stock; and
a monthly account statements showing the market value of each penny stock held in the customer’s account.
In addition, the penny stock rules require that before a transaction in a penny stock not otherwise exempt from those rules; the
broker-dealer must make a special written determination that the penny stock is a suitable investment for the purchaser and receive
the purchaser’s written acknowledgement of the receipt of a risk disclosure statement, a written agreement to transactions involving
penny stocks, and a signed and dated copy of a suitably written statement.
These disclosure requirements may have the effect of reducing the trading activity in the secondary market for shares of our
common stock if it becomes subject to these penny stock rules. Therefore, if our shares of common stock becomes subject to the
penny stock rules, stockholders may have difficulty selling those securities.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
The following table sets forth information relating to our outstanding equity compensation plans as of December 31, 2011:
Equity compensation plans approved by securityholders (1)(2)
Equity compensation plans not approved by securityholders
Total
Number of Securities
to be Issued Upon
Weighted-Average 
Exercise Price of
Exercise of
Outstanding
Number of Securities
Remaining Available for 
Future Issuance Under 
Equity Compensation
Plans [excluding
Outstanding Options, 
Warrants and Rights
(A)
2,067,000
None
               2,067,000 (3)
- 130 -
Options, Warrants
Securities Reflected in
and Rights
(B)
Column (A)]
(C)
US$1.07
N/A
2,299,117
N/A
2,299,117
(1)
(2)
(3)
All stock options granted before the date of this proxy statement/prospectus are subject to the terms and conditions of our 2011 Stock
Option Plan.
 
As of December 31, 2011, 100,000 stock options were exercised under our company’s former 2005 Equity Incentive Compensation
Plan by a former consultant of our company.
 
Representing approximately 4.7% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock as at December 31, 2011.
In July 2011, we adopted our 2011 Stock Option Plan. At the time of adoption of our 2011 Plan:
the 1,989,000 options outstanding under our former 2005 Equity Incentive Compensation Plan were converted into options
under our 2011 Stock Option Plan, and
the 2005 Equity Incentive Compensation Plan was terminated.
A description of our 2011 Stock Option Plan is contained in this proxy statement/prospectus under “Executive Compensation -
Stock Option Plan”.
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS, PROMOTERS AND CONTROL PERSONS
Directors and Executive Officers
The following individuals serve as our executive officers and members of our Board of Directors and will continue in these positions
following the Continuation:
Name
Paul Zyla
John C. Ross
Richard W. Grayston
Peter Minuk
Yves Pierre Clement
Victor Nkansa
Robert J. Casaceli
James H. Schweitzer
Age
68
54
68
47
48
54
64
74
Position
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
Chief Financial Officer
Chairman of the Board and Director
Secretary and Treasurer and Director
Vice-President, Exploration
Vice-President, Ghana Operations
Director
Director
Paul Norman Zyla 
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
Mr. Zyla was appointed President and Chief Executive Officer of our company in May 2010 and has been a director of our company
since January 2010. He formerly served as our President, Chief Executive Officer, Secretary and Treasurer and a director from
November 2003 to August 2005. Mr. Zyla has over 26 years of resource-based public company experience. Since September 1993 to
the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Mr. Zyla has been a self-employed consultant to the mining industry.
Mr. Zyla graduated from the University of Toronto with a Bachelor of Science degree in 1966.
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Mr. Zyla devotes approximately 60% of his time in consulting services to our
company on a month-to-month basis (see “Management Consulting Agreements - Management Consulting Agreement with
President and Chief Executive Officer”). He provides 40% of his time to unrelated companies. Mr. Zyla has not entered into a non-
competition and non-disclosure agreement with our company.
During the prior five years, Mr. Zyla has been an officer and/or director of the following public companies:
- 131 -
Name of Company
Buccaneer Gold Corp. (1)
NV Gold Corporation (2)
Position(s) Held
President, Secretary-Treasurer and Director November 2009 to present
Director
October 2011 to present
Term of Office
(1)
(2)
Buccaneer Gold Corp. (formerly Verbina Resources Inc.) is mineral exploration TSXV listed issuer.
NV Gold Corporation is mineral exploration TSXV listed issuer.
John C. Ross 
Chief Financial Officer
Mr. Ross was appointed Chief Financial Officer of our company in July 2010. Mr. Ross has been involved with resource-based
companies for over 20 years in various roles and capacities. Over the last three years, Mr. Ross has served as Chief Financial
Officer, on a part time basis, to U308 Corp., Tri Origin Exploration Ltd., Colossus Minerals Inc., Cronus Resources Ltd., and
SonnenEnergy Corp.
Mr. Ross obtained his Chartered Accountant designation from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Ontario in 1987, an M.B.A.
from the University of Western Ontario and a B.A. in Economics and Mathematics from the University of Western Ontario.
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Mr. Ross devotes approximately 20% of his time in consulting services to our
company pursuant to a management consulting agreement (see “Management Consulting Agreements - Management Consulting
Agreement with Chief Financial Officer”). He provides 80% of his time to unrelated companies. Mr. Ross has not entered into a non-
competition and non-disclosure agreement with our company.
During the prior five years, Mr. Ross has been an officer and/or director of the following public companies:
Name of Company
U308 Corp.(1)
Tri Origin Exploration Ltd. (2)
Colossus Minerals Inc. (3)
Continental Gold Limited (4)
SonnenEnergy Corp. (5)
Southampton Ventures Inc. (6)
Position(s) Held
Chief Financial Officer
Chief Financial Officer
Chief Financial Officer
Chief Financial Officer
Chief Financial Officer
Chief Financial Officer
Term of Office
June 2010 to present
January 2010 to January 2011
January 2007 to September 2009
September 2007 to March 2010
December 2007 to September 2008
June 2005 to June 2009
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
U308 Corp. is mineral exploration TSXV listed issuer.
Tri Origin Exploration Ltd. is mineral exploration TSXV listed issuer.
Continental Gold Limited (formerly Colossus Minerals Inc.). is mineral exploration TSX listed issuer.
Continental Gold Limited (formerly Cronus Resources Inc. which amalgamated with Continental Gold Limited in March 2010) is an
advance-stage gold exploration TSX listed issuer.
SonnenEnergy Corp. is a solar and photovoltaic systems TSXV listed issuer.
Quetzel Energy Ltd. (formerly Southampton Ventures Inc. which was acquired by Quetzal Energy Ltd. in June 2009) is an oil and gas
TSXV listed issuer.
Richard Walter Grayston 
Chairman and Director
Mr. Grayston was appointed as Chairman and a director of our company in March 2007. Since 1985, Mr. Grayston has been a self-
employed business consultant with more than 27 years of experience in financial and economic consulting and public company
management including preparation of valuations, feasibility studies, capital budgeting, financial reorganizations, profit improvement
studies and business plans and going public and business brokerage during which time he has provided his consulting services to
oil and gas, mineral exploration, technology, manufacturing, retail and wholesale consumer businesses.
- 132 -
Mr. Grayston received a Ph.D. in Finance and Economics from the University of Chicago in 1971, a MBA from the University of
Chicago in 1969, a BA of Commerce from the University of British Columbia in 1966 and has been a certified general accountant
since 1977.
During the prior five years, Mr. Grayston has been an officer and/or director of the following public companies.
Name of Company
Logan Resources Ltd. (1)
Camex Energy Corp. (2)
Position(s) Held
Director
President, Chief Executive Officer and DirectorMarch 2012 to present
Term of Office
July 2012 to present
Intensity Company Inc. (3)
Buccaneer Gold Corp. (4)
SG Spirit Gold Inc. (5)
Ranger Canyon Energy Inc. (6)
 
 
New Cantech Ventures Inc. (7)
President, Chief Executive Officer and DirectorDecember 2011 to present
November 2009 to present
Director
October 2009 to October 2011
President and Chief Executive Officer
October 2009 to January 2010 November
Interim Chief Financial Officer and Director
2009 to present
August 2008 to December 2009
August 2008 to December 2009
May 2008 to September 2011
October 2008 to September 2011
October 2008 to September 2011
January 1991 to May 2008
Vice President, Finance
Chief Financial Officer
Director
Chief Executive Officer and
Chief Financial Officer
Director
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Logan Resources Ltd. is a mineral exploration TSXV listed issuer.
Camex Energy Corp. is a NEX-listed issuer.
Intensity Company Inc. is an industrial TSXV listed issuer.
Buccaneer Gold Corp. is a mineral exploration TSXV listed issuer.
SG Spirit Gold Inc. (formerly Ruby Red Resources Inc.) is a mineral exploration TSXV listed issuer.
Ranger Canyon Energy Inc. is a private Alberta, Canada oil and gas company seeking listing on the TSXV.
New Cantech Ventures Inc. is an oil and gas and mineral exploration (diamonds and gold) TSXV listed issuer.
Peter Minuk 
Secretary and Treasurer and Director
Mr. Minuk was appointed as Vice-President, Finance and a director of our company in March 2007. He resigned as Vice-President,
Finance effective January 31, 2009 and was subsequently appointed Secretary and Treasurer on August 11, 2009 following the
resignation of Kiomi Mori from this office. Mr. Minuk has more than 24 years of experience in finance and investment as well as
experience in project management, training and developing staff and client relationships. From February 1, 2009 to May 31, 2009, he
provided limited consulting services to our company. From April 2, 2011 to the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Mr. Minuk
has been providing freelance management and consulting services to unrelated companies. From June 1, 2009 to April 1, 2011, Mr.
Minuk was a business analyst consultant for Industry Canada where he was responsible for reviewing proposals relating to regional
development of public infrastructure projects and providing oversight over 40 projects assigned to him by the Fed Dev Ontario
which is responsible for administering a variety of government stimulus programs, resources and initiatives for the southern Ontario
region. Before joining our company, from 1990 to 2006, Mr. Minuk was employed by BMO InvestorLine in connection with
implementing project management protocols. Mr. Minuk received a Masters Certificate in Project Management from the Schulich
School of Business, York University in 2005. He obtained his Fellow of the Canadian Securities Institute in 1989 and completed the
Business Administration program from Southern Alberta Institute of Technology in 1985.
During the prior five years, Mr. Minuk has been an officer and/or director of the following public companies.
- 133 -
Name of Company
Buccaneer Gold Corp. (1)
Position(s) Held
Secretary-Treasurer
Term of Office
April 2011 to present
(1)
Buccaneer Gold Corp. is a mineral exploration TSXV listed issuer.
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Mr. Minuk devotes approximately 25% of his time in consulting services to our
company. He provides 75% of his time to unrelated companies. There is no management consulting agreement in force at this time
nor has Mr. Minuk entered into a non-competition and non-disclosure agreement with our company.
Yves Pierre Clement, P. Geo. 
Vice-President, Exploration
Mr. Clement was appointed Vice-President, Exploration of our company in May 2006. Mr. Clement has over 23 years experience in
the generation, evaluation and development of a wide variety of mineral resources hosted by a broad spectrum of geological
environments in Canada and South America. Before joining our company, Mr. Clement was senior project geologist for Lake Shore
Gold Corp. in the Timmins lode gold camp from August 2005 to April 2006 and was formerly exploration manager for Aurora
Platinum Corp.’s Sudbury operations from August 2000 to July 2005. Before joining Aurora, Mr. Clement was senior project
geologist/exploration manager for Southwestern Resources Corp. where he was responsible for the generation of precious and
base metal exploration opportunities in Peru and Chile. Mr. Clement’s experience will allow us to further maximize the value of our
existing portfolio of projects, as well as allowing us to expand our strategy of growth through strategic acquisitions.
During the prior five years, Mr. Clement has been an officer and/or director of the following public companies:
Name of Company
Ginguro Exploration Inc. (1)
Position(s) Held
Vice President, Exploration
Term of Office
March 2005 to July 2009
(1)
Ginguro Exploration Inc. is a gold exploration TSXV listed issuer.
As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Mr. Clement devotes approximately 90% of his time in consulting services to our
company pursuant to a management consulting agreement (see “Management Consulting Agreements - Management Consulting
Agreement with Vice-President, Exploration”). He provides 10% of his time to unrelated companies. Mr. Clement has not entered into
a non-competition and non-disclosure agreement with our company.
Victor Nkansa, CA, BA, Economics, MBA, Finance 
Vice-President, Ghana Operations
Mr. Nkansa was appointed as Vice-President, Ghana Operations of our company in December 2009 when he assumed the
responsibilities of this position previously held by Nantogma Abudalai, which includes overseeing our operations in Ghana under
the supervision of our President and CEO, Paul Zyla and James Longshore, who is the President and General Manager of our
Ghanaian subsidiaries. Mr. Nkansa is also the Secretary and a director of our Ghanaian subsidiaries. Mr. Nkansa is familiar and
experienced with respect to obtaining mining leases, prospecting and reconnaissance licenses and the government regulations
relating thereto and is knowledgeable in connection with environmental and forestry issues, immigration and customs affairs. His
experience and background will assist us with respect to acquiring approvals, prospecting licenses, mining leases and related
permits and renewals from the relevant government authorities to advance our operations in Ghana and acting as our primary
government liaison in connection therewith. Mr. Nkansa has more than 27 years of business experience, the last 13 years of which
have been in the mining industry. Since 2004, he has been the Controller of our Ghanaian subsidiaries where his responsibilities
include the provision of accounting services and assisting with the facilitation of license renewals with respect to our property
interests.
During the prior five years, Mr. Nkansa has not been an officer and/or director of any other public companies.
- 134 -
As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Mr. Nkansa devotes a variable amount of his time in consulting services to our
company on a month to month “as needed” basis (see “Management Consulting Agreements - Management Consulting Agreement
with Vice-President, Ghana Operations”). Mr. Nkansa has not entered into a non-competition and non-disclosure agreement with our
company.
Robert Joseph Casaceli 
Director
Mr. Casaceli was appointed as a director of our company in June 2010. Mr. Casaceli is currently a consultant to the mining industry
and served as Chief Geologist for Franco-Nevada Corporation from 2008 to March 2010. Mr. Casaceli has also served as President
and Chief Executive Officer of Franc-Or Resources (now Crocodile Gold Inc.) from 1996 to 2008. Mr. Casaceli has been involved in
the design, funding and implementation of numerous reconnaissance and advanced-stage exploration projects and prospect/mine
evaluations in over 50 countries.
Mr. Casaceli received a M.S. in Geology from Oregon State University and a B.A. in Geology from the University of Colorado.
During the prior five years, Mr. Casaceli has been an officer and/or director of the following public companies.
Name of Company
Creso Exploration Inc. (1)
Franc-Or Resources Corporation (2)
Position(s) Held
President and Chief Executive Officer
President and Chief Executive Officer
Term of Office
July 2010 to November 2011
1996 to 2008
(1)
(2)
Creso Exploration Inc. is a mineral exploration TSXV listed issuer.
Pursuant to a business combination in 2009, Franc-Or Resources Corporation is now Crocodile Gold Inc., a gold exploration and
mining TSX listed issuer.
James Harold Schweitzer 
Director
Mr. Schweitzer was appointed as a director of our company in June 2011. Mr. Schweitzer was employed in the securities sector of the
investment industry in Canada in various capacities for 55 years and retired in June 2011. He was employed as a registered
representative with Haywood Securities Inc. from February 2003 to June 2011, when he resigned from Haywood. His former
employment as a registered representative of Haywood Securities Inc. was approved by the Investment Dealers Association of
Canada. As a registered representative, Mr. Schweitzer acted as an account executive and investment advisor for clients and was
licensed to provide advice to clients as to which securities (primary resource stocks) a client can buy and sell. Prior to that, Mr.
Schweitzer became a director and shareholder in the brokerage firm of Wills Bickle and Co. Ltd. in 1975. In 1979, he joined McDermid
Miller and McDermid as a registered representative and was appointed as a trading officer for Ontario and was in charge of its
Toronto branch office until its merger with St. Lawrence Securities in 1984. Mr. Schweitzer remained with McDermid Miller and
McDermid through two mergers with other brokerage firms until 2000 when Raymond James Financial Inc. acquired the then named
firm of Goepel McDermid Inc. He resigned as registered representative of Raymond James Financial Inc. in February 2003.
During the prior five years, Mr. Schweitzer has been an officer and/or director of the following public companies:
Name of Company
Ranger Canyon Energy Inc. (1)
Position(s) Held
Director
Term of Office
May 2008 to September 2011
(1)
Ranger Canyon Energy Inc. is a non-trading company that is required to file reports on SEDAR (the Canadian equivalent of EDGAR).
There are no family relationships between any of the executive officers and directors. Each director of our company holds office
until he resigns or his successor is elected at an annual stockholders’ meeting.
- 135 -
Consultants
One of our business strategies is to outsource other services as required by our company from time to time by engaging
consultants on an “as needed” basis or entering into special purpose contracts to maintain our overhead at a reasonable,
affordable cost.
Compliance with Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act
We are not currently subject to Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act, and, therefore, our directors and executive officers, and persons
who own more than 10% of our common stock are not required to file with the SEC reports disclosing their initial ownership and
changes in their ownership of our common stock.
Corporate Governance Matters
Audit Committee
While we are not currently subject to any law, rule or regulation in the United States requiring that we establish or maintain an audit
committee, as a reporting issuer in Canada, we are required to comply with National Instrument 52-110 – Audit Committees (“NI 52-
110”), adopted by the Canadian Securities Administrators, which states in part that every issuer must have an audit committee that
complies with the requirements of the Instrument. Prior to our company becoming a reporting issuer in Canada in November 2010,
our Board of Directors determined it advisable and in the best interests of our stockholders to establish an audit committee (the
“Audit Committee”) in November 2009.
Our Audit Committee assists our Board of Directors in fulfilling its oversight responsibility relating to:
the integrity of our financial statements;
our compliance with legal and regulatory requirements; and
the qualifications and independence of our independent registered public accountants.
Our Audit Committee has adopted a written charter pursuant to which the Audit Committee provides:
an independent review and oversight of our company's financial reporting processes, internal controls and independent
auditors;
a forum separate from our management in which auditors and other interested parties can candidly discuss concerns. By
effectively carrying out its functions and responsibilities, our Audit Committee helps to ensure that:
our management properly develops and adheres to a sound system of internal controls;
procedures are in place to objectively assess our management's practices and internal controls; and
the outside auditors, through their own review, objectively assess our company's financial reporting practices.
Our Audit Committee is directly responsible for the appointment, compensation, retention and oversight of the work of any
registered public accounting firm engaged for the purpose of preparing or issuing an audit report or performing other audit, review
or attest services for our company.
Our Audit Committee is composed of three directors; namely Richard Grayston, who is also Chair of our Audit Committee, Robert
Casaceli and James Schweitzer, all of whom have been determined by our Board of Directors to be “independent,” as defined in the
Marketplace Rules of the NASDAQ and within the meaning of NI 52-110.
- 136 -
Board of Directors Independence
Our Board of Directors consists of five members; namely Richard Grayston (Chair), Paul Zyla, Peter Minuk, Robert Casaceli and
James Schweitzer. Our Board of Directors has determined that Richard Grayston, Robert Casaceli and James Schweitzer are
independent within the within the meaning of National Instrument 58-101 – Disclosure of Corporate Governance Practices (“NI 58-
101”) and the Marketplace Rules of the NASDAQ and as is required by the applicable policies of the TSX. Paul Zyla and Peter Minuk
are not independent within the meaning of NI 58-101 as they are officers of our company and thereby have a “material relationship”
with our company.
Audit Committee Financial Expert
Each of Richard Grayston and James Schweitzer is an “audit committee financial expert” within the meaning of Item 401(h)(1) of
Regulation S-K. In general, an “audit committee financial expert” is an individual member of the audit committee who:
understands generally accepted accounting principles and financial statements;
is able to assess the general application of such principles in connection with accounting for estimates and accruals;
has experience preparing, auditing, analyzing or evaluating financial statements comparable to the breadth and complexity of
issues that can reasonably be expected to be raised by the company’s financial statements;
understands internal controls over financial reporting;
understands audit committee functions; and
is an independent director.
Code of Ethics
In December 2009, we adopted a new and expanded code of ethics applicable to our principal executive officer, principal financial
and accounting officers and persons performing similar functions. Our code of ethics is a written standard designed to deter
wrongdoing and to promote:
honest and ethical conduct;
full, fair, accurate, timely and understandable disclosure in regulatory filings and public statements;
compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations;
the prompt reporting of a violation of our code of ethics; and
accountability for adherence to our code of ethics.
A copy of our code of ethics was previously filed as an exhibit to our annual report filed on Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2009. We will provide a copy of our code of ethics, without charge, to any person who makes a written request to us at our
principal offices.
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
We established our Nominating and Corporate Governance committee in November 2009. The Nominating and Corporate
Governance Committee has adopted a written charter pursuant to which the committee:
recommends the slate of director nominees for election to our Board of Directors;
- 137 -
identifies and recommends candidates to fill vacancies on our Board of Directors;
reviews the composition of our Board of Directors’ committees; and
monitors compliance with, reviews and recommends changes to our various corporate governance policies and guidelines.
This committee also prepares and supervises our Board of Directors’ annual review of director independence and our Board of
Directors’ annual self-evaluation. The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee is composed of three directors; namely
Richard W. Grayston, Robert J. Casaceli and James Schweitzer, all of whom have been determined by our Board of Directors to be
“independent,” as defined in the Marketplace Rules of the NASDAQ and within the meaning of NI 52-110.
A majority of the persons serving on our Board of Directors must be “independent”. The Nominating and Corporate Governance
Committee has considered transactions and relationships between each director or any member of his immediate family and us or
our affiliates, including those reported under “Certain Relationships and Related Transactions” below and also reviewed
transactions and relationships between directors or their affiliates and members of our senior management or their affiliates. As a
result of this review, the committee affirmatively determined that each of Messrs. Grayston, Casaceli and Schweitzer are
independent.
Nomination of Directors
The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee considers all qualified candidates for our Board of Directors identified by
members of the committee, by other members of our Board of Directors, by senior management and by our stockholders. The
committee reviews each candidate including each candidate’s independence, skills and expertise based on a variety of factors,
including the person’s experience or background in management, finance, regulatory matters and corporate governance. When
identifying nominees to serve as director, the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee seeks to create a Board of
Directors that is strong in its collective knowledge and has a diversity of skills and experience with respect to accounting and
finance, management and leadership, vision and strategy, business operations, business judgment, industry knowledge and
corporate governance. In addition, before nominating an existing director for re-election to our Board of Directors, the Nominating
and Corporate Governance Committee considers and reviews an existing director’s Board of Directors’ and committee meeting
attendance and performance, length of Board of Directors’ service, experience, skills and contributions that the existing director
brings to our Board of Directors, equity ownership in our company and independence.
The committee follows the same process and uses the same criteria for evaluating candidates proposed by members of our Board
of Directors, members of senior management and stockholders. Based on its assessment of each candidate, the committee
recommends candidates to our Board of Directors. However, there is no assurance that there will be any vacancy on our Board of
Directors at the time of any submission or that the committee will recommend any candidate for our Board of Directors.
Director Qualification
The following is a discussion for each director of the specific experience, qualifications, attributes or skills that led our Nominating
and Corporate Governance Committee to recommend to our Board of Directors, and for our Board of Directors to conclude that the
individual should be serving as a director of our company.
Paul Zyla – Mr. Zyla’s extensive career in leadership positions in the mining industry and, in particular, his previous success as Chief
Executive Officer with Carib Gold and other junior exploration companies, were factors considered by our Nominating and
Corporate Governance Committee and our Board of Directors.
Richard W. Grayston – Mr. Grayston’s extensive experience as a CGA (certified general accountant) and Ph.D., together with his
previous directorships and/or position as Chief Financial Officer of four mineral exploration public companies before joining our
company, were factors considered by our Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee and our Board of Directors. As at the
date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Mr. Grayston is the President and Chief Executive Officer of two issuers in Canada, the
Audit Committee Chair of three other mineral exploration issuers in Canada and a director or five other issuers in Canada.
- 138 -
Peter Minuk – Mr. Minuk’s extensive experience with respect to project management and his years of experience at the Bank of
Montreal were factors considered by our Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee and our Board of Directors.
Robert J. Casaceli – Mr. Casaceli’s experience as President and Chief Executive Officer of Creso Exploration Inc. from July 2010 until
November 2011, together with his former position of Chief Geologist at Franco-Nevada U.S. Corporation, were factors considered by
our Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee and our Board of Directors.
James H. Schweitzer – Mr. Schweitzer’s extensive career as a trader and salesman in the investment industry makes him
knowledgeable with respect to markets and companies and, together with his financial knowledge, were factors considered by our
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee and our Board of Directors. In addition to keeping up to date with the changing
rules and policies of the securities regulators under which he operated, Mr. Schweitzer also had to monitor and keep abreast of all
the economic factors that would affect the financial health of his clientele.
In addition to the each of the individual skills and background described above, our Nominating and Corporate Governance
Committee and our Board of Directors also concluded that each of these individuals will continue to provide knowledgeable advice
to our other directors and to senior management on numerous issues facing our company and on the development and execution
of our strategy.
Compensation Committee
We established a Compensation Committee in November 2009. The Compensation Committee has adopted a written charter
pursuant to which the committee is responsible for overseeing our compensation programs and practices, including our executive
compensation plans and incentive compensation plans. Our Chief Executive Officer provides input to the Compensation Committee
with respect to the individual performance and compensation recommendations for the other executive officers. Although the
committee’s charter authorizes the committee to retain an independent consultant, no third party compensation consultant was
engaged for 2010. The Compensation Committee is composed of three directors; namely Richard Grayston, Robert Casaceli, who is
also Chair of our Compensation Committee, and James Schweitzer, all of whom have been determined by our Board of Directors to
be “independent,” as defined in the Marketplace Rules of the NASDAQ and within the meaning of NI 52-110.
Risk Management
We separate the role of our Chief Executive Officer and the Chairman of our Board of Directors. Our management has approval limits
which it must not exceed without approval from our Board of Directors. These approval limits span hiring, asset purchases and the
issuance of shares. Our Board of Directors administers its oversight function through three sub-committees which report to our full
Board of Directors, being our Audit Committee, our Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee and our Compensation
Committee. We are a very small company at this time and consider five members for our Board of Directors to be adequate for the
purpose of directing its activities. Our Board of Directors self-assesses on an ongoing basis and has the scope to increase its size if
the need is determined.
Summary Compensation Table
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
The following table sets forth information relating to all compensation awarded to, earned by or paid by us during each of the two
fiscal years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010 respectively, to:
- 139 -
our chief (principal) executive officer;
each of our executive officers who was awarded, earned or we paid more than $100,000; and
up to two additional individuals for whom disclosure would have been made in this table but for the fact that the individual was
not serving as an executive officer of our company at December 31, 2011.
The value attributable to any option awards is computed in accordance with ASC 718 (Accounting Standards Codification, Topic
718).
SUMMARY COMPENSATION TABLE
NON-EQUITY
NONQUALIFIED
DEFERRED
STOCK
OPTION INCENTIVE PLANCOMPENSATION ALL OTHER
SALARY BONUS AWARDS AWARDS COMPENSATION
EARNINGS
COMPENSATION TOTAL
($)
(C)
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
($)
(D)
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
($)
(E)
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
($)
(F)
0 
69,956
0 
43,898
124,000 
0
($)
(G)
($)
(H)
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
($)
(I)
36,720 
6,794
($)
(J)
36,720 
76,750
220,293 
179,811
220,293 
223,709
153,000 
116,472
277,000 
116,472
0 
0
0 
0
0 
0
NAME AND
PRINCIPAL
POSITION YEAR
(B)
2011 
2010
2011 
2010
2011 
2010
(A)
Paul Zyla 
CEO (1) (2)
(3) 
James 
Longshore 
Former
CEO, CFO
(2)(4)
Yves
Clement 
Vice-
President,
Exploration
(1)(2)(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
All dollar amounts stated above are in U.S. dollars. To the extent that contractual amounts have been paid in Canadian dollars, such
amounts have been converted into U.S. dollars at the average exchange rate of $1.00 Canadian dollar = $1.02 U.S. dollar.
 
The fair value of these options has been calculated in accordance with ASC718 under U.S. GAAP. The grant date fair value does not
materially differ from that calculated under the CICA Handbook or International Financial Reporting Standards. The methodology used
to calculate the grant date fair value was the Black-Scholes method, with a volatility assumption of 95%, an expected life of three years
and an interest free rate of 2%.
 
Mr. Zyla was appointed as our President and CEO effective June 1, 2010. Mr. Zyla received the compensation noted above under “All
Other Compensation” for the provision of consulting services to our company pursuant to a management consulting agreement (see
“Management Consulting Agreements – Management Consulting Agreement with President and Chief Executive Officer”). Mr. Zyla’s
compensation was paid in Canadian dollars and was translated at the average exchange rate of $1.00 Canadian dollar = $1.02 U.S.
dollar.
 
Mr. Longshore resigned as our Chief Executive Officer and our Chief Financial Officer and as a director of our company effective June
1, 2010. Before December 31, 2011, Mr. Longshore’s consulting services were provided to our company pursuant to a management
consulting agreement with Brokton International Ltd., a corporation of which Mr. Longshore is the sole officer, director and stockholder
from which Mr. Longshore received this compensation for the provision of consulting services as the general manager of XG Mining
and XGEL (see “Management Consulting Agreements – Management Consulting Agreement with Brokton”). With respect to the
compensation noted above under “All Other Compensation”, Mr. Longshore received:
- 140 -
in 2010:
$95,000 for the provision of consulting services to our company, except for $3,325 which was paid to him for director fees; and
$81,486 in gold bullion from Ravenclaw Mining Limited; and
in 2011:
$120,000 for the provision of consulting services to our company; and
$102,646 from Ravenclaw Mining Limited (see “Related Party Transactions – Consulting Agreement with Principal
Stockholder” for further details).
(5)
Mr. Clement was appointed as our Vice-President, Exploration on May 1, 2006. Mr. Clement received the compensation noted above
under “All Other Compensation” for the provision of consulting services to our company pursuant to a management consulting
agreement (see “Management Consulting Agreements – Management Consulting Agreement with Vice-President, Exploration”). Mr.
Clement’s compensation was paid in Canadian dollars and was translated at the average exchange rate of $1.00 Canadian dollar =
$1.02 U.S. dollar.
During the fiscal year, our Compensation Committee considered and determined compensation be paid to Mr. Zyla as noted under
“Management Consulting Agreements – Management Consulting Agreement with President and Chief Executive Officer”. In
determining the compensation to be paid to Mr. Zyla, our Compensation Committee considered a number of factors including the
scope of his duties and responsibilities to our company, the time he devotes to our business, his length of services to our company
and industry standards for compensation paid for similar positions in other comparable reporting companies. Our Compensation
Committee did not consult with any experts or other third parties in fixing the amount of Mr. Zyla’s compensation.
In 2010, Mr. Longshore did not receive any monetary compensation as our Chief Executive Officer or as our Chief Financial Officer.
In 2010 and in the fiscal year, Mr. Longshore received a compensation package, through Brokton International Ltd., for providing his
consulting services as general manager to XG Mining and XGEL as noted under “Management Consulting Agreements –
Management Consulting Agreement with Brokton”. Mr. Longshore was reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses incurred on behalf of
our company in connection with carrying out his duties and responsibilities. The terms of any future compensation to be paid to Mr.
Longshore will be determined by our Compensation Committee. At such time, our Compensation Committee will consider a number
of factors in determining Mr. Longshore’s compensation including the scope of his duties and responsibilities to our company and
our subsidiaries, the time he devotes to our business, his length of service to our company and industry standards for
compensation paid for similar positions in other comparable reporting companies and whether to consult with any experts or third
parties in fixing such compensation.
During the fiscal year, our Compensation Committee considered and determined compensation be paid to Mr. Clement as noted
under “Management Consulting Agreements – Management Consulting Agreement with Vice-President, Exploration”. In
determining the compensation to be paid to Mr. Clement, our Compensation Committee considered a number of factors including
the scope of his duties and responsibilities to our company and our subsidiaries, the time he devotes to our business, his length of
service to our company and industry standards for compensation paid for similar positions in other comparable reporting
companies. Our Compensation Committee did not consult with any experts or other third parties in fixing the amount of Mr.
Clement’s compensation.
Management Consulting Agreements
Management Consulting Agreement with President and Chief Executive Officer
We entered into a management consulting agreement with our President and Chief Executive Officer, Paul Zyla, dated September 1,
2010 for the provision of his services as our President and Chief Executive Officer. This agreement was not for a defined term and
could be terminated by Mr. Zyla upon 60 days’ notice. Our Chief Executive Officer was paid CAD$2,000 (USD$2,040) at the
commencement of each calendar quarter and was reimbursed for certain expenses incurred in performing his duties to our
company. Our Chief Executive Officer provides the stewardship of our company, oversees day-to-day managerial functions of our
business, reviews all business opportunities, reports to our Board of Directors and performs the duties and responsibilities
generally associated with being the most senior executive of a reporting company. This agreement was superseded by a
management consulting agreement for a term of one year which expired on December 31, 2011. As of the date of this proxy
statement/prospectus, Mr. Zyla provides his services to our company on a month-to-month basis. He is paid CAD$3,000
(USD$3,060) per month to provide the services set forth in the preceding paragraph and is reimbursed for certain expenses incurred
in performing his duties to our company. There is no provision for a payment to be made to our Chief Executive Officer if his
services are terminated without cause.
- 141 -
Management Consulting Agreement with Brokton
We entered into a management consulting agreement on January 3, 2009 with Brokton International Ltd. to provide the consulting
services of our Chief Executive Officer at the time, James Longshore, as general manager for XG Mining and XGEL for a one year
term which expired on December 31, 2009. Brokton International Ltd. was paid $5,000 per month for providing Mr. Longshore’s
services and was reimbursed for certain expenses incurred by Mr. Longshore in performing his duties to our Ghanaian subsidiaries.
This agreement was superseded by a management consulting agreement for a one year term which expired on December 31, 2010.
Pursuant to this agreement, Brokton International Ltd. was paid $10,000 per month for providing Mr. Longshore’s services and was
reimbursed for certain expenses incurred by Mr. Longshore in performing his duties to our Ghanaian subsidiaries. Either Brokton
International Ltd. or our company could terminate this agreement, without reason or cause, by providing one month’s written notice
in advance of such termination. This agreement provided for a payment of one month of consulting fees to Brokton International
Ltd. in lieu of notice being provided by our company. This agreement was renewed by way of renewal agreement on November 30,
2010 for a further one year term commencing on January 1, 2011 and expiring on December 31, 2011. As of the date of this proxy
statement/prospectus, Brokton International Ltd. provides Mr. Longshore’s services to our company on a month-to-month basis.
There is no provision for a payment to be made to Brokton International Ltd. if Mr. Longshore’s services are terminated without
cause. Management Consulting Agreement with Chief Financial Officer
We entered into a management consulting agreement with our Chief Financial Officer, John Ross, effective September 1, 2010 for the
provision of his services to our company. This agreement is not for a defined term. Our Chief Financial is paid CAD$500 (USD$510)
per day and is reimbursed for certain expenses incurred in performing his duties to our company. Our Chief Financial Officer
provides certain accounting services to our company including financial and general management duties, accounting, financial and
reporting control and regulatory reporting duties. Our company may give written notice to our Chief Financial Officer of our intention
to terminate this agreement on the date therein specified in the notice which shall in any event be a date at least 15 and not more
than 30 days after giving of such notice. Our Chief Financial Officer may terminate this agreement at any time upon providing our
company with 60 days’ notice. There is no provision for a payment to be made to our Chief Financial Officer if this agreement if
terminated without cause.
Management Consulting Agreement with Vice-President, Exploration
We entered into a management consulting agreement with our Vice-President, Exploration, Yves Clement, for a term of 36 months
which expired on May 1, 2009. Before the expiration of this agreement, we negotiated terms for renewal of this agreement for a
further one year term with our Vice-President, Exploration. Pursuant to this agreement, our Vice-President, Exploration was paid
approximately CAD$10,000 (USD$10,200) per month and was reimbursed for certain expenses incurred in performing his duties to
our company. Under this agreement or any renewal thereof, our Vice-President, Exploration was to be paid compensation equivalent
to 18 months’ fees, based on the rate of compensation being paid at the relevant time if this agreement was terminated without cause
or if a change of control occurred. Our Vice-President, Exploration makes project or property site attendances as may be required
from time to time, prepares progress reports with respect to our mineral exploration projects, conducts due diligence as may be
required from time to time in connection with potential mineral properties; reviews geological data and liaises with principal owners
of mineral properties in which our company may wish to acquire an interest, meets with government authorities and retains technical
experts, makes recommendations to our Board of Directors and its relevant committees with respect to the acquisition and/or
abandonment of mineral exploration properties and prepares and implements, subject to our Board of Directors’ approval, plans for
the operation of our company including plans for exploration programs, costs of operations and other expenditures in connection
with our mineral projects. This agreement, or any renewal thereof, was superseded by the management consulting agreement for a
term of three years which will expire on March 1, 2014. This agreement supersedes the agreement referred to in the preceding
paragraph or any renewal thereof. Our Vice-President is paid CAD$12,500 (USD$12,225) per month to provide the services set forth
in the preceding paragraph and is reimbursed for certain expenses incurred in performing his duties to our company. If our
company terminates this agreement before September 30, 2012, our Vice-President, Exploration shall be paid additional
remuneration of CAD$10,000 (USD$10,200) per month for each additional month of termination before September 30, 2012. If our
company terminates this agreement on or after October 1, 2012, then no additional remuneration shall be paid to our Vice-President,
Exploration.
- 142 -
Management Consulting Agreement with Vice-President, Ghana Operations
We entered into the Nkansa Agreement with our Vice-President, Ghana Operations, Victor Nkansa, for a term of one year which
expired on June 1, 2011 and was renewed by way of renewal agreement for a further term of one year commencing on June 1, 2011
and expiring on May 31, 2012. As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, our Vice-President, Ghana Operations is paid
$2,500 per month by XG Mining to provide his consulting services on a month to month “as needed” basis. There is no provision for
a payment to be made to our Vice-President, Ghana Operations if he is terminated without cause.
Compensation of Management
The terms of the foregoing management consulting agreements were determined by our Compensation Committee and
subsequently approved by our Board of Directors. As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, our Compensation Committee
has complete authority to determine the amount of compensation to be paid and the other terms of management compensation. At
the time of entering into the foregoing agreements, our Compensation Committee did not consult with any consultants or other third
parties in determining the amount of compensation to be paid under the management consulting agreements.
Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year End
The following table sets forth information concerning our grant of options to purchase shares of our common stock during the fiscal
year ended December 31, 2011 to each person named in the Summary Compensation table.
EQUITY
INCENTIVE
PLAN AWARDS
NUMBER OF
NUMBER OF
SECURITIES
SECURITIES
UNDERLYING UNDERLYING UNDERLYING
UNEXERCISED UNEXERCISED UNEXERCISED OPTION
NUMBER OF
SECURITIES
EQUITY
EQUITY
INCENTIVE
PLAN
INCENTIVE AWARDS
PLAN
MARKET OR
OF
OF
NUMBER SHARES SHARES,
MARKET AWARDS
PAYOUT
VALUE NUMBER OF VALUE OF
UNEARNED UNEARNED
SHARES,
OF SHARESOR UNITS UNITS OR UNITS OR
OTHER
OR UNITS
RIGHTS
OF STOCK STOCK
THAT
THAT
HAVE
HAVE
NOT
NOT
OTHER
RIGHTS
THAT
HAVE
NOT
THAT
HAVE
NOT
OPTIONS
(#)
OPTIONS
UNEARNED EXERCISE OPTION
(#)
OPTIONS
PRICE EXPIRATION VESTED VESTED VESTED
VESTED
NAME EXERCISABLEUNEXERCISABLE
(A)
Paul Zyla
 
James
Longshore
 
Yves
Clement
(B)
0
0
(C)
0
0
45,000
55,000
(#)
(D)
0
0
0
($)
(E)
N/A
N/A
1.95
DATE
(F)
N/A
N/A
(#)
(G)
0
0
March 1,
2014
55,000
($)
(H)
0
0
0
(#)
(I)
0
0
0
(#)
(J)
0
0
0
Note:
In connection with the options granted to Mr. Clement, the option expiration date was extended to March 1, 2021 by disinterested
In connection with the options granted to Mr. Clement, the option expiration date was extended to March 1, 2021 by disinterested
stockholders’ approval obtained at our 2012 annual and special meeting held on June 7, 2012 and by TSX acceptance.
- 143 -
2011 10% Rolling Stock Option Plan
On May 12, 2011, our Board of Directors considered and believed that it was advisable and in the best interests of our company to
terminate our fixed 2005 Equity Incentive Compensation Plan and authorized, approved and adopted our 2011 10% rolling stock
option plan (the “2011 Plan”). Our 2011 Plan was approved by our stockholders at our annual and special stockholders’ meeting
held on June 10, 2011 and we received final acceptance of our 2011 Plan from the TSX on July 13, 2011.
Pursuant to our 2011 Plan, our company may issue no more than 10% of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock in the
aggregate from time to time, and a maximum of 5% of the shares of common stock may be issued to any one director, officer, key
employee or other eligible person, except consultants, in any 12 month period, unless disinterested stockholder approval is
obtained. The maximum number of shares of common stock that may be issued to a consultant under our 2011 Plan in a 12 month
period shall not exceed 2% of the shares of common stock outstanding. The number of securities issuable to our company’s
insiders (as defined in National Instrument 55-104 – Insider Reporting Requirements), at any time, under all security-based
compensation arrangements, shall not exceed 10% of the issued and outstanding securities and the number of securities issued to
insiders, within any one-year period, under all security-based compensation arrangements, shall not exceed 10% of the issued and
outstanding securities. Shares of common stock used for stock grants and our 2011 Plan options may be authorized and unissued
shares or shares of common stock reacquired by our company. Shares of common stock covered by our 2011 Plan options which
terminate unexercised or shares of common stock subject to stock awards which are forfeited or cancelled will again become
available for grant as additional options or stock awards, without decreasing the maximum number of shares of common stock
issuable under our 2011 Plan.
Upon adoption of our 2001 Plan, the 1,989,000 outstanding options granted under our former 2005 Equity Incentive Compensation
Plan were converted into options under our 2011 Plan, and the former plan was terminated. As at the date of this proxy
statement/prospectus, 4,366,117 shares of our common stock have been reserved for issuance under our 2011 Plan. During the
fiscal year, 130,000 options were cancelled pursuant to our Board of Directors’ approval. After the fiscal year, 110,000 options were
exercised by a consultant. As at the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, there are 1,957,000 options outstanding to purchase
an aggregate of 1,957,000 shares of common stock (taking into account the exercise of 110,000 options in January 2012). The
1,957,000 shares of common stock reserved for the exercise of 1,957,000 options represent 4.4% of the 44,648,417 shares of
common stock currently outstanding. Options to purchase 2,510,921 shares of common stock are currently available for grant under
our 2011 Plan, being 10% of the 44,648,417 shares of common stock currently outstanding less the 1,957,000 shares of common
stock reserved for the 1,957,000 options currently outstanding.
The period during which options may be exercised shall be determined by our Board of Directors in its discretion, to a maximum of
10 years from the date that the option is granted and the options shall vest on the date of the grant, except that options issued to
persons employed in investor relations activities must vest in stages over not less than 12 months with no more than one-quarter of
the options vesting in any three month period. On February 29, 2012, our Board of Directors approved an amendment to certain
stock option agreements in connection with options previously granted to insiders of our company whereby the option exercise
term would be extended to the maximum allowable exercise period of 10 years from the date of the original grant date of such
options, subject to regulatory acceptance and disinterested stockholder approval. In accordance with Section 613(a) of the TSX
Company Manual, an extension of the exercise term under a security based compensation agreement, benefitting an insider of a
company, requires disinterested security holder approval. At our annual and special meeting of stockholders held on June 7, 2012,
we obtained disinterested stockholder approval with respect to the extension of the option exercise term for an aggregate of
1,615,000 options previously granted to insiders of our company.
Compensation of Directors
In March 2007, we established compensation arrangements for each director’s service and expense on our Board of Directors.
Directors’ fees are paid on a quarterly basis. As of December 31, 2011, we did not pay fees to directors for their attendance at Board
of Directors’ meetings.
- 144 -
The following table sets forth information relating to the compensation paid to our directors for their services as members of our
Board of Directors for 2011: The information in the following table excludes any reimbursement of travel and lodging expenses
which our company may have paid.
DIRECTOR COMPENSATION
NON-QUALIFIED
NON-EQUITY
DEFERRED
OPTION
AWARDS COMPENSATION
INCENTIVE PLANCOMPENSATION ALL OTHER
NAME
(A)
FEES
EARNED
OR PAID
IN CASH
($)
(B)
STOCK
AWARDS
($)
(C)
Richard Grayston (1)
(2)
8,160
0
0
0
0
0
8,160
($)
(D)
($)
(E)
EARNINGS
COMPENSATION
TOTAL
($)
(F)
($)
(G)
($)
(H)
Peter Minuk (1)(2)
 
Robert Montgomery
(1)(2)(3)
 
Robert Casaceli (1)(2)
 
James Schweitzer (1)
(2)(3)
6,120
 
3,060
6,000
 
3,060
0
 
0
0
 
0
0
 
0
0
 
120,206
0
 
0
0
 
0
0
 
0
0
 
0
0
 
0
0
 
0
6,120
 
3,060
6,000
 
123,266
(1)
(2)
(3)
 
(4)
All dollar amounts stated above are in U.S. dollars. Except for Mr. Casaceli, all other directors received director compensation in
Canadian dollars. To the extent that the director compensation noted above was paid in Canadian dollars, such amounts have been
converted into U.S. dollars at the average exchange rate of $1.00 Canadian dollar = $1.02 U.S. dollar.
 
The fair value of these options has been calculated in accordance with ASC718 under U.S. GAAP. The grant date fair value does not
materially differ from that calculated under the CICA Handbook or International Financial Reporting Standards. The methodology used
to calculate the grant date fair value was the Black-Scholes method, with a volatility assumption of 95%, an expected life of three years
and an interest free rate of 2%.
 
Mr. Montgomery was not reelected as a director at the 2011 annual and special meeting of our stockholders.
 
Mr. Schweitzer was appointed as a director at the 2011 annual and special meeting of our stockholders.
Consulting Agreement with Principal Stockholder
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
From February 1, 2004 through February 1, 2006, we entered into a consulting agreement with Brokton International Ltd., a company
which, as of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, owns 6.88% of our common stock and is one of only two stockholders that
owns more than 5% of our issued and outstanding shares of our common stock. Under this agreement, we engaged Brokton
International Ltd. as a consultant to advise our management with respect to hiring additional qualified management, providing
support with respect to operational matters and government compliance in Ghana, mergers and acquisitions and financial advisory.
James Longshore, our former President and a former director of our company, is the President of Brokton International Ltd. and
exercises sole investment, voting and disposition powers over the shares of Brokton. Mr. Longshore is a director of our wholly-
owned subsidiaries, XGEL and XOG Ghana (since April 2006) and Chief Operating Officer (since February 2007) and General
Manager (since June 2006) and a director of XG Mining (since June 2006) and Chief Operating Officer (since February 2007) and
General Manager (since June 2006) and a director and officer of Xtra Energy (since March 2007). From February 2004 to February
2006, we paid Brokton International Ltd. an aggregate of $53,176 for its consulting services and reimbursed it for expenses incurred
on our behalf.
- 145 -
On January 3, 2009, we entered into a consulting agreement with Brokton International Ltd. to provide us with the consulting
services of Mr. Longshore as General Manager of our subsidiaries, XG Mining and XGEL for a one year term ending on December 31,
2009. During the term of this agreement, we paid Brokton International Ltd. an aggregate of $60,000 and reimbursed it for expenses
incurred on behalf of our company and our subsidiaries.
On June 1, 2010, we entered into a consulting agreement with Brokton International Ltd. to provide the continued consulting
services of Mr. Longshore as General Manager of our subsidiaries, XG Mining and XGEL for a one year term which expired on
December 31, 2010. On November 30, 2010, the above agreement was renewed by way of renewal agreement for a further one year
term effective January 1, 2011 and ending on December 31, 2011. As of the date of this proxy statement/prospectus, Brokton
International Ltd. provides Mr. Longshore’s services to our company on a month-to-month basis.
See “Executive Compensation – Summary Compensation Table” for all compensation paid to Brokton during 2010 and the fiscal
year. During 2010 and the fiscal year, Mr. Longshore also received compensation from Ravenclaw Mining Limited for assisting this
company in fulfilling its agreement with our company. Ravenclaw Mining Limited entered into an agreement dated July 1, 2010 with
our company for a term of one year whereby it will receive a maximum payment of 2% gross overriding royalty on all placer gold
produced by the independent Ghanaian contract miners who carry out recovery of placer gold operations at our Kibi and Pameng
projects. Ravenclaw Mining Limited will not receive the 2% gross overriding royalty until our company receives its 10% gross
overriding royalty on all placer gold produced from the contract miners. Ravenclaw Mining Limited has to the option to take their
payment in cash or kind. This agreement is renewable on an annual basis.
Director Independence
As shares of our common stock are currently traded on the OTC Bulletin Board, we are not subject to the rules of any national
securities exchange which requires that a majority of a listed company’s directors and specified committees of its board of directors
meet independence standards prescribed by such rules. For the purpose of preparing the disclosures in this proxy
statement/prospectus with respect to director independence, we have used the definition of “independent director” within the
meaning of NI 52-110 and as set forth in the Marketplace Rules of the NASDAQ, which defines an “independent director” generally
as being a person, other than an executive officer or employee of the company or any other individual having a relationship which,
in the opinion of our Board of Directors, would interfere with the exercise of independent judgment in carrying out the
responsibilities of a director.
Consistent with these standards, our Board of Directors has determined that Richard Grayston, Robert Casaceli and James
Schweitzer are “independent”.
SECURITY OWNERSHIP
At September 26, 2012, we had 44,610,917 shares of our common stock issued and outstanding. The following table sets forth
information known to us as of September 26, 2012 relating to the beneficial ownership of shares of our common stock by:
each person who is known by us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of our outstanding shares of common stock;
each director;
each named executive officer; and
all named executive officers and directors as a group.
Unless otherwise indicated, the business address of each person listed is in care of our field camp located at 2 Masalakye Street,
Kwabeng, Ghana. The percentages in the table have been calculated on the basis of treating as outstanding for a particular person,
all shares of our common stock outstanding on that date and all shares of our common stock issuable to that holder if that person
exercises outstanding options, warrants, rights or conversion privileges owned by that person at that date which are exercisable
within 60 days of that date. Except as otherwise indicated, the persons listed below have sole voting and investment power with
respect to all shares of our common stock owned by them, except to the extent that power may be shared with a spouse.
NAME OF BENEFICIAL OWNER
Paul Zyla
John C. Ross
Richard W. Grayston
Yves P. Clement
Peter Minuk
Victor Nkansa
Robert J. Casaceli
James H. Schweitzer
James Longshore
Officers and Directors as a Group (9 persons)
 
Mark T. McGinnis
- 146 -
AMOUNT AND NATURE
OF BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP
504,250    (1)
70,000    (2)
263,000    (3)
424,000    (4)
170,000    (5)
22,000    (6)
99,000    (7)
251,000    (8)
3,069,855    (9)
4,873,105    (1) to (9)
3,317,292    (10)
PERCENTAGE
OF CLASS
1.13%
0.16%
0.59%
0.95%
0.38%
0.05%
0.22%
0.56%
6.88%
10.92%
7.44%
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Consists of (a) 396,250 shares of our common stock; (b) 108,000 shares of our common stock which can be acquired upon the exercise
of options to purchase shares of our common stock that have vested and are currently exercisable.
 
Consists of (a) 65,000 shares of our common stock which can be acquired upon the exercise of options to purchase shares of our
common stock that have vested and are currently exercisable; and (b) 5,000 shares of our common stock which shall become issuable
upon options that shall vest and be exercisable from September 26, 2012. Excludes 20,000 shares of our common stock issuable upon
the exercise of options that have not yet vested and will vest monthly as to 2,500 in each month.
 
Consists of (a) 38,000 shares of our common stock; and (b) 225,000 shares of our common stock which can be acquired upon the
exercise of options to purchase shares of our common stock that have vested and are currently exercisable.
 
Consists of (a) 414,000 shares of our common stock which can be acquired upon the exercise of options to purchase shares of our
common stock that have vested and are currently exercisable; and (b) 10,000 shares of our common stock which shall become
issuable upon options that shall vest and be exercisable from September 26, 2012.
 
Consists of (a) 20,000 shares of our common stock; and (b) 150,000 shares of our common stock which can be acquired upon the
exercise of options to purchase shares of our common stock that have vested and are currently exercisable.
 
Consists of (a) 21,000 shares of our common stock which can be acquired upon the exercise of options to purchase shares of our
common stock that have vested and are currently exercisable; and (b) 1,000 shares of our common stock which shall become issuable
upon options that shall vest and be exercisable from September 26, 2012. Excludes (a) 2,000 shares of our common stock issuable
upon the exercise of options that have not yet vested and will vest monthly as to 500 in each month; (b) 3,000 shares of our common
stock issuable upon the exercise of options that have not yet vested and will vest on March 1, 2014.
 
Consists of (a) 93,000 shares of our common stock which can be acquired upon the exercise of options to purchase shares of our
common stock that have vested and are currently exercisable; and (b) 6,000 shares of our common stock which shall become issuable
upon options that shall vest and be exercisable from September 26, 2012. Excludes 9,000 shares of our common stock issuable upon
the exercise of options that have not yet vested and will vest monthly as to 3,000 in each month.
- 147 -
(8)
(9)
Consists of (a) 200,000 shares of our common stock; (b) 45,000 shares of our common stock which can be acquired upon the exercise
of options to purchase shares of our common stock that have vested and are currently exercisable; and (c) 6,000 shares of our common
stock which shall become issuable upon options that shall vest and be exercisable from September 26, 2012. Excludes 57,000 shares
of our common stock issuable upon the exercise of options that have not yet vested and will vest monthly as to 3,000 in each month.
 
Consists of (a) 70,000 shares of our common stock; (b) 2,000,000 shares of our common stock which are owned by Brokton
International Ltd.; (c) 774,855 shares of our common stock which are owned by Sausilito Ltd.; and (d) 225,000 shares of our common
stock which can be acquired upon the exercise of options to purchase shares of our common stock that have vested and are currently
exercisable. Brokton International Ltd. is a Turks & Caicos Islands corporation, whose sole beneficial owner is James Longshore.
Sausilito Ltd. is a Turks & Caicos Islands corporation, whose sole beneficial owner is James Longshore. Mr. Longshore exercises sole
investment, voting and disposition powers over the shares of our common stock included in the above table.
(10) Consists of (a) 2,492,725 shares of our common stock held by Mark McGinnis; and (b) 152,775 broker warrants, issued on closing of
the initial public offering, which are exercisable into shares of our common stock from September 26, 2012; and (c) 671,792 shares of
our common stock held by his spouse of which an aggregate of 7,350 shares of our common stock is held in trust for their children.
Authorized Capital
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
Our securities consist of shares of common stock with a par value of $0.001 per share. Our authorized capital is 250,000,000 shares
of common stock of which 44,610,917 shares of our common stock are issued and outstanding as of September 26, 2012.
Common Stock
Each share of our common stock is entitled to one vote per share on all matters submitted to a vote of the stockholders, including
the election of directors. Except as otherwise required by law or as provided in any resolution adopted by our Board of Directors
with respect to any series of preferred stock, the holders of shares of our common stock will possess all voting power. Generally, all
matters to be voted on by our stockholders must be approved by a majority (or, in the case of the election of directors, by a plurality)
of the votes entitled to be cast by all shares of our common stock that are present in person or represented by proxy, subject to any
voting rights granted to holders of any preferred stock. Two individuals present in person, each of whom is a stockholder or a
proxyholder entitled to vote at a meeting, are necessary to constitute a quorum at any meeting of our stockholders. A vote by the
holders of a majority of our outstanding shares of common stock is required to effectuate certain fundamental corporate changes
such as a liquidation, a merger or an amendment to our articles of incorporation. Our articles of incorporation do not provide for
cumulative voting in the election of directors.
The holders of shares of our common stock will be entitled to such cash dividends as may be declared from time to time by our
Board of Directors from funds available therefor.
The holders of shares of our common stock will be entitled to receive pro rata all of our assets available for distribution to such
holders.
- 148 -
If our company completes any merger or consolidation with or into another company where shares of our common stock are
converted into or exchangeable for shares of our common stock, other securities or property (including cash), all holders of shares
of our common stock will be entitled to receive the same kind and amount of shares of our common stock and other securities and
property (including cash).
Holders of shares of our common stock have no pre-emptive rights, no conversion rights and there are no redemption provisions
applicable to our shares of common stock.
EXPERTS
The financial statements for Xtra-Gold Nevada as at and for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, included in this proxy
statement/prospectus have been audited by Davidson & Company LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth
in their report, and are included herein in reliance upon such report and upon the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and
accounting.
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the issuance of shares offered hereby will be passed upon for Xtra-Gold BVI by Harney Westwood & Riegels, Road
Town, Tortola, British Virgin Islands.
AVAILABLE INFORMATION
We have filed with the SEC a registration statement under the Securities Act that registers the shares of our common stock to be
issued in connection with the Continuation, if approved. This proxy statement/prospectus is a part of that registration statement. The
registration statement, including the attached exhibits and schedules, contains additional relevant information about our company.
We will make available free of charge on our website at www.xtragold.com under “Investor Info”, copies of materials we file with, or
furnish to, the SEC. You may also read and copy this information at the public reference room the SEC maintains at 100 F Street,
N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. You may obtain information on the operation of the SEC’s public reference room by calling the SEC at
1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC also maintains a website that contains reports, proxy statements and other information about issuers, like
our company, who file electronically with the SEC. The address of the site is www.sec.gov. Information on the SEC’s website is not
part of this proxy statement/prospectus. To the extent required by the rules and regulations of the SEC, we will amend this proxy
statement/prospectus to include information filed after the date of this proxy statement/prospectus.
Documents filed with the SEC are available from our company without charge. You can obtain documents filed with the SEC by
requesting them from our company by telephone at 416 366-4227 or in writing at the following address:
360 Bay Street, Suite 301
Toronto ON M5H 2V6, Canada
Attention: Paul Zyla, President
If you would like to request documents, please do so by November 9, 2012, to receive the documents before the special meeting.
- 149 -
INDEX TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The following financial statements of Xtra-Gold Nevada listed below are included with this proxy statement/prospectus. These
financial statements have been prepared on the basis of the U.S. GAAP and are expressed in U.S. dollars.
Years Ended December 31, 2011 and 2010:
 
      Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
      Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2011 and 2010
      Consolidated Statements of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2011 and 2010
      Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2011 and 2010
      Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity
      Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Three and Six Months Ended June 30, 2012 and 2011:
 
      Consolidated Balance Sheets as of June 30, 2012 (unaudited) and December 31, 2011
      Consolidated Statements of Operations for the Three and Six Month Periods Ended June 30, 2012 and 2011 (unaudited)
      Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the Three and Six Month Periods Ended June 30, 2012 and 2011 (unaudited)
      Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity (unaudited)
      Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (unaudited)
Page
 
 
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-5
F-7
F-16
 
 
 
F-34
F-35
F-36
F-38
F-40
F-1
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Shareholders of
Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. and subsidiaries
(an Exploration Stage Company)
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. and subsidiaries (an Exploration
Stage Company) (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, and the related consolidated statements of operations,
stockholders' equity, and cash flows for the years then ended and for the period from the beginning of the exploration stage on
January 1, 2003 to December 31, 2011. Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. and subsidiaries’ management is the responsible for these
consolidated financial statements. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
are free of material misstatement. The company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal
control over financial reporting. Our audit included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing
audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of
the company's internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An audit also includes examining,
on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles
used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2011 and 2010, and the results of its operations and its cash flows
for the years then ended and for the period from the beginning of the exploration stage on January 1, 2003 to December 31, 2011 in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going
concern. As discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company has suffered recurring losses from
operations. These matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plan
in regards to these matters are discussed in Note 2. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that
might results from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Vancouver, Canada
 
March 29, 2012
F-2
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
AS AT DECEMBER 31
ASSETS
Current
Cash and cash equivalents
Investments, at fair value (cost of $1,870,648 (2010 - $78,318)) (Note 4)
Due from related party (Note 12)
Receivables and other assets
 
Total current assets
Restricted cash (Note 10)
Equipment (Note 5)
Mineral properties (Note 8)
 
TOTAL ASSETS
 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
 
Total current liabilities
 
Asset retirement obligation (Note 10)
 
Total liabilities
 
Stockholders’ equity
Capital stock (Note 11)
Authorized
250,000,000 common shares with a par value of $0.001
Issued and outstanding
44,569,217 common shares (2010 – 42,961,179 common shares)
Additional paid in capital
Deficit
Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage
Total Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. stockholders’ equity
$
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
$
   
   
   
$
“DAVIDSON & COMPANY LLP”
Chartered Accountants
2011
4,498,753  $
 
2,531,644 
 
213,872 
130,637 
 
   
 
 
7,374,906 
 
220,961 
1,370,027 
 
 
857,422 
 
   
 9,823,316  $
   
   
   
 745,860  $
745,860 
 
171,395 
 
917,255 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44,569 
28,441,909 
(1,427,764)
2010
10,096,122 
129,141 
— 
125,354 
 
10,350,617 
220,000 
735,426 
1,713,862 
 
 13,019,905 
 
 
 
 517,236 
 
517,236 
 
155,395 
 
672,631 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42,961 
26,089,803 
(1,427,764)
(17,646,122)
(12,321,365)
Total Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. stockholders’ equity
Non-controlling interest
 
Total stockholders’ equity
 
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
History and organization of the Company (Note 1) 
Continuance of operations (Note 2) 
Contingency and commitments (Note 16) 
Subsequent events (Note 17)
$
9,412,592 
(506,531)
 
8,906,061
9,823,316  $
12,383,635 
(36,361)
 
12,347,274 
 
 13,019,905
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-3
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
EXPENSES (INCOME)
Amortization
Exploration
General and administrative
Options receipts in excess of property value (Note 8)
Write-off of mineral property
 
LOSS BEFORE OTHER ITEMS
 
OTHER ITEMS
Foreign exchange gain
Interest expense
Realized gains on sales of trading securities
Net unrealized gain (loss) on trading securities
Other income
Recovery of gold
Gain on disposal of property
Write off of investment
 
 
 
Consolidated loss for the period
 
Net loss (income) attributable to non-controlling interest
 
Net loss attributable to Xtra-Gold Resources Corp.
 
Basic and diluted loss attributable to common shareholders per common
share
 
Basic and diluted weighted average number of common shares outstanding
Cumulative 
 
amounts from 
 
  the beginning of 
the exploration 
 
stage on 
 
  January 1, 2003 
  to December 31, 
2011 
 
 
   
   
 
$
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
$
Year 
 
Ended 
 
  December 31, 
2011 
 
 
   
   
 
 584,843  $
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 (17,646,122) $
21,502,980 
7,609,010 
(315,000)
26,000 
 
(29,407,833)
 
 
566,680 
(241,936)
254,319 
47,210 
910,730 
9,386,689 
356,488 
(25,000)
 
11,255,180 
 
(18,152,653)
 
506,531
Year 
 
Ended 
 
  December 31, 
2010 
 
 
   
   
 
 114,785 
 284,413  $
2,992,932 
 
6,465,637 
1,355,399 
 
1,278,577 
(315,000)
 
— 
— 
 
— 
   
 
 
(4,463,116)
 
(7,713,627)
 
   
 
 
   
 
179,124 
 
16,028 
(1,283)
 
— 
170,422 
 
60,317 
212,073 
 
(98,290)
34,104 
 
53,894 
1,227,394 
 
1,316,330 
— 
 
260,058 
(25,000)
 
— 
 
   
 
1,486,471 
 
1,918,700 
   
 
 
(2,976,645)
 
(5,794,927)
 
   
 
(40,268)
 
470,170 
 
   
 
 (3,016,913)
 (5,324,757) $
$
(0.12) $
43,815,678
(0.09)
 
35,160,827
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-4
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Loss for the period
Items not affecting cash:
Amortization
Amortization of deferred financing costs
Accretion of asset retirement obligation
Shares issued for services
Stock-based compensation
Options receipts in excess of property value
Unrealized foreign exchange (gain) loss
Realized gain on sale of trading securities
Purchase of investments
Proceeds on sale of trading securities
Unrealized (gain) loss on trading securities
Gain on disposal of property
Write-off of mineral property
Expenses paid by stockholders
Write-off of investment
 
Changes in non-cash working capital items:
Increase in receivables and other
Increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Increase in due to related party
 
Net cash used in operating activities
 
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Proceeds from issuance of convertible debentures
Deferred financing costs
Repurchase of capital stock
Issuance of capital stock, net of financing costs
 
Net cash provided by financing activities
Cumulative 
 
amounts from 
 
  the beginning of 
the exploration 
 
stage on 
 
  January 1, 2003 
  to December 31, 
2011 
 
 
   
   
 
$
Year 
 
Ended 
 
  December 31, 
2011 
 
 
   
   
 
 (18,152,653) $
584,843 
46,202 
40,262 
202,365 
1,839,928 
(315,000)
(401,956)
(254,319)
(13,327,886)
12,157,256 
(47,210)
(356,488)
26,000 
2,700 
25,000 
 
 
(336,134)
735,167 
50,000 
 
(17,481,923)
 
 
900,000 
(46,202)
(165,000)
22,609,711 
 
23,298,509
Year 
 
Ended 
 
  December 31, 
2010 
 
 
   
   
 
 (2,976,645)
 (5,794,927) $
   
 
114,785 
 
1,283 
 
 
7,191 
— 
 
411,507 
 
— 
 
 
(37,220)
(170,422)
 
— 
 
1,746,805 
 
98,290 
 
 
— 
— 
 
— 
 
25,000 
 
   
 
   
 
(78,892)
 
284,163 
 
— 
 
   
 
(574,155)
 
 
   
   
 
— 
 
— 
 
(108,000)
 
10,774,804 
 
   
 
10,666,804
284,413 
— 
16,000 
— 
361,239 
(315,000)
63,965 
(60,317)
(1,763,196)
240,559 
(212,073)
(260,058)
— 
— 
— 
 
 
(219,155)
228,623 
— 
 
(7,429,927)
 
 
— 
— 
— 
1,992,475 
 
1,992,475
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
- continued -
F-5
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Continued
 
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Cumulative 
 
amounts from 
 
  the beginning of 
the exploration 
 
stage on 
 
  January 1, 2003 
  to December 31, 
2011
Year 
 
Ended 
 
  December 31, 
2011
Year 
 
Ended 
 
  December 31, 
2010
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Acquisition of equipment
Deposit on equipment
Restricted cash
Oil and gas property expenditures
Acquisition of cash on purchase of subsidiary
Acquisition of subsidiary
Option payments received
Proceeds on disposal of assets
Net cash used in investing activities
 
Change in cash and cash equivalents during the period
 
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of the period
 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of the period
Supplemental disclosure with respect to cash flows (Note 13)
$
(1,835,129)
(151,506)
(220,961)
(250,137)
11,510 
(25,000)
525,000 
628,390 
(1,317,833)
 
4,498,753 
 
—
4,498,753  $
(946,956)
— 
(961)
— 
— 
— 
500,000 
288,000 
(159,917)
 
(5,597,369)
 
10,096,122
4,498,753  $
(454,197)
 
(220,000)
— 
— 
— 
25,000 
30,000 
(619,197)
 
9,473,452 
 
622,670 
 
 10,096,122
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-6
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Balance, December 31,
2002
Paid on behalf of the
Company
October 31, 2003, issuance
of stock for acquisition of
subsidiary
Loss for the year
Balance, December 31,
2003
March, 2004 - private
placement at $0.35 per
share
May, 2004 - private
placement at $0.35 per
share
December, 2004 -
acquisition of subsidiary via
issuance of common stock
Common Stock
Amount
Additional 
Paid in 
 
Capital
Deficit
Non- 
 
  Controlling 
Interest
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated 
During the 
 
  Exploration 
Stage
Total
Number 
 
  of Shares
12,364,085   $
12,364  $  1,412,842  $ (1,427,764) $
—  $
—  $
(2,558)
—
50,350,000 
—
62,714,085
2,000,000
2,129,400
2,698,350
—
50,350 
—
5,258
(50,350)
—
—
— 
—
62,714
1,367,750
(1,427,764)
2,000
2,129
698,000
743,161
2,699
1,616,311
- continued -
—
—
—
—
— 
—
—
—
—
—
—
— 
(2,700)
(2,700)
—
—
5,258
— 
(2,700)
—
700,000
745,290
—
1,619,010
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-7
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Common Stock
Additional
Non-
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated 
During the
Continued
Share issuance costs
Loss for the year
Balance, December 31,
2004
May, 2005 – cancellation of
shares
June 2005 – for services
June, 2005 – private
placement at $0.55 per
share
August, 2005 – private
placement at $0.55 per
share
November, 2005 – private
placement at $0.55 per
share
Number 
 
  of Shares 
 
   
— 
 
 
—
Amount 
 
— 
—
Paid in 
Capital 
 
(76,298)
—
Deficit 
 
— 
—
Controlling 
Interest 
 
 
   
— 
 
 
—
Exploration 
Stage 
 
 
   
— 
 
 
(398,533)
Total 
 
(76,298)
(398,533)
69,541,835
(47,000,000)
10,000
536,218
300,000
1,549,354
69,542
4,348,924
(1,427,764)
(47,000)
10
536
300
1,550
47,000 
5,490
294,384
164,700
850,595
- continued -
— 
—
—
—
—
—
— 
—
—
—
—
(401,233)
2,589,469
— 
—
—
—
—
— 
5,500
294,920
165,000
852,145
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-8
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Common Stock
Number 
 
 
  of Shares 
 
Continued
 
   
— 
Share issuance costs
 
Stock-based compensation  
— 
Loss for the year
— 
 
Balance, December 31,
2005
February, 2006 – conversion
of promissory note at $0.55
per share
March, 2006 – exercise of
warrants at $0.75 per share  
March, 2006 - private
placement at $0.70 per
share
April, 2006 – exercise of
warrants at $0.75 per share
792,029 
177,200
24,937,407
90,909
108,500
Amount 
 
— 
— 
—
Additional 
Paid in 
 
Capital 
 
   
 
(130,714)
 
 
41,022 
—
Deficit 
 
— 
— 
—
Non- 
 
  Controlling 
Interest 
 
 
   
— 
 
 
— 
—
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated 
During the 
 
  Exploration 
Stage 
 
 
   
— 
 
 
— 
(272,572)
Total 
 
(130,714)
41,022 
(272,572)
24,938
5,621,401
(1,427,764)
91
108
792 
177
49,909
81,267
553,628 
132,723
- continued -
—
—
— 
—
—
—
—
— 
—
(673,805)
3,544,770
—
—
— 
—
50,000
81,375
554,420 
132,900
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-9
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Common Stock
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated
Continued
June, 2006 – cancellation of
shares
June, 2006 – private
placement at $0.90 per
share
July, 2006 – private
placement at $0.90 per
share
October, 2006 – private
placement at $1.10 per
 
share
Share issuance costs
 
Stock-based compensation  
Loss for the year
 
Balance, December 31,
2006
Number 
 
  of Shares
Amount
Additional 
Paid in 
 
Capital
Deficit
Non- 
 
  Controlling 
Interest
During the 
 
  Exploration 
Stage
(10,000)
578,112
1,132,000
282,000 
— 
— 
—
28,088,157
(10)
578
(6,990)
519,722
1,132
1,017,668
282 
— 
— 
—
309,918 
(240,616)
206,041 
—
—
—
—
— 
— 
— 
—
28,088
8,244,671
(1,427,764)
- continued -
—
—
—
— 
— 
— 
—
—
Total
(7,000)
520,300
—
—
—
1,018,800
— 
— 
— 
(2,562,992)
310,200 
 
(240,616)
 
 
206,041 
  (2,562,992)
(3,236,797)
3,608,198
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-10
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Amount
Additional 
Paid in 
 
Capital
668 
— 
— 
—
901,405 
(89,533)
195,623 
—
Common Stock
Continued
October, 2007 – Private
 
placement at $1.35 per unit
Share issuance costs
 
Stock-based compensation  
Loss for the year
 
Balance, December 31,
2007
February, 2008 – Private
placement at $1.50 per unit
May, 2008 – Exercise of
options at $0.75 per share
June, 2008 – Conversion of
debentures at $1.00 per
share
Number 
 
  of Shares
668,202 
— 
— 
—
28,756,359
1,062,000
100,000
650,000
28,756
9,252,166
(1,427,764)
1,062
1,591,938
100
650
74,900
649,350
- continued -
—
—
—
Deficit
Non- 
 
  Controlling 
Interest
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated 
During the 
 
  Exploration 
Stage
Total
— 
— 
— 
—
— 
— 
— 
—
—
—
—
—
— 
— 
— 
(1,874,757)
902,073 
 
(89,533)
 
 
195,623 
  (1,874,757)
(5,111,554)
2,741,604
—
1,593,000
—
—
75,000
650,000
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-11
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Common Stock
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated
Continued
July, 2008 – Exercise of
warrants at $1.50 per share  
December, 2008 – For
services at $1.50 per share  
Share issuance costs
 
Stock-based compensation  
Loss for the year
 
Balance, December 31,
2008
April, 2009 – Private
placement at $0.70 per unit
May, 2009 – Private
placement at $0.70 per unit
Number 
 
  of Shares
631,000
131,243 
— 
— 
—
710,000
308,000
31,330,602
Amount
Additional 
Paid in 
 
Capital
Deficit
Non- 
 
  Controlling 
Interest
During the 
 
  Exploration 
Stage
Total
631
132 
— 
— 
—
945,869
196,733 
(125,040)
156,444 
—
—
— 
— 
— 
—
31,331
12,742,360
(1,427,764)
710
308
496,290
215,292
—
—
- continued -
—
— 
— 
— 
—
—
—
—
—
946,500
— 
— 
— 
(3,231,403)
196,865 
 
(125,040)
 
156,444 
  (3,231,403)
(8,342,957)
3,002,970
—
—
497,000
215,600
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-12
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Common Stock
Number 
 
  of Shares
Amount
Additional 
Paid in 
 
Capital
Deficit
Non- 
 
  Controlling 
Interest
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated 
During the 
 
  Exploration 
Stage
Total
Continued
May, 2009 – Repurchase
and cancellation of shares at
$0.25 per share
August, 2009 – Private
placement at $0.80 per unit
December, 2009 – Private
 
placement at $1.00 per unit
Share issuance costs
 
Stock-based compensation  
Loss for the year
 
Balance, December 31,
2009
(200,000)
376,875
706,000 
— 
— 
—
33,231,477
(200)
376
706 
— 
— 
—
(49,800)
301,124
705,294 
(107,390)
468,052 
—
—
—
— 
— 
— 
—
33,231
14,771,222
(1,427,764)
—
—
— 
— 
— 
(76,629)
(76,629)
—
—
(50,000)
301,500
— 
— 
— 
(961,495)
706,000 
 
(107,390)
 
468,052 
 
  (1,038,124)
(9,304,452)
3,995,608
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-13
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Continued
February, 2010 –
Conversion of debenture at
$1.00 per share
March, 2010 – Repurchase
Common Stock
Number 
 
  of Shares
Amount
Additional 
Paid in 
 
Capital
Deficit
Non- 
 
  Controlling 
Interest
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated 
During the 
 
  Exploration 
Stage
Total
250,000
250
249,750
—
—
—
250,000
March, 2010 – Repurchase
and cancellation of shares at
$1.33 per share
April, 2010 – Private
placement at $1.00 per unit
June, 2010 – Private
placement at $1.00 per unit
August, 2010 – Conversion
of warrants at $1.00 per
share
November, 2010 – Initial
public offering at CAD$1.35
(USD$1.33) per share
December, 2010 –
Conversion of warrants at
 
$1.50 per share
Share issuance costs
 
Stock-based compensation  
Income (loss) for the year
 
Balance, December 31,
2010
(80,891)
838,000
250,000
360,000
8,092,593
20,000 
— 
— 
—
42,961,179
(80)
838
250
360
(107,920)
837,162
249,750
359,640
8,092
10,744,621
20 
— 
— 
—
29,980 
  (1,455,909)
411,507 
 
 
—
—
—
—
—
—
— 
— 
— 
—
42,961
26,089,803
(1,427,764)
—
—
—
—
—
— 
— 
— 
40,268
(36,361)
—
—
—
—
(108,000)
838,000
250,000
360,000
—
10,752,713
— 
— 
— 
(3,016,913)
30,000 
  (1,455, 909)
 
411,507 
  (2,976,645)
(12,321,365)
12,347,274
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-14
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
Common Stock
Continued
Conversion of warrants at
$1.50 per share
Conversion of warrants at
$1.00 per share
 
Stock-based compensation  
Loss for the year
 
Balance, December 31,
2011
Number 
 
  of Shares
768,874
839,164 
— 
—
Amount
Additional 
Paid in 
 
Capital
769
839 
— 
—
1,152,542
838,325 
361,239 
—
Deficit
Non- 
 
  Controlling 
Interest
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated 
During the 
 
  Exploration 
Stage
Total
—
— 
— 
—
—
— 
— 
(470,170)
—
1,153,311
— 
— 
(5,324,757)
839,164 
 
 
361,239 
  (5,794,927)
44,569,217  $
44,569  $ 28,441,909  $ (1,427,764) $
(506,531)  $  (17,646,122) $  8,906,061
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-15
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
1.
HISTORY AND ORGANIZATION OF THE COMPANY
 
Silverwing Systems Corporation (the “Company”), a Nevada corporation, was incorporated on September 1, 1998. On June 23, 1999,
the Company completed the acquisition of Advertain On-Line Canada Inc. (“Advertain Canada”), a Canadian company operating in
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. The Company changed its name to Advertain On-Line Inc. (“Advertain”) on August 19, 1999.
Advertain Canada’s business was the operation of a web site, “Advertain.com”, whose primary purpose was to distribute entertainment
advertising on the Internet.
 
In May 2001, the Company, being unable to continue its funding of Advertain Canada’s operations, decided to abandon its interest in
Advertain Canada. On June 15, 2001, the Company sold its investment in Advertain Canada back to Advertain Canada’s original
shareholder. On June 18, 2001, the Company changed its name from Advertain to RetinaPharma International, Inc. (“RetinaPharma”)
and became inactive.
2.
In 2003, the Company became a resource exploration company. On October 31, 2003, the Company acquired 100% of the issued and
outstanding common stock of Xtra-Gold Resources, Inc. (“XGRI”). XGRI was incorporated in Florida on October 24, 2003. On
December 19, 2003, the Company changed its name from RetinaPharma to Xtra-Gold Resources Corp.
 
In 2004, the Company acquired 100% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Canadiana Gold Resources Limited (“Canadiana”)
and 90% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Goldenrae Mining Company Limited (“Goldenrae”). Both companies are
incorporated in Ghana and the remaining 10% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Goldenrae is held by the Government of
Ghana.
 
On October 20, 2005, XGRI changed its name to Xtra Energy Corp. (“Xtra Energy”).
 
On October 20, 2005, the Company incorporated Xtra Oil & Gas Ltd. (“XOG”) in Alberta, Canada.
 
On December 21, 2005, Canadiana changed its name to Xtra-Gold Exploration Limited (“XG Exploration”).
 
On January 13, 2006, Goldenrae changed its name to Xtra-Gold Mining Limited (“XG Mining”).
 
On March 2, 2006, the Company incorporated Xtra Oil & Gas (Ghana) Limited (“XOGG”) in Ghana.
 
CONTINUANCE OF OPERATIONS
 
The Company is in the early stages of exploration and as is common with any exploration company, it raises financing for its
exploration and acquisition activities. The Company has incurred a loss of $5,324,757 for the year ended December 31, 2011 and has
accumulated a deficit during the exploration stage of $17,646,122. Results for the year ended December 31, 2011 are not necessarily
indicative of future results. This raises substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to
continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital and implement its business plan, which
is typical for junior exploration companies. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the
Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
 
Management of the Company (“Management”) is of the opinion that sufficient financing will be obtained from external financing and
further share issuances to meet the Company’s obligations. At December 31, 2011, the Company has working capital of $6,629,046,
which would not be sufficient to fund the current level of operations for a period greater than twelve months. The Company’s
discretionary exploration activities do have considerable scope for flexibility in terms of the amount and timing of exploration
expenditures, and expenditures may be adjusted accordingly if required.
F-16
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
3.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
 
Generally accepted accounting principles
 
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles of the United
States of America (“U.S. GAAP”).
 
Principles of consolidation
 
These consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company, its wholly owned subsidiaries, Xtra Energy (from
October 31, 2003), XG Exploration (from February 16, 2004), XOG (from October 20, 2005) and XOGG (from March 2, 2006) and its
90% owned subsidiary, XG Mining (from December 22, 2004). All intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated on
consolidation.
 
Use of estimates
 
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and
assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ
from those estimates. Significant areas requiring the use of estimates include the carrying value and recoverability of mineral
properties, inputs used in the calculation of stock-based compensation and finders’ warrants, inputs used in the calculation of the asset
retirement obligation, and the valuation allowance applied to deferred income taxes. Actual results could differ from those estimates,
and would impact future results of operations and cash flows.
 
Cash and cash equivalents
 
The Company considers highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. At December
The Company considers highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. At December
31, 2011 and 2010, cash and cash equivalents consisted of cash held at financial institutions.
 
Receivables
 
No allowance for doubtful accounts has been provided. Management has evaluated all receivables and believes they are all
collectible.
 
Recovery of gold
 
Recovery of gold and other income is recognized when title and the risks and rewards of ownership to delivered bullion and
commodities pass to the buyer and collection is reasonably assured.
 
Trading securities
 
The Company’s trading securities are reported at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses included in earnings.
 
Non-Controlling Interest
 
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of XG Mining (from December 22, 2004). All intercompany accounts and
transactions have been eliminated upon consolidation. The Company records a non-controlling interest which reflects the 10% portion
of the earnings (loss) of XG Mining allocable to the holders of the minority interest.
F-17
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
3.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (cont’d...)
 
Equipment
 
Equipment is recorded at cost and is being amortized over its estimated useful lives using the declining balance method at the
following annual rates:
Furniture and equipment
Computer equipment
Vehicles
Exploration equipment
20%
30%
30%
20%
Mineral properties and exploration and development costs
The costs of acquiring mineral rights are capitalized at the date of acquisition. After acquisition, various factors can affect the
recoverability of the capitalized costs. If, after review, management concludes that the carrying amount of a mineral property is
impaired, it will be written down to estimated fair value. Exploration costs incurred on mineral properties are expensed as incurred.
Development costs incurred on proven and probable reserves will be capitalized. Upon commencement of production, capitalized
costs will be amortized using the unit-of-production method over the estimated life of the ore body based on proven and probable
reserves (which exclude non-recoverable reserves and anticipated processing losses). When the Company receives an option
payment related to a property, the proceeds of the payment are applied to reduce the carrying value of the exploration asset.
Long-lived assets
Long-lived assets held and used by the Company are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances
indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. For purposes of evaluating the recoverability of long-lived
assets, the recoverability test is performed using undiscounted net cash flows related to the long-lived assets. If such assets are
considered to be impaired, the impairment recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets
exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs
to sell.
Asset retirement obligations
The Company records the fair value of an asset retirement obligation as a liability in the period in which it incurs a legal obligation
associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets that result from the acquisition, construction, development, and/or
normal use of the long-lived assets. The Company also records a corresponding asset which is amortized over the life of the asset.
Subsequent to the initial measurement of the asset retirement obligation, the obligation is adjusted at the end of each period to
reflect the passage of time (accretion expense) and changes in the estimated future cash flows underlying the obligation (asset
retirement cost).
F-18
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
3.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (cont’d...)
 
Stock-based compensation
 
The Company accounts for share-based compensation under the provisions of ASC 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation”. Under
the fair value recognition provisions, stock-based compensation expense is measured at the grant date for all stock-based awards to
employees and directors and is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. The
Black-Scholes option valuation model is used to calculate fair value.
 
The Company accounts for stock compensation arrangements with non-employees in accordance with ASC 718 which requires that
such equity instruments are recorded at their fair value on the measurement date. The measurement of stock- based compensation is
subject to periodic adjustment as the underlying equity instruments vest. Non-employee stock-based compensation charges are
amortized over the vesting period on a straight-line basis. For stock options granted to non- employees, the fair value of the stock
options is estimated using a Black-Scholes valuation model.
 
Income taxes
 
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax assets and liabilities are
recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing
assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected
to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Under the asset
and liability method the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that
includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recognized if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax
asset will not be recognized.
 
Loss per share
 
Basic loss per common share is computed using the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the year. To
calculate diluted loss per share, the Company uses the treasury stock method and the if converted method. As of December 31, 2011,
there were 566,482 warrants (2010 – 2,439,320) and 2,067,000 stock options (2010 – 1,788,000) outstanding which have not been
included in the weighted average number of common shares outstanding as these were anti- dilutive.
 
Foreign exchange
 
The Company’s functional currency is the U.S. dollar. Any monetary assets and liabilities that are in a currency other than the U.S.
dollar are translated at the rate prevailing at year end. Revenue and expenses in a foreign currency are translated at rates that
approximate those in effect at the time of translation. Gains and losses from translation of foreign currency transactions into U.S. dollars
are included in current results of operations.
 
Financial instruments
 
The Company’s financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, investments, receivables, restricted cash, and accounts
payable and accrued liabilities. It is management’s opinion that the Company is not exposed to significant interest, currency or credit
risks arising from its financial instruments. The fair values of these financial instruments approximate their carrying values unless
otherwise noted. The Company has its cash primarily in government or bank guaranteed deposit certificates, bank bonds or in one
commercial bank in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
F-19
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
3.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (cont’d...)
 
Fair value of financial assets and liabilities
The Company measures the fair value of financial assets and liabilities based on GAAP guidance which defines fair value, establishes
The Company measures the fair value of financial assets and liabilities based on GAAP guidance which defines fair value, establishes
a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements.
 
The Company classifies financial assets and liabilities as held-for-trading, available-for-sale, held-to-maturity, loans and receivables or
other financial liabilities depending on their nature. Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognized at fair value on their initial
recognition, except for those arising from certain related party transactions which are accounted for at the transferor’s carrying amount
or exchange amount.
 
Financial assets and liabilities classified as held-for-trading are measured at fair value, with gains and losses recognized in net
income. Financial assets classified as held-to-maturity, loans and receivables, and financial liabilities other than those classified as
held-for-trading are measured at amortized cost, using the effective interest method of amortization. Financial assets classified as
available-for-sale are measured at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses being recognized as other comprehensive income until
realized, or if an unrealized loss is considered other than temporary, the unrealized loss is recorded in income.
 
Financial instruments, including receivables, accounts payable and accrued liabilities are carried at cost, which management believes
approximates fair value due to the short term nature of these instruments. Cash and cash equivalents, investments in trading securities
and restricted cash are classified as held for trading, with unrealized gains and losses being recognized in income.
 
The following table presents information about the assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of December 31, 2011,
and indicates the fair value hierarchy of the valuation techniques the Company utilized to determine such fair value. In general, fair
values determined by Level 1 inputs utilize quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets. Fair values determined by
Level 2 inputs utilize data points that are observable such as quoted prices, interest rates and yield curves. Fair values determined by
Level 3 inputs are unobservable data points for the asset or liability, and included situations where there is little, if any, market activity
for the asset:
Assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
Restricted cash
Investments
Total
December 31,  
 
 
   
$
 
 
$
Quoted Prices  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 4,498,753  $
 
220,961 
2,531,644 
 
 7,251,358  $
in Active
Markets
(Level 1)
2011
Other
Significant
 
 
 
  Significant
 
 
 
  Unobservable 
  Observable  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 — 
 4,498,753  $
 —  $
— 
 
— 
 
220,961 
— 
— 
2,531,644 
 
 
 7,251,358  $
 —  $
 —
Inputs
(Level 3)
Inputs
(Level 2)
The fair values of cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and investments are determined through market, observable and
corroborated sources.
F-20
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
3.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (cont’d...)
 
Concentration of credit risk
 
The financial instrument which potentially subjects the Company to concentration of credit risk is cash. The Company maintains cash
in bank accounts that, at times, may exceed federally insured limits. As of December 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company has exceeded
the federally insured limit. The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts and believes it is not exposed to any
significant risks on its cash in bank accounts. The Company sells all gold recovered to one licensed export agent in Ghana. There is no
contract in place and the Company is able to switch suppliers at its discretion.
 
Recent accounting pronouncements
 
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
 
Business Combinations
 
In December 2010, the ASC guidance for business combinations was updated to clarify existing guidance which requires a public
entity to disclose pro forma revenue and earnings of the combined entity as though the business combination(s) that occurred during
the current year had occurred as of the beginning of the comparable prior annual period only. The update also expands the
supplemental pro forma disclosures required to include a description of the nature and amount of material, nonrecurring pro forma
adjustments directly attributable to the business combination included in the reported pro forma revenue and earnings. Adoption of the
updated guidance, effective for the Company’s fiscal year beginning January 1, 2011, had no impact on the Company’s consolidated
financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
 
Fair Value Accounting
 
In January 2010, the ASC guidance for fair value measurements and disclosure was updated to require additional disclosures related
to transfers in and out of level 1 and 2 fair value measurements. The guidance was amended to clarify the level of disaggregation
required for assets and liabilities and the disclosures required for inputs and valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of
assets and liabilities that fall in either level 2 or level 3. The updated guidance was effective for the Company’s fiscal year beginning
January 1, 2010. The adoption had no impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
 
Also in January 2010, the ASC guidance for fair value measurements and disclosure was updated to require enhanced detail in the
level 3 reconciliation. Adoption of the updated guidance, effective for the Company’s fiscal year beginning January 1, 2011, had no
impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
 
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
 
Comprehensive Income
 
In June 2011, the ASC guidance was issued related to comprehensive income. Under the updated guidance, an entity will have the
option to present the total of comprehensive income either in a single continuous statement of comprehensive income or in two
separate but consecutive statements. In addition, the update required certain disclosure requirements when reporting other
comprehensive income. The update does not change the items reported in other comprehensive income or when an item of other
comprehensive income must be reclassified to income. In December 2011, the FASB issued its final standard to defer the new
requirement to present components of reclassifications of other comprehensive income on the face of the income statement.
Companies will still be required to adopt the other requirements contained in the new standard on comprehensive income. The
Company adopted the new guidance and its deferral and opted to present the total of comprehensive income in two separate but
consecutive statements effective for its fiscal year beginning January 1, 2011. The early adoption had no impact on the Company’s
consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
F-21
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (cont’d...)
 
Fair Value Accounting
 
In May 2011, the ASC guidance was issued related to disclosures around fair value accounting. The updated guidance clarifies
different components of fair value accounting including the application of the highest and best use and valuation premise concepts,
measuring the fair value of an instrument classified in a reporting entity’s shareholders’ equity and disclosing quantitative information
about the unobservable inputs used in fair value measurements that are categorized in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. The update
is effective for the Company’s fiscal year beginning January 1, 2012. The Company does not expect the updated guidance to have a
significant impact on the consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
 
INVESTMENTS
 
At December 31, 2011, the Company held investments classified as held for trading, which consisted of various equity securities and
interest bearing debt instruments. All held for trading investments are carried at fair value. As of December 31, 2011, the fair value of
investments was $2,531,644 (2010 – $129,141).
 
The following table summarizes the fair value of the Company’s investments.
3.
4.
Trading securities
Interest bearing debt instruments
5.
EQUIPMENT
Accumulated
2011
Net Book
Investments
2011
2,022,079 
509,565 
2,531,644
2010
129,141 
— 
129,141
Accumulated
2010
Net Book
Furniture and equipment
Computer equipment
Exploration equipment
Vehicles
6.
DEFERRED FINANCING COSTS
Balance, beginning of year
Costs incurred
Amortization
Balance, end of year
Cost
Amortization
Value
Cost
Amortization
Value
8,358  $
$
20,274 
 
 
 
  1,464,478 
 
333,989 
 
$  1,827,099  $
1,809  $
 6,549  $
1,608 
 
18,666 
 
 
  1,084,635 
379,843 
52,014 
 
281,975 
 
 457,072  $  1,370,027  $
8,358  $
20,274 
 
 
781,126 
155,325 
 
 965,083  $
4,179  $
13,844 
 
 
185,464 
26,170 
 
 229,657  $
4,179 
6,430 
595,662 
129,155 
 735,426
2011
$
 
 
$
F-22
—  $
 
— 
— 
 
 —  $
2010
1,283 
— 
(1,283)
 —
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
6.
7.
8.
DEFERRED FINANCING COSTS (cont’d…)
 
During the year ended December 31, 2005, the Company paid a finder’s fee of $45,000 and other expenses of $1,202 relating to a
convertible debenture financing.
 
OIL AND GAS INVESTMENT
 
In April 2008, XOG purchased an 18.9% participating interest in a petroleum and natural gas lease at an Alberta Crown Land sale for
$40,000. The lease has a five year term, but may be held by continuous production of petroleum and natural gas commencing prior to
the expiry of the five year term. During the year ended December 31, 2010, the Company sold its 18.9% participating interest for
$40,000.
 
MINERAL PROPERTIES
Acquisition costs
Asset retirement obligation (Note 10)
Option payment received
Total
$
 
 
$
2011
1,607,729  $
 
131,133 
(881,440)
 
 857,422  $
2010
1,607,729 
131,133 
(25,000)
 1,713,862
Kibi, Kwabeng and Pameng Projects
The Company holds an individual mining lease over the lease area of each of the Kibi Project, the Kwabeng Project and the Pameng
Project, all of which are located in Ghana. Each of these mining leases grant the Company mining rights to produce gold in the
respective lease areas until July 26, 2019 with respect to the Kwabeng and Pameng Projects, and until December 17, 2015 with
respect to the Kibi Project (formerly known as the Apapam Project), the latter of which can be renewed for up to a further 30 year
term on application and payment of applicable fees to the Minerals Commission of Ghana (“Mincom”). All gold production will be
subject to a production royalty of the net smelter returns (“NSR”) payable to the Government of Ghana.
Banso and Muoso Project
During the year ended December 31, 2010, the Company made an application to Mincom to convert a single prospecting license
(“PL”) securing its interest in the Banso and Muoso Projects located in Ghana to a mining lease covering the lease area of each of
these Projects. This application was approved by Mincom who subsequently made recommendation to the Minister of Lands,
Forestry and Mines to grant an individual mining lease for each Project. Subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2010, the
Government of Ghana granted two mining leases for these Projects dated January 6, 2011. These mining leases grant the Company
mining rights to produce gold in the respective lease areas until January 5, 2025 with respect to the Banso Project and until January
5, 2024 with respect to the Muoso Project. These mining leases supersede the PL previously granted to the Company. Among other
things, both mining leases require that the Company (i) pay the Government of Ghana a fee of $30,000 in consideration of granting of
each lease (paid in the March 2011 quarter); (ii) pay annual ground rent of GH¢260.00 (USD$167) for the Banso Project and
GH¢280.00 (USD$180) for the Muoso Project (paid in the March 2011 quarter); (iii) commence commercial production of gold within
two years from the date of the mining leases; and (iv) pay a production royalty to the Government of Ghana.
The Company executed a letter of intent (“LOI”) with Buccaneer Gold Corp. (“Buccaneer”), formerly Verbina Resources Inc., a
company related by directors and/or officers in common, on July 21, 2010 whereby Buccaneer could acquire an undivided 55%
interest in the Company’s interest in the mineral rights of the Company’s Banso and Muoso concessions (“Concessions”). On
January 21, 2011 the terms of the agreement were amended.
F-23
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
8.
MINERAL PROPERTIES (cont’d…)
 
Banso and Muoso Project (cont’d…)
 
Pursuant to the 2011 LOI, Buccaneer can acquire a 55% legal and beneficial interest in the Company’s interest in the mineral rights of
the Concessions pursuant to the following terms: Buccaneer shall (i) provide the Company, by February 28, 2011, with notice of its
satisfactory completion of due diligence of the Concessions (provided on January 21, 2011), and receipt of regulatory acceptance by
the TSX Venture Exchange of the 2011 LOI (received on February 16, 2011) (the “Effective Date”); (ii) make a cash payment to the
Company of $425,000 consisting of $100,000 upon the Effective Date and $325,000 within 90 days of the Effective Date (received); (iii)
issue 1,000,000 fully paid and non-assessable common shares of Buccaneer to the Company upon the Effective Date (issued in the
March 2011 quarter); (iv) incur a total of $4,425,000 in exploration expenditures on the Concessions within five (5) years of the Effective
Date with $500,000 to be incurred in the first year (completed) from the Effective Date and $1,000,000 in each year thereafter, except
that in the final year the exploration expenditures shall be a minimum of $925,000; and (v) pay to the Company $300,000 in connection
with a Versatile Time-domain Electromagnetic (“VTEM”), Magnetic and Radiometric survey to be flown over the Concessions by the
Company, which payment shall be credited toward the $500,000 in exploration expenditures referred to above in subparagraph (iv).
 
A definitive binding option agreement shall be entered into between the Company and Buccaneer which agreement will require
approval from the Minister of Lands, Forestry and Mines.
 
The status of each Buccaneer commitment to the Company in the 2011 LOI is as follows:
Item Description
(i)
 
(ii)
 
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
Due diligence completed
TSX accepts LOI
Pay $100,000 to the Company
Pay a further $325,000 to the Company
Issue 1,000,000 Buccaneer shares to the Company
Spend $4,425,000 on the properties over 5 years
Pay $300,000 to the Company for a VTEM survey
Status
Completed
Completed
Received by the Company
Received by the Company
Received by the Company
In Progress
Received by the Company
The 1,000,000 Buccaneer shares received were valued at $411,440 at the date of issuance.
Option agreement on Edum Banso Project
In October, 2005, XG Exploration entered into an option agreement (the “Option Agreement”) with Adom Mining Limited (“Adom”) to
acquire 100% of Adom’s right, title and interest in and to a prospecting license on the Edum Banso concession (the “Edum Banso
Project”) located in Ghana. Adom further granted XG Exploration the right to explore, develop, mine and sell mineral products from
this concession. The prospecting license has been renewed for a two year period expiring on July 21, 2013.
The consideration paid for the Option Agreement was $15,000 with additional payments of $5,000 to be paid on the anniversary date
of the Option Agreement in each year during the term which term has been extended to November 11, 2013. Further net smelter
royalty payments, based on proven and probable reserves and gold production, was also payable to Adom.
F-24
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
MINERAL PROPERTIES (cont’d...)
8.
9.
10.
MINERAL PROPERTIES (cont’d...)
 
Option agreement on Edum Banso Project (cont’d…)
 
During August 2011, the Company assigned its interest in the Edum Banso Project to Norman Cay Development Inc. (“NCD”) for a
cash payment of $125,000, 1,000,000 NCD shares, valued at $260,000 at the date of issuance, and an option payment of $135,000
payable in six months from the date of assignment of the option interest. If NCD did not exercise its six-month option the Project
reverted to the Company. Of the payments received, $20,000 reduced the carrying value of the Edum Banso Project on the balance
sheet and the balance reduced exploration spending in the third quarter of 2011. A $25,000 finder’s fee was paid to introduce the
Company to NCD and this fee reduced the gain recorded in the income statement.
 
Subsequent to December 31, 2011, NCD paid the final $135,000 to the Company.
 
Mining lease and prospecting license commitments
 
The Company is committed to expend, from time to time to the Minerals Commission for an extension of an expiry date of a prospecting
license (currently $15,000 for each occurrence) or grant of a mining lease and pay the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) (of
Ghana) for processing and certificate fees with respect to EPA permits, an aggregate of less than $500 in connection with annual or
ground rent and mining permits to enter upon and gain access to the areas covered by the Company’s mining leases and prospecting
licenses.
 
CONVERTIBLE DEBENTURES
 
During the year ended December 31, 2005, the Company completed a convertible debenture financing for gross proceeds of $900,000.
The debentures bore interest at 7% per annum, payable quarterly, and the principal balance was repayable by June 30, 2010.
Debenture holders had the option to convert any portion of the outstanding principal into common shares at the conversion rate of $1
per share. During the year ended December 31, 2008, convertible debentures totaling $650,000 were converted into 650,000 common
shares. In February 2010, the convertible debenture of $250,000 was converted into 250,000 common shares.
 
ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATION
Balance, beginning of year
Change in obligation
Accretion expense
Balance, end of year
$
 
 
$
2011
155,395  $
 
 
 171,395  $
— 
16,000
2010
71,906 
76,298 
7,191 
 155,395
The Company has a legal obligation associated with its mineral properties for clean up costs when work programs are completed.
The undiscounted amount of cash flows, required over the estimated reserve life of the underlying assets, to settle the obligation,
adjusted for inflation, is estimated at $220,000 (2010 - $220,000). The obligation was calculated using a credit-adjusted risk free
discount rate of 10% and an inflation rate of 2%. It is expected that this obligation will be funded from general Company resources at
the time the costs are incurred. The Company has been required by the Ghanaian government to post a bond of $220,961 (2010 -
$220,000) which has been recorded in restricted cash.
F-25
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
11.
CAPITAL STOCK
 
Cancellation of shares
 
In May 2005, 47,000,000 common shares owned by two former directors were returned to treasury and cancelled.
 
In June 2006, 10,000 common shares were returned to the Company in settlement of a dispute and cancelled.
 
In May 2009, 200,000 common shares were repurchased for $50,000 and cancelled.
 
In March 2010, 80,891 common shares were repurchased for $108,000 and cancelled.
 
Issuance of shares for services
 
In December 2008, an aggregate of 131,243 common shares were issued to three vendors of the Company’s subsidiary, XG Mining to
In December 2008, an aggregate of 131,243 common shares were issued to three vendors of the Company’s subsidiary, XG Mining to
settle outstanding accounts for services at a value of $1.50 per share.
 
Private placements
 
In June 2010, the Company issued 250,000 units at $1.00 per unit for gross proceeds of $250,000. Each unit consisted of one common
share and one half of one share purchase warrant. One whole warrant enables the holder to acquire an additional common share at a
price of $1.50 expiring 18 months from the date of issue. The Company also issued finder’s warrants enabling the holders to acquire up
to 25,000 common shares at the same terms as the unit warrants. The fair value of finder’s warrants was $15,091 calculated using the
Black-Scholes valuation method. The assumptions used were 1.5 years of expected life, risk free interest rate of 1.82%, volatility of
99.78% and a dividend rate of 0%.
 
In April 2010, the Company issued 838,000 units at $1.00 per unit for gross proceeds of $838,000. Each unit consisted of one common
share and one half of one share purchase warrant. One whole warrant enables the holder to acquire an additional common share at a
price of $1.50 expiring 18 months from the date of issue. The Company also issued finder’s warrants enabling the holders to acquire up
to 73,800 common shares at the same terms as the unit warrants. The fair value of finder’s warrants was $40,516 calculated using the
Black-Scholes valuation method. The assumptions used were 1.5 years of expected life, risk free interest rate of 2.05%, volatility of
116.59% and a dividend rate of 0%.
 
In December 2009, the Company issued 706,000 units at $1.00 per unit for gross proceeds of $706,000. Each unit consisted of one
common share and one half of one share purchase warrant. One whole warrant enables the holder to acquire an additional common
share at a price of $1.50 expiring eighteen months from the date of issue. The Company also issued finder’s warrants enabling the
holders to acquire up to 50,600 common shares at the same terms as the unit warrants. The fair value of finder’s warrants was $20,098
calculated using the Black-Scholes valuation method. The assumptions used were 1.5 years of expected life, risk free interest rate of
2.05%, volatility of 109% and a dividend rate of 0%.
 
In August 2009, the Company issued 376,875 units at $0.80 per unit for gross proceeds of $301,500. Each unit consisted of one
common share and one half of one share purchase warrant. One whole warrant enables the holder to acquire an additional common
share at a price of $1.00 expiring two years from the date of issue.
 
In April and May 2009, the Company issued 1,018,000 units at $0.70 per unit for gross proceeds of $712,600. Each unit consisted of
one common share and one share purchase warrant enabling the holder to acquire an additional common share at a price of $1.00
expiring two years from the date of issue.
 
In February 2008, the Company issued 1,062,000 units at $1.50 per unit for gross proceeds of $1,593,000. Each unit consisted of one
common share and one share purchase warrant enabling the holder to acquire an additional common share at
F-26
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
11.
CAPITAL STOCK (cont’d...)
 
Private placements (cont’d…)
 
a price of $2.25 per share expiring on July 7, 2009. The Company also issued finder’s warrants enabling the holder to acquire up to
84,960 common shares at the same terms as the unit warrants. The fair value of the finder’s warrants was $15,136 and calculated
using the Black-Scholes valuation method. The assumptions used were 1.5 years of expected life, risk free interest rate of 4.88%,
volatility of 33% and a dividend rate of 0%.
 
In October 2007, the Company issued 668,202 units at $1.35 per unit for gross proceeds of $902,073. Each unit consisted of one
common share and one half of one share purchase warrant. One whole warrant enables the holder to acquire an additional common
share at a price of $1.75 for one year which expiry date was extended to January 13, 2009 (expired). The Company also issued finder’s
warrants enabling the holder to acquire up to 33,410 common shares at the same terms as the unit warrants (expired). The fair value of
the finder’s warrants was $2,015 and calculated using the Black-Scholes valuation method. The assumptions used were 1 year of
expected life, risk free interest rate of 4.50%, volatility of 36% and a dividend rate of 0%.
 
In October 2006, the Company issued 282,000 common shares at $1.10 per share for gross proceeds of $310,200. For each two
shares subscribed for, the purchaser received one share purchase warrant which enables the holder to acquire an additional common
share at a price of $1.50 to April 23, 2008 which expiry date was extended to July 13, 2008 (65,000 exercised; 76,000 expired).
 
In July 2006, the Company issued 1,132,000 common shares at $0.90 per share for gross proceeds of $1,018,800. For each two
shares subscribed for, the purchaser received one share purchase warrant which enables the holder to acquire an additional common
share at a price of $1.50 to July 31, 2007 which expiry date was extended to July 13, 2008 (566,000 exercised).
 
In June 2006, the Company issued 578,112 common shares at $0.90 per share for gross proceeds of $520,300. For each two shares
In June 2006, the Company issued 578,112 common shares at $0.90 per share for gross proceeds of $520,300. For each two shares
subscribed for, the purchaser received one share purchase warrant which enables the holder to acquire an additional common share at
a price of $1.50 to June 16, 2007 (expired).
 
In March 2006, the Company issued 792,029 common shares at $0.70 per share for gross proceeds of $554,420.
 
In November 2005, the Company issued 1,549,354 common shares at $0.55 per share for gross proceeds of $852,145.
 
In August 2005, the Company issued 300,000 common shares at $0.55 per share for gross proceeds of $165,000. For each two shares
subscribed for, the purchaser received one share purchase warrant which enables the holder to acquire an additional common share at
a price of $0.75 to August 31, 2006 (expired).
 
In June 2005, the Company issued 536,218 common shares at $0.55 per share for gross proceeds of $294,920. For each two shares
subscribed for, the purchaser received one share purchase warrant which enables the holder to acquire an additional common share at
a price of $0.75 to April 30, 2006 (177,200 exercised; 90,910 expired).
 
Initial Public Offering
 
In November 2010, the Company completed an initial public offering in Canada and issued 8,092,593 common shares at CAD$1.35
(USD$1.33) for gross proceeds of CAD$10,925,001 (USD$10,753,149). The Company also issued 566,482 broker warrants with a
strike price of CAD$1.35 (US$1.33) per warrant and a two-year term to maturity. The Company valued the warrants at $364,248 using
the Black-Scholes model with a 90% volatility, 0% dividend and 1.5% interest rate.
F-27
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
11.
CAPITAL STOCK (cont’d...)
 
Escrow Shares
 
A total of 267,500 shares (the “Escrow Shares”) were deposited into escrow at the time of listing of the Company’s shares on the
Toronto Stock Exchange on November 23, 2010 (the “Listing Date”), following completion of the IPO. The Escrow Shares are released
from escrow as to (a) 1/4 of the Escrow Shares on the Listing Date; (b) 1/3 of the remaining Escrow Shares, six months after the Listing
Date; (c) 1/2 of the remaining Escrow Shares, 12 months after the Listing Date; and (d) the remaining Escrow Shares, 18 months after
the Listing Date. As of December 31, 2011 a total of 133,750 Escrow Shares were held in escrow (December 31, 2010 – 200,625).
 
Acquisition of subsidiary
 
Effective December 22, 2004, the Company acquired 90% of the outstanding shares of XG Mining in exchange for 2,698,350 shares of
common stock. In connection with this acquisition, 47,000,000 shares owned by two former officers and directors of the Company were
returned to treasury and cancelled.
 
Stock options
 
On June 30, 2011, the Company adopted a new 10% rolling stock option plan (the “2011 Plan”) and cancelled the 2005 equity
compensation plan. Pursuant to the 2011 Plan, the Company is entitled to grant options and reserve for issuance up to 10% of the
shares issued and outstanding at the time of grant. The terms and conditions of any options granted, including the number and type of
options, the exercise period, the exercise price and vesting provisions, are determined by the Compensation Committee who makes
recommendation to the Board of Directors for their approval. The maximum term of options granted cannot exceed 10 years.
 
At December 31, 2011, the following stock options were outstanding:
Number of
Options
324,000
540,000
110,000
108,000
216,000
270,000
90,000
108,000
100,000
Exercise
Price
$0.70
$0.75
$1.00
$1.00
$1.00
$1.00
$1.15
$1.85
$1.85
Expiry Date
May 1, 2013
May 1, 2013
February 12, 2012 (1)
January 1, 2013
February 1, 2013
May 1, 2013
July 1, 2013
June 10, 2014
July 1, 2014
145,000
56,000
$1.95
$1.98
March 1, 2014
February 15, 2014
(1)
Exercised subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2011
Stock option transactions and the number of stock options outstanding are summarized as follows:
F-28
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
11.
CAPITAL STOCK (cont’d...) Stock options (cont’d…)
Outstanding, beginning of year
   Granted
   Exercised
   Cancelled/Expired
 
Outstanding, end of year
 
Exercisable, end of year
Options
Number of
2011
 
  Weighted Average  
  Exercise Price
 
   
1,788,000  $
 
 
 
   
2,067,000  $
   
1,749,500  $
0.88 
1.90 
— 
1.05 
 
 1.07 
 
 0.99
409,000 
— 
(130,000)
Number of
  Options
2010
 
  Weighted Average 
  Exercise Price  
   
 
 0.73 
972,000  $
1.02 
 
924,000 
— 
 
— 
0.70 
 
(108,000)
 
   
 
 0.88 
1,788,000  $
   
 
 0.85 
1,490,000  $
The aggregate intrinsic value for options vested as of December 31, 2011 is approximately $452,250 (2010 - $1,312,200) and for total
options outstanding is approximately $758,750 (2010 - $2,447,200).
The fair value of stock options granted during the year ended December 31, 2011 totalled $477,193 (December 31, 2010 - $594,388) of
which at December 31, 2011 the remaining $202,831 from the 2011 grants and $96,001 from 2010 grants will be expensed in future
periods. A total of $361,239 has been included in general and administrative expenses for the year December 31, 2011 (year ended
December 31, 2010 - $411,507).
The following assumptions were used for the Black-Scholes valuation of stock options granted or extended during the years ended
December 31, 2011 and 2010:
Risk-free interest rate
Expected life
Annualized volatility
Dividend rate
2011
1.75%
3 years
95.34
—
2010
1.73%
3 years
94.28
—
The weighted average fair value of options granted was $1.17 (2010 - $0.63) .
Warrants
At December 31, 2011, the following warrants were outstanding:
Number of Warrants
566,482
Exercise Price
$1.33
F-29
Expiry Date
November 23, 2012
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
11.
CAPITAL STOCK (cont’d...)
 
Warrants (cont’d…)
Warrants (cont’d…)
 
Warrant transactions and the number of warrants outstanding are summarized as follows:
Balance, beginning of year
   Issued
   Exercised
   Expired
Balance, end of year
2011
2,439,320  $
   
— 
 
(1,608,038)
(264,800)
 
566,482  $
1.29 
 
1.24 
1.49 
 1.33
2010
1,610,038  $
 
1,209,282 
(380,000)
 
   
— 
2,439,320  $
1.13 
1.42 
1.03 
 
 1.29
12.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
 
During the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, the Company entered into the following transactions with related parties:
13.
Consulting fees paid or accrued to officers or their companies
Directors’ fees
 
Stock option grants to officers and directors
Stock option grant price range
$
 
   
 
$
2011
351,670  $
 
   
 
 1.85 to 1.95  $
32,299 
 
223,000
2010
269,519 
25,970 
 
636,000 
 1.00 to 1.15
An amount of $213,872 was due from a company with directors and/or officers in common (2010 - $Nil).
 
The amounts charged to the Company for the services provided have been determined by negotiation among the parties. These
transactions were in the normal course of operations and were measured at the exchange value, which represented the amount of
consideration established and agreed to by the related parties.
 
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE WITH RESPECT TO CASH FLOWS
Cash paid during the period for:
       Interest
       Income taxes
Cumulative amounts 
 
  from the beginning of  
  the exploration stage  
  on January 1, 2003 to   
  December 31, 2011
 
   
   
$
$
187,362  $
 —  $
2011
—  $
 —  $
2010
— 
 —
The significant non-cash transactions during the year ended December 31, 2011 include the receipt of 1,000,000 Buccaneer
common shares per the 2011 LOI (Note 8), and the receipt of 1,000,000 NCD shares valued at $260,000 (Note 8).
F-30
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
13.
14.
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE WITH RESPECT TO CASH FLOWS (cont’d…)
 
The significant non-cash transactions during the year ended December 31, 2010 included (a) the issuance of 665,282 finder’s warrants
with a value of $419,855 in connection with a private placement (Note 11); (b) the conversion of $250,000 of a convertible debenture
into 250,000 common shares; and (c) capitalization of $76,298 in mineral properties related to asset retirement costs.
 
DEFERRED INCOME TAXES
 
Income tax benefits attributable to losses from United States of America operations was $Nil for the years ended December 31, 2011
and 2010, and differed from the amounts computed by applying the United States of America federal income tax rate of 34% to pretax
losses from operations as a result of the following:
2011
2010
Loss for the year
 
Computed “expected” tax (benefit) expense
Non deductible (taxable) items
Lower effective income tax rate on loss of foreign subsidiaries
Valuation allowance
 
Net expected tax (benefit) expense
$
   
$
 
 
 
   
$
(5,794,927) $
   
 (1,970,275) $
 
 
 
   
 —  $
4,088 
399,000 
1,567,187
(2,976,645)
 
 (1,012,059)
14,502 
21,884 
975,673 
 
 —
The tax effects of temporary differences that give rise to significant deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are presented
below:
Deferred tax assets (liabilities):
       Trading securities
       Net operating loss carryforwards - US
       Net operating loss carryforwards - Ghana
 
Valuation allowance
 
Total deferred tax assets
$
 
 
   
 
   
$
2011
(224,739) $
 
1,611,391 
1,229,724 
 
   
 
 
(2,616,376)
   
 
 —  $
2010
(17,280)
1,675,192 
1,063,043 
 
(2,720,955)
 
 —
The valuation allowance for deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2011 and 2010 was $(2,616,376) and $(2,720,955) respectively. In
assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of
the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future
taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible.
Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies
in assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets. In order to fully realize the deferred tax asset attributable to net
F-31
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
14.
15.
DEFERRED INCOME TAXES (cont’d…)
 
operating loss carryforwards, the Company will need to generate future taxable income of approximately $10,000,000 prior to the
expiration of the net operating loss carryforwards. Of the $10,000,000 of operating loss carryforwards, $3,600,000 is attributable to the
US, and expires between 2012 and 2031, and the balance of $6,400,000 is attributable to Ghana and expires between 2012 and 2016.
 
SEGMENTED INFORMATION
 
The Company has one reportable segment, being the exploration and development of resource properties.
 
Geographic information is as follows:
Cash and restricted cash:
         Canada
         Ghana
Total cash and restricted cash
Capital assets
         Canada
         Ghana
Total capital assets
Total
$
 
$
   
 
 
$
$
2011
456,513
4,263,201  $
 
 4,719,714  $
   
 
 
3,418 
2,224,031 
 
 2,227,449  $
 6,947,163  $
2010
9,950,180 
365,942 
 10,316,122 
 
10,609 
2,438,679 
 2,449,288 
 12,765,410
16.
CONTINGENCY AND COMMITMENTS
a)
The Company entered into a management consulting agreement with the Vice President, Exploration, which extends from
March 1, 2011 to March 1, 2014, whereby the Company will pay CAD$12,500 (USD$12,875) per month for the three year term
b)
c)
for providing the majority of his time in consulting services to the Company. In the event of termination, without cause, before
September 30, 2012, the Company will be required to pay CAD$10,000 (USD$10,300) for each month of early termination up to
September 30, 2012. Thereafter, in the event that the services are terminated at any time after October 1, 2012, then no
additional payment will be payable.
 
The Company leases 1,163 square feet for its corporate office located at Suite 301, 360 Bay Street, Toronto, Ontario. The lease
has a 66 month term commencing May 1, 2007, at approximately CAD$4,392 (USD$4,306) per month.
 
In late 2009, the Government of Ghana announced an increase in the gross overriding royalty (“GOR”) required payable by all
mining companies in the country from 3% to 5%. The industry standard remained at 3% due to stability agreements which were
in place with a number of companies. From the commencement of gold recovery in July 2010 to September 2010, the Company
paid the GOR at 5% and as of October 2010, the Company began to pay the GOR at 3% until July 1, 2011 when the Company
again paid the royalty at 5%. As a result of this decision, there is a potential unrecorded liability of $84,300 related to 2010
activities and a recorded liability of $120,000 related to 2011 activities.
F-32
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
DECEMBER 31, 2011
17.
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
a)
Subsequent to December 31, 2011, NCD paid the Company $135,000 related to an option of the Edum Banso property (see
Note 8).
F-33
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
(unaudited)
AS AT
ASSETS
Current
     Cash and cash equivalents
     Investment in trading securities, at fair value 
          (cost of $1,312,463 (December 31, 2011 - $1,870,648)) (Note 4)
     Due from related party (Note 9)
     Receivables and other assets
     Total current assets
Restricted cash (Note 7)
Equipment (Note 5)
Mineral properties (Note 6)
TOTAL ASSETS
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current
     Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
 
   Total current liabilities
 
Asset retirement obligation (Note 7)
     Total liabilities
Stockholders’ equity
     Capital stock (Note 8)
     Authorized
     250,000,000 common shares with a par value of $0.001
     Issued and outstanding
     44,674,717 common shares (December 31, 2011 – 44,569,217 common shares)
     Additional paid in capital
Deficit
     Deficit accumulated during the exploration stage
Total Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. stockholders’ equity
     Non-controlling interest
June 30, 2012  
 
   
   
 
$
December 31, 2011 
 
   
   
 
 4,498,753 
 1,517,683  $
$
   
   
$
1,321,989 
18,080 
126,952 
2,984,704 
220,961 
1,241,497 
857,422
5,304,584  $
   
   
 524,768  $
524,768 
 
179,395 
704,163 
 
 
 
 
 
44,674
2,531,644 
213,872 
130,637 
7,374,906 
220,961 
1,370,027 
857,422 
 9,823,316 
 
 
 745,860 
 
745,860 
 
171,395 
917,255 
 
 
 
 
 
44,569
28,968,535 
(1,427,764)
(22,102,936)
5,482,509
28,441,909 
(1,427,764)
(17,646,122)
9,412,592
Non-controlling interest
     Total stockholders’ equity
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
$
(882,088)
4,600,421 
 
 5,304,584  $
(506,531)
8,906,061 
 9,823,316
History and organization of the Company (Note 1)
Continuance of operations (Note 2)
Contingency and commitments (Note 12)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-34
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
(unaudited)
Cumulative 
 
 
amounts 
 
 
from 
 
 
  the beginning 
 
of the 
 
 
exploration 
 
 
stage on 
 
 
January 1, 
 
 
2003 to 
 
 
June 30, 
 
 
2012 
 
 
 
   
 
EXPENSES
   
 
$
       Amortization
 
       Exploration
       General and administrative
 
       Option receipts in excess of property value  
       Write-off of mineral property
 
LOSS BEFORE OTHER ITEMS
 
   
 
OTHER ITEMS
   
 
       Foreign exchange gain (loss)
       Interest expense
 
       Realized gain (losses) on sales of trading
securities
       Net unrealized loss on trading securities
25,348,745 
8,426,459 
(450,000)
26,000 
(34,064,577)
 
 
457,568 
(243,638)
Three Month 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2012 
 
 
   
   
 
 713,373  $
Three Month 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2011 
 
 
   
   
 
 76,204  $
Six Month 
 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2012 
 
 
   
   
 
 49,164  $
Six Month 
 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2011 
 
 
   
   
 
 79,566 
 128,530  $
2,691,449 
 
3,845,765 
577,084 
 
817,449 
— 
 
(135,000)
— 
 
— 
(3,348,099)
 
(4,656,744)
 
   
 
   
 
 
(164,394)
 
(109,112)
(1,702)
 
—
1,651,464 
623,505 
— 
— 
(2,351,173)
 
 
(185,167)
(1,702)
1,122,471 
321,739 
— 
— 
(1,493,374)
 
 
(271,641)
—
263,085 
(182,697)
996,501
(26,962)
(466,565)
54,572
— 
(47,481)
12,873
8,766 
(229,907)
85,771
— 
— 
— 
(625,824)
 
(2,976,997)
260,904 
— 
— 
(45,345)
 
(1,538,719)
70,557 
— 
— 
(175,627)
 
(4,832,371)
— 
(66,990)
24,223
1,282,679 
260,058 
— 
1,335,576 
 
(2,012,523)
9,457,246 
356,488 
(25,000) 
11,079,553 
 
(22,985,024)
882,088
172,066
115,135
375,557
157,477
Other income
       Recovery of gold
 
       Gain on disposal of property or equipment  
       Write-off of investment in trading securities  
 
 
   
 
Net loss for the period
 
 
   
Net loss attributable to non-controlling
interest
Net loss attributable to Xtra-Gold
Resources Corp.
Basic and diluted loss attributable to
common stockholders per common share  
Basic and diluted weighted average
number of common shares outstanding
$  (22,102,936) $
(2,804,931) $
(1,423,584) $
(4,456,814) $
(1,855,046)
$
(0.06) $
(0.03) $
(0.10) $
(0.04)
44,658,703
43,668,909
44,663,002
43,322,266
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-35
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
(unaudited)
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING
ACTIVITIES
$
 Loss for the period
   
 Items not affecting cash:
 
     Amortization
 
     Amortization of deferred financing costs
 
     Accretion of asset retirement obligation
 
     Shares issued for services
     Stock-based compensation
 
     Option receipts in excess of property value  
     Unrealized foreign exchange (gain) loss
 
     Realized (gain) loss on sale of trading
 
securities
 
     Purchase of trading securities
 
     Proceeds on sale of trading securities
 
     Unrealized loss on trading securities
 
     Gain on disposal of property or equipment
 
     Write-off of mineral property
 
     Expenses paid by stockholders
     Write-off of investment in trading securities  
 Changes in non-cash working capital items:
         (Increase) decrease in receivables and
other
         Increase (decrease) in accounts payable
and accrued liabilities
         Increase (decrease) in due to related
party
 Net cash used in operating activities
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING
ACTIVITIES
 Proceeds from issuance of convertible
debentures
 Deferred financing costs
 Repurchase of capital stock
 Issuance of capital stock, net of financing
costs
 Net cash provided by (used in) financing
activities
Cumulative 
 
  amounts from 
  the beginning 
of the 
 
exploration 
 
stage on 
 
January 1, 
 
2003 to 
 
June 30, 
 
2012
Three Month 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2012
Three Month 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2011
Six Month 
 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2012
Six Month 
 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2011
(22,985,024) $
713,373 
46,202 
48,262 
202,365 
2,261,419 
(450,000)
(415,004)
(263,085)
(13,411,043)
13,241,974 
182,697 
(356,488)
26,000 
2,700 
25,000
(118,577)
514,076
31,920 
(20,703,233)
900,000 
(46,202)
(169,760)
22,719,711
23,403,749
(2,976,997) $
76,204 
— 
4,000 
— 
380,838 
— 
27,679
(1,538,719) $
49,164 
— 
4,000 
— 
78,111 
— 
36,021
(4,832,371) $
128,530 
— 
8,000 
— 
421,491 
(135,000)
(13,048)
(2,012,523)
 
79,566 
— 
8,000 
— 
99,422 
— 
32,460
26,962 
— 
939,832 
466,565 
— 
— 
— 
—
(2,947)
(547,592)
(18,080)
(1,623,536)
— 
— 
(4,760)
—
(4,760)
— 
— 
— 
47,481 
— 
— 
— 
—
231,195
(162,511)
— 
(1,255,258)
— 
—
1,238,564
1,238,564
(8,766)
(83,157)
1,084,718 
229,907 
— 
— 
— 
—
217,557
(221,091)
(18,080)
(3,221,310)
— 
— 
(4,760)
110,000
105,240
— 
— 
— 
66,990 
(260,058)
— 
— 
—
(11,562)
(138,890)
— 
(2,136,595)
— 
— 
—
1,276,064
1,276,064
- continued -
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-36
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
(unaudited)
Cumulative 
 
amounts 
 
from 
 
  the beginning 
of the 
 
exploration
Continued...
 
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING
ACTIVITIES
     Acquisition of equipment
     Deposit on equipment
     Restricted cash
     Oil and gas property expenditures
     Acquisition of cash on purchase of
subsidiary
     Acquisition of subsidiary
     Option payment received
     Proceeds on disposal of assets
     Net cash provided by (used in) investing
activities
 
Change in cash and cash equivalents
during the period
 
Cash and cash equivalents, beginning of
the period
 
Cash and cash equivalents, end of the
period
$
$
stage on 
January 1, 
2003 to 
June 30, 
2012
Three Month 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2012
Three Month 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2011
Six Month 
 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2012
Six Month 
 
  Period Ended 
June 30, 
 
2011
(1,835,129) $
(151,506)
(220,961)
(250,137)
11,510 
(25,000)
660,000 
628,390
(1,182,833)
1,517,683
—
— 
— 
— 
—
— 
— 
—
—
(1,628,296)
3,145,979
(594,273) $
— 
— 
—
— 
— 
425,000 
—
(169,273)
(185,967)
9,283,801
—  $
 
— 
 
— 
—
— 
— 
135,000
135,000
(2,981,070)
4,498,753
(849,796)
— 
(961)
—
— 
— 
425,000 
288,000
(137,757)
(998,288)
10,096,122
1,517,683  $
1,517,683  $
9,097,834  $
1,517,683  $
9,097,834
Supplemental disclosure with respect to cash flows (Note 10)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-37
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
(unaudited)
Common Stock
Number 
 
  of Shares
Amount
Additional 
Paid in 
 
Capital
Deficit
Non- 
 
  Controlling 
Interest
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated 
During the 
 
  Exploration 
Stage
Total
Balance, December 31,
2010
 
Conversion of warrants at
$1.50 per share
 
Conversion of warrants at
$1.00 per share
 
Stock-based compensation  
 
Loss for the year
 
Balance, December 31,
2011
42,961,179  $
42,961  $ 26,089,803  $ (1,427,764) $
(36,361) $  (12,321,365) $ 12,347,274
768,874
839,164 
 
— 
 
—
769
839 
 
— 
 
—
1,152,542
838,325 
 
361,239 
 
—
—
— 
 
— 
 
—
—
— 
 
— 
 
(470,170)
—
— 
 
— 
 
(5,324,757)
1,153,311
839,164 
 
361,239 
 
(5,794,927)
44,569,217  $
44,569  $ 28,441,909  $ (1,427,764) $
(506,531) $  (17,646,122) $  8,906,061
- continued -
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-38
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
(unaudited)
Common Stock
Number 
 
  of Shares
Amount
Additional 
Paid in 
 
Capital
Deficit
Non- 
 
  Controlling 
Interest
Deficit 
 
  Accumulated 
During the 
 
  Exploration 
Stage
Total
Balance, December 31,
2011
 
January, 2012 – Exercise of
options at $1.00 per share  
 
Stock-based compensation  
 
Loss for the period
 
Balance, March 31, 2012
 
Repurchase of shares at
$1.06 per share
 
Share issuance costs
 
Stock-based compensation  
 
Loss for the period
 
Balance, June 30, 2012
44,569,217  $
110,000 
 
— 
 
—
44,679,217  $
(4,500)
 
— 
 
— 
 
—
44,674,717  $
44,569  $ 28,441,909  $ (1,427,764) $
110 
 
— 
 
—
109,890 
 
40,653 
 
—
44,679  $ 28,592,452  $ (1,427,764) $
— 
 
— 
 
—
(506,531) $  (17,646,122) $  8,906,061
— 
 
— 
 
(203,491)
— 
 
— 
 
(1,651,883)
110,000 
 
 
   
40,653 
 
   
 
  (1,855,374)
   
 
 (710,022) $  (19,298,005) $  7,201,340
(5)
 
— 
 
— 
 
—
44,674  $ 28,968,535  $ (1,427,764) $
(4,755)
 
— 
 
380,838 
 
—
— 
 
— 
 
— 
 
—
— 
 
— 
 
— 
 
(172,066)
(4,760)
   
 
 
— 
   
 
 
380,838 
   
 
  (2,976,997)
   
 
 (882,088) $  (22,102,936) $  4,600,421
— 
 
— 
 
— 
 
(2,804,931)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-39
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
1.
HISTORY AND ORGANIZATION OF THE COMPANY
 
Silverwing Systems Corporation (the “Company”), a Nevada corporation, was incorporated on September 1, 1998. On June 23, 1999,
the Company completed the acquisition of Advertain On-Line Canada Inc. (“Advertain Canada”), a Canadian company operating in
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. The Company changed its name to Advertain On-Line Inc. (“Advertain”) on August 19, 1999.
Advertain Canada’s business was the operation of a website, “Advertain.com”, whose primary purpose was to distribute entertainment
advertising on the Internet.
 
In May 2001, the Company, being unable to continue its funding of Advertain Canada’s operations, decided to abandon its interest in
Advertain Canada. On June 15, 2001, the Company sold its investment in Advertain Canada back to Advertain Canada’s original
shareholder. On June 18, 2001, the Company changed its name from Advertain to RetinaPharma International, Inc. (“RetinaPharma”)
and became inactive.
 
In 2003, the Company became a resource exploration company. On October 31, 2003, the Company acquired 100% of the issued and
outstanding common stock of Xtra-Gold Resources, Inc. (“XGRI”). XGRI was incorporated in Florida on October 24, 2003. On
December 19, 2003, the Company changed its name from RetinaPharma to Xtra-Gold Resources Corp.
 
In 2004, the Company acquired 100% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Canadiana Gold Resources Limited (“Canadiana”)
and 90% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Goldenrae Mining Company Limited (“Goldenrae”). Both companies are
incorporated in Ghana and the remaining 10% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Goldenrae is held by the Government of
Ghana.
On October 20, 2005, XGRI changed its name to Xtra Energy Corp. (“Xtra Energy”).
2.
On October 20, 2005, XGRI changed its name to Xtra Energy Corp. (“Xtra Energy”).
 
On October 20, 2005, the Company incorporated Xtra Oil & Gas Ltd. (“XOG”) in Alberta, Canada.
 
On December 21, 2005, Canadiana changed its name to Xtra-Gold Exploration Limited (“XG Exploration”).
 
On January 13, 2006, Goldenrae changed its name to Xtra-Gold Mining Limited (“XG Mining”).
 
On March 2, 2006, the Company incorporated Xtra Oil & Gas (Ghana) Limited (“XOGG”) in Ghana.
 
CONTINUANCE OF OPERATIONS
 
The Company is in the early stages of exploration and as is common with any exploration company, it raises financing for its
exploration and acquisition activities. The Company has incurred a loss of $4,456,814 for the six month-period ended June 30, 2012
and has accumulated a deficit during the exploration stage of $22,102,936. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern
is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital and implement its business plan, which is typical for junior exploration
companies. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a
going concern.
 
Management of the Company (“Management”) is of the opinion that sufficient financing will be obtained from external financing and
further share issuances to meet the Company’s obligations. At June 30, 2012, the Company has working capital of $2,459,936, which
would not be sufficient to fund the current level of operations for a period greater than 12 months. The Company’s discretionary
exploration activities do have considerable scope for flexibility in terms of the amount and timing of exploration expenditures, and
expenditures may be adjusted accordingly if required.
F-40
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
3.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
 
Generally accepted accounting principles
 
The accompanying unaudited financial statements have been prepared by the Company in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America applicable to interim financial information and with the rules and regulations of the
United States Securities and Exchange Commission. Accordingly, certain information and note disclosures normally included in
financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles have been condensed, or omitted, pursuant
to such rules and regulations. In the opinion of Management, the unaudited interim financial statements include all adjustments
necessary for the fair presentation of the results of the interim periods presented. All adjustments are of a normal recurring nature,
except as otherwise noted below. These financial statements should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited consolidated
financial statements and notes thereto for the year ended December 31, 2011, included in the Company’s Form 10-K, filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. The results of operations for the interim periods are not necessarily indicative of the results of
operations for any other interim period or for a full fiscal year.
 
Cash and cash equivalents
 
The Company considers highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less to be cash equivalents. At June 30,
2012 and December 31, 2011, cash and cash equivalents consisted of cash held at financial institutions and highly liquid investments
with original maturities of less than three months.
 
Loss per share
 
Basic loss per common share is computed using the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the year. To
calculate diluted loss per share, the Company uses the treasury stock method and the if converted method. As of June 30, 2012, there
were 566,482 warrants (December 31, 2011 – 566,482) and 1,957,000 stock options (December 31, 2011 – 2,067,000) outstanding
which have not been included in the weighted average number of common shares outstanding as these were anti-dilutive.
 
Fair value of financial assets and liabilities
 
The Company measures the fair value of financial assets and liabilities based on GAAP guidance which defines fair value, establishes
a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements.
 
The Company classifies financial assets and liabilities as held-for-trading, available-for-sale, held-to-maturity, loans and receivables or
other financial liabilities depending on their nature. Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognized at fair value on their initial
recognition, except for those arising from certain related party transactions which are accounted for at the transferor’s carrying amount
or exchange amount.
Financial assets and liabilities classified as held-for-trading are measured at fair value, with gains and losses recognized in net
income. Financial assets classified as held-to-maturity, loans and receivables, and financial liabilities other than those classified as
held-for-trading are measured at amortized cost, using the effective interest method of amortization. Financial assets classified as
available-for-sale are measured at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses being recognized as other comprehensive income until
realized, or if an unrealized loss is considered other than temporary, the unrealized loss is recorded in income.
 
Financial instruments, including due from related party, receivables, accounts payable and accrued liabilities are carried at cost, which
management believes approximates fair value due to the short term nature of these instruments. Cash and cash equivalents,
investments in trading securities and restricted cash are classified as held for trading, with unrealized gains and losses being
recognized in income.
F-41
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
3.
4.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (cont’d…)
 
Fair value of financial assets and liabilities (cont’d…)
 
The following table presents information about the assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis as of June 30, 2012, and
indicates the fair value hierarchy of the valuation techniques the Company utilized to determine such fair value. In general, fair values
determined by Level 1 inputs utilize quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets. Fair values determined by Level 2
inputs utilize data points that are observable such as quoted prices, interest rates and yield curves. Fair values determined by Level 3
inputs are unobservable data points for the asset or liability, and included situations where there is little, if any, market activity for the
asset:
Assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
Restricted cash
Trading securities
     Total
Other
Inputs
(Level 2)
in Active
Markets
(Level 1)
June 30, 2012  
 
   
   
 
$
 
 
$
Quoted Prices  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 1,517,683  $
 
220,961 
1,321,989 
 
 3,060,633  $
Significant
 
 
 
  Observable  
 
 
 
 
   
   
 1,517,683  $
 
220,961 
1,321,989 
 
 3,060,633  $
Inputs
(Level 3)
Significant
 
  Unobservable 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 — 
 —  $
— 
 
— 
— 
— 
 
 —  $
 —
The fair values of cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and investments are determined through market, observable and
corroborated sources.
 
Recently adopted accounting pronouncements
 
Fair Value Accounting
 
In May 2011, the ASC guidance was issued related to disclosures around fair value accounting. The updated guidance clarifies
different components of fair value accounting including the application of the highest and best use and valuation premise concepts,
measuring the fair value of an instrument classified in a reporting entity’s shareholders’ equity and disclosing quantitative information
about the unobservable inputs used in fair value measurements that are categorized in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. The update
is effective for the Company’s fiscal year beginning January 1, 2012. The Company’s January 1, 2012 adoption of the updated
guidance had no impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
 
INVESTMENTS
 
At June 30, 2012, the Company held investments classified as held for trading, which consisted of various equity securities and interest
bearing debt instruments. All held for trading investments are carried at fair value. As of June 30, 2012, the fair value of investments
was $1,321,989 (December 31, 2011 – $2,531,644).
 
 
 
 
Trading securities
Interest bearing debt instruments
December 31, 2011 
   
 
 2,022,079 
 1,321,989  $
 
509,565 
 2,531,644 
 1,321,989  $
June 30, 2012  
   
 
$
 
$
Investments
—
F-42
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
5.
EQUIPMENT
Furniture and equipment
Computer equipment
Exploration equipment
Vehicles
Cost
June 30, 2012
 
  Accumulated  
 
  Amortization  
 
   
 
   
 8,358  $
$
 
 
20,274 
  1,464,478 
 
 
 
333,989 
$  1,827,099  $
Cost
Net Book  
  Value
 
   
 7,549  $
 
19,488 
466,826 
 
 
91,739
December 31, 2011
 
  Accumulated  
 
 
  Amortization  
 
 
   
 
   
 809  $
 8,358  $
 
 
20,274 
786 
997,652 
  1,464,478 
 
 
333,989 
 
242,250 
 585,602  $  1,241,497  $  1,827,099  $
Net Book  
  Value
 
 
   
 1,809 
 6,549  $
 
18,666 
1,608 
379,843 
  1,084,635 
281,975 
 
52,014 
 457,072  $  1,370,027
6.
MINERAL PROPERTIES
Acquisition costs
Asset retirement obligation (Note 7)
Option payment received
Total
Kibi, Kwabeng and Pameng Projects
June 30, 2012  
   
 
$
 
 
$
December 31, 2011 
   
 
 1,607,729 
 1,607,729  $
 
131,133 
131,133 
(881,440)
(881,440)
 
 857,422  $
 857,422
The Company holds an individual mining lease over the lease area of each of the Kibi Project, the Kwabeng Project and the Pameng
Project, all of which are located in Ghana. Each of these mining leases grant the Company mining rights to produce gold in the
respective lease areas until July 26, 2019 with respect to the Kwabeng and Pameng Projects, and until December 17, 2015 with
respect to the Kibi Project (formerly known as the Apapam Project), the latter of which can be renewed for up to a further 30 year
term on application and payment of applicable fees to the Minerals Commission of Ghana (“Mincom”). All gold production will be
subject to a production royalty of the net smelter returns (“NSR”) payable to the Government of Ghana.
Banso and Muoso Project
During the year ended December 31, 2010, the Company made an application to Mincom to convert a single prospecting license
(“PL”) securing its interest in the Banso and Muoso Projects located in Ghana to a mining lease covering the lease area of each of
these Projects. This application was approved by Mincom who subsequently made recommendation to the Minister of Lands,
Forestry and Mines to grant an individual mining lease for each Project. Subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2010, the
Government of Ghana granted two mining leases for these Projects dated January 6, 2011. These mining leases grant the Company
mining rights to produce gold in the respective lease areas until January 5, 2025 with respect to the Banso Project and until January
5, 2024 with respect to the Muoso Project. These mining leases supersede the PL previously granted to the Company. Among other
things, both mining leases require that the Company (i) pay the Government of Ghana a fee of $30,000 in consideration of granting of
each lease (paid in the March 2011 quarter); (ii) pay annual ground rent of GH¢260.00 (USD$167) for the Banso Project and
GH¢280.00 (USD$180) for the Muoso Project (paid in the March 2011 quarter); (iii) commence commercial production of gold within
two years from the date of the mining leases; and (iv) pay a production royalty to the Government of Ghana.
F-43
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
6.
MINERAL PROPERTIES (cont’d…)
 
Banso and Muoso Project (cont’d…)
 
The Company executed a letter of intent (“LOI”) with Buccaneer Gold Corp. (“Buccaneer”), formerly Verbina Resources Inc., a company
related by two directors in common, on July 21, 2010 whereby Buccaneer could acquire an undivided 55% interest in the Company’s
interest in the mineral rights of the Company’s Banso and Muoso concessions (“Concessions”). On January 21, 2011 the terms of the
agreement were amended.
Pursuant to the 2011 LOI, Buccaneer can acquire a 55% legal and beneficial interest in the Company’s interest in the mineral rights of
the Concessions pursuant to the following terms: Buccaneer shall (i) provide the Company, by February 28, 2011, with notice of its
satisfactory completion of due diligence of the Concessions (provided on January 21, 2011), and receipt of regulatory acceptance by
the TSX Venture Exchange of the 2011 LOI (received on February 16, 2011) (the “Effective Date”); (ii) make a cash payment to the
Company of $425,000 consisting of $100,000 upon the Effective Date and $325,000 within 90 days of the Effective Date (received); (iii)
issue 1,000,000 fully paid and non-assessable common shares of Buccaneer to the Company upon the Effective Date (issued in the
March 2011 quarter); (iv) incur a total of $4,425,000 in exploration expenditures on the Concessions within five (5) years of the Effective
Date with $500,000 to be incurred in the first year (completed) from the Effective Date and $1,000,000 in each year thereafter, except
that in the final year the exploration expenditures shall be a minimum of $925,000; and (v) pay to the Company $300,000 in connection
with a Versatile Time-domain Electromagnetic (“VTEM”), Magnetic and Radiometric survey to be flown over the Concessions by the
Company, which payment shall be credited toward the $500,000 in exploration expenditures referred to above in subparagraph (iv).
 
A definitive binding option agreement shall be entered into between the Company and Buccaneer which agreement will require
approval from the Minister of Lands, Forestry and Mines.
 
The status of each Buccaneer commitment to the Company in the 2011 LOI is as follows:
Description
TSX accepts LOI
Item
(i) Due diligence completed
 
(ii) Pay $100,000 to the Company
 
(iii)
(iv) Spend $4,425,000 on the properties over 5 years
(v) Pay $300,000 to the Company for a VTEM survey
Pay a further $325,000 to the Company
Issue 1,000,000 Buccaneer shares to the Company
Status
Completed
Completed
Received by the Company
Received by the Company
Received by the Company
In Progress
Received by the Company
The 1,000,000 Buccaneer shares received were valued at $411,440 at the date of issuance.
Option agreement on Edum Banso Project
 
In October 2005, XG Exploration entered into an option agreement (the “Option Agreement”) with Adom Mining Limited (“Adom”) to
acquire 100% of Adom’s right, title and interest in and to a prospecting license on the Edum Banso concession (the “Edum Banso
Project”) located in Ghana. Adom further granted XG Exploration the right to explore, develop, mine and sell mineral products from this
concession. The prospecting license has been renewed for a two year period expiring on July 21, 2013.
F-44
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
6.
7.
MINERAL PROPERTIES (cont’d…)
 
The consideration paid for the Option Agreement was $15,000 with additional payments of $5,000 to be paid on the anniversary date of
the Option Agreement in each year during the term which term has been extended to November 11, 2013. Further net smelter royalty
payments, based on proven and probable reserves and gold production, was also payable to Adom.
 
During August 2011, the Company assigned its interest in the Edum Banso Project to Norman Cay Development Inc. (“NCD”) for a
cash payment of $125,000, 1,000,000 NCD shares, valued at $260,000 at the date of issuance, and an option payment of $135,000
payable in six months from the date of assignment of the option interest. If NCD did not exercise its six-month option the Project
reverted to the Company. Of the payments received, $20,000 reduced the carrying value of the Edum Banso Project on the balance
sheet and the balance reduced exploration spending in the third quarter of 2011. A $25,000 finder’s fee was paid to introduce the
Company to NCD and this fee reduced the gain recorded in the statement of operations.
 
During the three month period ended March 31, 2012, NCD paid a final option payment of $135,000 to the Company.
 
Mining lease and prospecting license commitments
 
The Company is committed to expend, from time to time fees payable (a) to the Minerals Commission for (i) an extension of an expiry date of a prospecting license
(currently $15,000 for each occurrence);(ii) a grant of a mining lease (currently $35,000); (iii) an extension of a mining lease (currently $100,000); (iv) annual
operating permits; and (v) the conversion of a reconnaissance license to a prospecting license (currently $20,000); (b) to the Environmental Protection Agency
("EPA") (of Ghana) for processing and certificate fees with respect to EPA permits; and (c) an aggregate of less than $500 in connection with annual ground rent
and mining permits to enter upon and gain access to the areas covered by the Company’s mining leases and future reconnaissance and prospecting licenses.
ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATION
Balance, beginning of period
Accretion expense
Balance, end of period
June 30, 2012  
   
 
$
 
$
December 31, 2011 
   
 
 155,395 
 171,395  $
 
16,000 
 171,395 
 179,395  $
8,000
The Company has a legal obligation associated with its mineral properties for clean up costs when work programs are completed.
The undiscounted amount of cash flows, required over the estimated reserve life of the underlying assets, to settle the obligation,
adjusted for inflation, is estimated at $220,000 (2011 - $220,000). The obligation was calculated using a credit- adjusted risk free
discount rate of 10% and an inflation rate of 2%. It is expected that this obligation will be funded from general Company resources at
the time the costs are incurred. The Company has been required by the Ghanaian government to post a bond of $220,961 which has
been recorded in restricted cash with accrued interest ($220,961 at June 30, 2012).
8.
CAPITAL STOCK
 
Cancellation of shares
 
In May 2005, 47,000,000 common shares owned by two former directors were returned to treasury and cancelled.
 
In June 2006, 10,000 common shares were returned to the Company in settlement of a dispute and cancelled.
F-45
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
8.
CAPITAL STOCK (cont’d…)
 
Cancellation of shares (cont’d…)
 
In May 2009, 200,000 common shares were repurchased for $50,000 and cancelled.
 
In May 2005, 47,000,000 common shares owned by two former directors were returned to treasury and cancelled.
 
In June 2006, 10,000 common shares were returned to the Company in settlement of a dispute and cancelled.
 
In May 2009, 200,000 common shares were repurchased for $50,000 and cancelled.
 
In March 2010, 80,891 common shares were repurchased for $108,000 and cancelled.
 
Issuance of shares for services
 
In December 2008, an aggregate of 131,243 common shares were issued to three vendors of the Company’s subsidiary, XG Mining to
settle outstanding accounts for services at a value of $1.50 per share. In March 2010, 80,891 of these common shares were
repurchased for $108,000 and cancelled.
 
Private placements
 
In June 2010, the Company issued 250,000 units at $1.00 per unit for gross proceeds of $250,000. Each unit consisted of one common
share and one half of one share purchase warrant. One whole warrant enables the holder to acquire an additional common share at a
price of $1.50 expiring 18 months from the date of issue. The Company also issued finder’s warrants enabling the holders to acquire up
to 25,000 common shares at the same terms as the unit warrants. The fair value of the finder’s warrants was $15,091 calculated using
the Black-Scholes valuation method. The assumptions used were 1.5 years of expected life, risk free interest rate of 1.82%, volatility of
99.78% and a dividend rate of 0%.
 
In April 2010, the Company issued 838,000 units at $1.00 per unit for gross proceeds of $838,000. Each unit consisted of one common
share and one half of one share purchase warrant. One whole warrant enables the holder to acquire an additional common share at a
price of $1.50 expiring 18 months from the date of issue. The Company also issued finder’s warrants enabling the holders to acquire up
to 73,800 common shares at the same terms as the unit warrants. The fair value of finder’s warrants was $40,516 calculated using the
Black-Scholes valuation method. The assumptions used were 1.5 years of expected life, risk free interest rate of 2.05%, volatility of
116.59% and a dividend rate of 0%.
 
In December 2009, the Company issued 706,000 units at $1.00 per unit for gross proceeds of $706,000. Each unit consisted of one
common share and one half of one share purchase warrant. One whole warrant enables the holder to acquire an additional common
share at a price of $1.50 expiring eighteen months from the date of issue. The Company also issued finder’s warrants enabling the
holders to acquire up to 50,600 common shares at the same terms as the unit warrants. The fair value of finder’s warrants was $20,098
calculated using the Black-Scholes valuation method. The assumptions used were 1.5 years of expected life, risk free interest rate of
2.05%, volatility of 109% and a dividend rate of 0%.
 
In August 2009, the Company issued 376,875 units at $0.80 per unit for gross proceeds of $301,500. Each unit consisted of one
common share and one half of one share purchase warrant. One whole warrant enables the holder to acquire an additional common
share at a price of $1.00 expiring two years from the date of issue.
 
In April and May 2009, the Company issued 1,018,000 units at $0.70 per unit for gross proceeds of $712,600. Each unit consisted of
one common share and one share purchase warrant enabling the holder to acquire an additional common share at a price of $1.00
expiring two years from the date of issue.
F-46
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
8.
CAPITAL STOCK (cont’d…)
 
Initial Public Offering
 
In November 2010, the Company completed an initial public offering in Canada (the “IPO”) and issued 8,092,593 common shares at
CAD$1.35 (USD$1.33) for gross proceeds of CAD$10,925,001 (USD$10,753,149). The Company also issued 566,482 broker
warrants with a strike price of CAD$1.35 (US$1.33) per warrant and a two-year term to maturity. The Company valued the warrants at
$364,248 using the Black-Scholes model with a 90% volatility, 0% dividend and 1.5% interest rate.
 
Escrow Shares
 
A total of 267,500 shares (the “Escrow Shares”) were deposited into escrow at the time of listing of the Company’s shares on the
Toronto Stock Exchange on November 23, 2010 (the “Listing Date”), following completion of the IPO. The Escrow Shares are released
from escrow as to (a) 1/4 of the Escrow Shares on the Listing Date; (b) 1/3 of the remaining Escrow Shares, six months after the Listing
Date; (c) 1/2 of the remaining Escrow Shares, 12 months after the Listing Date; and (d) the remaining Escrow Shares, 18 months after
the Listing Date. As of June 30, 2012, there were no Escrow Shares held in escrow (December 31, 2011 – 66,875).
 
Acquisition of subsidiary
 
Effective December 22, 2004, the Company acquired 90% of the outstanding shares of XG Mining in exchange for 2,698,350 shares of
common stock. In connection with this acquisition, 47,000,000 shares owned by two former officers and directors of the Company were
returned to treasury and cancelled.
 
Stock options
 
On June 30, 2011, the Company adopted a new 10% rolling stock option plan (the “2011 Plan”) and cancelled the 2005 equity
compensation plan. Pursuant to the 2011 Plan, the Company is entitled to grant options and reserve for issuance up to 10% of the
shares issued and outstanding at the time of grant. The terms and conditions of any options granted, including the number and type of
options, the exercise period, the exercise price and vesting provisions, are determined by the Compensation Committee who makes
recommendation to the board of directors for their approval. The maximum term of options granted cannot exceed 10 years.
 
At June 30, 2012, the following stock options were outstanding:
Number of
Options
108,000
42,000
100,000
324,000
270,000
162,000
108,000
216,000
228,000
90,000
56,000
145,000
108,000
Exercise
Price
$0.75
$1.00
$1.85
$0.70
$0.75
$0.75
$1.00
$1.00
$1.00
$1.15
$1.98
$1.95
$1.85
Expiry Date
June 7, 2013
June 7, 2013
July 1, 2014
May 1, 2016
March 5, 2017
March 12, 2017
January 25, 2020
February 1, 2020
June 1, 2020
July 1, 2020
February 15, 2021
March 1, 2021
June 10, 2021
F-47
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
8.
CAPITAL STOCK (cont’d…)
 
Stock options (cont’d…)
Stock option transactions and the number of stock options outstanding are summarized as follows:
Outstanding, beginning of period
   Granted
   Exercised
   Cancelled/Expired
Outstanding, end of period
 
Exercisable, end of period
Options
June 30, 2012
Number of
Weighted Average  
  Exercise Price
 
   
2,067,000  $
 
 
 
1,957,000  $
   
1,757,000  $
1.07 
— 
— 
— 
 1.08 
 
 1.02
— 
(110,000)
—
December 31, 2011
Number of
  Options
Weighted Average 
  Exercise Price  
 
   
 0.88 
1,788,000  $
1.90 
 
409,000 
 
— 
— 
1.05 
(130,000)
 
 1.07 
2,067,000  $
   
 
 0.99 
1,749,500  $
The aggregate intrinsic value for options vested as of June 30, 2012 is approximately $294,390 (December 31, 2011 $452,250) and for
total options outstanding is approximately $296,507 (December 31, 2011 - $758,750).
No stock options were granted during the six month period ended June 30, 2012. Certain option maturity terms were extended
during the period and a non-cash charge of $315,194, reflecting an increase in the expected term to exercise from three years to five
years, was booked in the June 2012 quarter. Other significant Black Scholes valuations assumptions regarding the charge include
interest at 1.75%, no expected dividends, volatility of 75% and market price at June 30, 2012 of $1.05.
Warrants
At June 30, 2012, the following warrants were outstanding:
Number of Warrants
566,482
Exercise Price
$1.33
Warrant transactions and the number of warrants outstanding are summarized as follows:
Expiry Date
November 23, 2012
Outstanding, beginning of period
   Issued
   Exercised
   Expired
Exercisable, end of period
June 30, 2012
Weighted Average  
  Exercise Price
Number of
  Warrants
566,482  $
   
   
   
566,482  $
— 
— 
—
December 31, 2011
Number of
  Warrants
2,439,320  $
 
— 
 
(1,608,038)
(264,800)
 
566,482  $
Weighted Average 
  Exercise Price  
 1.29 
— 
1.24 
1.49 
 1.33
1.33 
 
 
 
 1.33
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
 
During the six month periods ended June 30, 2012 and June 30, 2011, the Company entered into the following transactions with
related parties:
9.
F-48
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
 
9.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS (cont’d…)
Six months
Six months
10.
Consulting fees paid or accrued to officers or their companies
Directors’ fees
 
Stock option grants to officers and directors
Stock option grant price range
June 30, 2012  
   
 
$
 
   
 
$
June 30, 2011  
 
   
 209,899 
 187,416  $
17,355 
 
16,918 
   
 
 
223,000 
— 
 
 —  $
 1.90
An amount of $18,080 was due from a company with two directors in common (December 31, 2011 - $213,872).
 
The amounts charged to the Company for the services provided have been determined by negotiation among the parties. These
transactions were in the normal course of operations and were measured at the exchange value, which represented the amount of
consideration established and agreed to by the related parties.
 
SUPPLEMENTAL DISCLOSURE WITH RESPECT TO CASH FLOWS
Cash paid during the period for:
       Interest
       Income taxes
Cumulative amounts  
  from the beginning of  
  the exploration stage  
  on January 1, 2003 to  
 
 
   
   
$
$
June 30, 2012  
 
   
   
 
 243,638  $
 —  $
June 30, 2012
June 30, 2011 
 
   
   
 
 — 
 1,702  $
 —  $
 —
There were no significant non-cash transactions during the six-month period ended June 30, 2012.
The significant non-cash transaction during the six months ended June 30, 2011 was the receipt of 1,000,000 Buccaneer common
shares per the 2011 LOI valued at $411,440.
 
SEGMENTED INFORMATION
 
The Company has one reportable segment, being the exploration and development of resource properties.
 
Geographic information is as follows:
Cash and restricted cash:
         Canada
         Ghana
Total cash and restricted cash
Capital assets
         Canada
         Ghana
Total capital assets
Total
June 30, 2012  
 
   
   
 
$
 
 
   
 
 
 
$
December 31, 2011 
 
   
   
 
 4,263,201 
 1,421,730  $
 
456,513 
316,914 
4,719,714 
 
1,738,644 
   
 
 
3,418 
 
1,595 
 
2,224,031 
2,097,324 
2,227,449 
2,098,919 
 
 3,837,563  $
 6,947,163
11.
F-49
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
(An Exploration Stage Company)
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (unaudited)
(Expressed in U.S. Dollars)
June 30, 2012
 
12.
CONTINGENCY AND COMMITMENTS
a)
b)
The Company entered into a management consulting agreement with the Vice President, Exploration, which extends from
March 1, 2011 to March 1, 2014, whereby the Company will pay CAD$12,500 (USD$12,198) per month for the three year term
for providing the majority of his time in consulting services to the Company. In the event of termination, without cause, before
September 30, 2012, the Company will be required to pay CAD$10,000 (USD$9,758) for each month of early termination up to
September 30, 2012. Thereafter, in the event that the services are terminated at any time after October 1, 2012, then no
additional payment will be payable.
The Company leases 1,163 square feet for its corporate office located at Suite 301, 360 Bay Street, Toronto, Ontario. The lease
c)
The Company leases 1,163 square feet for its corporate office located at Suite 301, 360 Bay Street, Toronto, Ontario. The lease
has a 66 month term which terminates October 31, 2012, at approximately CAD$4,392 (USD$4,286) per month.
 
In late 2009, the Government of Ghana announced an increase in the gross overriding royalty (“GOR”) required payable by all
mining companies in the country from 3% to 5%. The industry standard remained at 3% due to stability agreements which were
in place with a number of companies. From the commencement of gold recovery in July 2010 to September 2010, the Company
paid the GOR at 5% and as of October 2010, the Company began to pay the GOR at 3% until July 1, 2011 when the Company
again paid the royalty at 5%. As a result of this decision, there is a potential unrecorded liability of $84,300 related to 2010
activities and a recorded liability of $120,000 related to 2011 activities.
F-50
APPENDIX A
PLAN OF CONVERSION OF
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP., a Nevada corporation
INTO
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP., a British Virgin Islands company
This PLAN OF CONVERSION (the “Plan”), dated as of _______ ___, 2012, is hereby adopted and approved by XTRA-GOLD
RESOURCES CORP., a Nevada corporation (“Xtra-Gold Nevada”), in order to set forth the terms, conditions and procedures
governing the conversion of Xtra-Gold Nevada into a British Virgin Islands company pursuant to the Nevada Revised Statutes (the
“NRS”) and applicable laws in the British Virgin Islands.
WHEREAS, Xtra-Gold Nevada is a corporation formed and existing under the laws of the State of Nevada; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Directors (the “Board”) of Xtra-Gold Nevada has determined that it is in the best interests of Xtra-Gold
Nevada and its stockholders for Xtra-Gold Nevada to convert into a British Virgin Islands company pursuant to the NRS upon the
terms and conditions and in accordance with the procedures set forth herein, and the Board has authorized and approved the
conversion and the execution, delivery and filing of any and all instruments, certificates and documents necessary or desirable in
connection therewith, subject to stockholder approval under the NRS;
NOW, THEREFORE, Xtra-Gold Nevada does hereby adopt this Plan to effectuate the conversion of Xtra-Gold Nevada into a British
Virgin Islands company as follows:
1. Conversion; Effect of Conversion. Upon and subject to the terms and conditions of this Plan and pursuant to the relevant
provisions of the NRS, Xtra-Gold Nevada shall convert (referred to herein as the “Conversion”) into a British Virgin Islands company
named “Xtra-Gold Resources Corp.” (referred to herein as “Xtra-Gold BVI”) at the Effective Time (as defined in Section 2 below).
Xtra-Gold BVI shall thereafter be subject to all of the provisions of the laws of the British Virgin Islands, except that the existence of
Xtra-Gold BVI shall be deemed to have commenced on the date Xtra-Gold Nevada commenced (or is deemed to have commenced)
its existence. The Conversion shall not be deemed to affect any obligations or liabilities of Xtra-Gold Nevada incurred prior to the
Effective Time. Xtra-Gold Nevada shall not be required to wind up its affairs or pay its liabilities and distribute its assets, and the
Conversion shall not be deemed to constitute a dissolution of Xtra-Gold Nevada and shall constitute a continuation of the existence
of Xtra-Gold Nevada in the form of a British Virgin Islands company. Upon the Effective Time, all of the rights, privileges and powers
of Xtra-Gold Nevada, and all property and all debts due to Xtra-Gold Nevada, as well as all other things and causes of action
belonging to Xtra-Gold Nevada, shall be vested in Xtra-Gold BVI and shall thereafter be the property of Xtra-Gold BVI as they were of
Xtra-Gold Nevada, and all rights of creditors and all liens upon any property of Xtra-Gold Nevada shall be preserved unimpaired, and
all debts, liabilities and duties of Xtra-Gold Nevada shall thereafter attach to Xtra-Gold BVI and may be enforced against it to the
same extent as if such debts, liabilities and duties had been incurred or contracted by it.
2. Certificate of Conversion; Xtra-Gold BVI Charter Documents; Effective Time. The Conversion shall be effected by the filing with the
Secretary of State of the State of Nevada of duly executed Articles of Conversion, substantially in the form of Exhibit A attached
hereto (the “Certificate of Conversion”), and the filing in the British Virgin Islands of the continuation application attaching such
documents and information as required under section 181 of the BVI Business Companies Act (the “Continuation Application”).
Subject to the foregoing, the Conversion shall be effective upon the filing of the Certificate of Conversion and the Continuation
Application (the “Effective Time”).
A-1
3. Governance and Other Matters Related to Xtra-Gold BVI
(a) Memorandum and Articles of Association. At the Effective Time, the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Xtra-Gold BVI,
substantially in the form of Exhibit B attached hereto (the “Bylaws”), shall be as adopted by the Board of Directors of Xtra-Gold BVI.
Thereafter, the Bylaws may be amended by the Board of Directors or shareholders of Xtra-Gold BVI as provided in the Bylaws.
(b) Directors and Officers. The directors and officers of Xtra-Gold BVI immediately after the Effective Time shall be those individuals
listed on Exhibit C attached hereto. After the Effective Time, Xtra-Gold BVI and its Board of Directors shall take any necessary
actions to cause each of such individuals to be appointed or to confirm such appointments.
4. Effect of the Conversion on the Equity Securities of Xtra-Gold Nevada.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions of this Plan, at the Effective Time, automatically by virtue of the Conversion and without any
further action on the part of Xtra-Gold Nevada, Xtra-Gold BVI or any equityholder thereof, each issued and outstanding share of Xtra-
Gold Nevada (collectively, the “Common NV Stock”) shall automatically, without any further action on the part of the holder or the
payment of any additional consideration, convert into one (1) validly issued, fully paid and non-assessable share in Xtra-Gold BVI
(each, a “BVI Share”). Following the Effective Time, all Common NV Stock of Xtra-Gold Nevada shall no longer be outstanding and
shall automatically be canceled and retired and shall cease to exist, and each holder of a Common NV Stock immediately prior to the
Effective Time shall cease to have any rights with respect thereto, except the right to receive the relevant number of BVI Shares as
provided herein.
(b) Exchange of Common NV Stock for Stock Certificates. Promptly following the Effective Time, Xtra-Gold BVI shall deliver to each
such record holder of Common NV Stock one or more certificates evidencing that number of BVI Shares into which such holder’s
Common NV Stock were converted pursuant to the Conversion and the provisions of this Section 4 as the holder thereof may direct.
A certificate evidencing the proper number of BVI Shares into which the Common NV Stock were converted into pursuant to the
Conversion and this Section 4 shall only be issued to the person in whose name such Common NV Stock were registered
immediately prior to the Conversion. Until all BVI Shares are delivered in accordance with this Section 4(b), each Common NV Stock
shall be deemed at any time after the Effective Time to represent only the right to receive BVI Shares into which such Common NV
Stock was converted pursuant to the Conversion and this Section 4.
(c) No Further Ownership Rights in Common NV Stock. All BVI Shares issued in exchange for Common NV Stock pursuant to the
Conversion in accordance with the terms of this Section 4 shall be deemed to have been issued in full satisfaction of all rights
pertaining to the Common NV Stock under the NRS. After the Effective Time, there shall be no further registration of transfers on the
transfer books of Xtra-Gold Nevada of the Common NV Stock that were outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time.
5. Filings, Licenses, Permits, Titled Property, Etc. As applicable, following the Effective Time, Xtra-Gold BVI shall apply for new
qualifications to conduct business (including as a foreign corporation), licenses, permits and similar authorizations on its behalf and
in its own name in connection with the Conversion and to reflect the fact that it is a corporation. As required or appropriate, following
the Effective Time, all real, personal or intangible property of Xtra-Gold Nevada which was titled or registered in the name of Xtra-
Gold Nevada shall be re-titled or re-registered, as applicable, in the name of Xtra-Gold BVI by appropriate filings and/or notices to the
appropriate parties (including, without limitation, any applicable governmental agencies). In addition, following the Effective Time,
Xtra-Gold Nevada’s customer, vendor and investor communications (e.g., business cards, letterhead, websites, etc.) shall be revised
to reflect the Conversion and Xtra-Gold BVI’s corporate status.
A-2
6. Further Assurances. If, at any time after the Effective Time, Xtra-Gold BVI shall determine or be advised that any deeds, bills of
sale, assignments, agreements, documents or assurances or any other acts or things are necessary, desirable or proper, consistent
with the terms of this Plan, (a) to vest, perfect or confirm, of record or otherwise, in Xtra-Gold BVI its right, title or interest in, to or
under any of the rights, privileges, immunities, powers, purposes, franchises, properties or assets of Xtra-Gold Nevada, or (b) to
otherwise carry out the purposes of this Plan, Xtra-Gold BVI and its proper officers and directors (or their designees), are hereby
authorized to solicit in the name of Xtra-Gold Nevada any third-party consents or other documents required to be delivered by any
third-party, to execute and deliver, in the name and on behalf of Xtra-Gold Nevada all such deeds, bills of sale, assignments,
agreements, documents and assurances and do, in the name and on behalf of Xtra-Gold Nevada, all such other acts and things
necessary, desirable or proper to vest, perfect or confirm its right, title or interest in, to or under any of the rights, privileges,
immunities, powers, purposes, franchises, properties or assets of Xtra-Gold Nevada and otherwise to carry out the purposes of this
Plan.
7. Implementation and Interpretation; Termination and Amendment. This Plan shall be implemented and interpreted, prior to the
Effective Time, by the Board and, upon the Effective Time, by the Board of Directors of Xtra-Gold BVI, (a) each of which shall have
full power and authority to delegate and assign any matters covered hereunder to any other party(ies), including, without limitation,
any officers of Xtra-Gold Nevada or Xtra-Gold BVI, as the case may be, and (b) the interpretations and decisions of which shall be
final, binding, and conclusive on all parties. The Board or the Board of Directors of Xtra-Gold BVI, as applicable, at any time and from
time to time, may terminate, amend or modify this Plan.
8. Third Party Beneficiaries. This Plan shall not confer any rights or remedies upon any person or entity other than as expressly
provided herein
9. Severability. Whenever possible, each provision of this Plan will be interpreted in such manner as to be effective and valid under
applicable law, but if any provision of this Plan is held to be prohibited by or invalid under applicable law, such provision will be
ineffective only to the extent of such prohibition or invalidity, without invalidating the remainder of this Plan.
10. Governing Law. This Plan shall be construed in accordance with and governed by the laws of the State of Nevada, without regard
to the conflict of laws provisions thereof.
[Signature page follows]
A-3
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Xtra-Gold Resources Corp., a Nevada corporation, has caused this Plan to be executed by its duly
authorized representative as of the date first above written.
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
a Nevada corporation
 
 
By:
Name:
Title:
A-4
Exhibit A
Certificate of Conversion
of Xtra-Gold Nevada
[see attached]
Exhibit B
TERRITORY OF THE BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS
THE BVI BUSINESS COMPANIES ACT, 2004
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION
OF
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP. 
A COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES
1.
 
1.1
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
 
In this Memorandum of Association and the attached Articles of Association, if not inconsistent with the subject or context:
“Act” means the BVI Business Companies Act, 2004 (No. 16 of 2004) and includes the regulations made under the Act;
“Articles” means the attached Articles of Association of the Company;
“Chairman of the Board” has the meaning specified in Regulation 133;
“Distribution” in relation to a distribution by the Company to a Shareholder means the direct or indirect transfer of an asset, other than
Shares, to or for the benefit of the Shareholder, or the incurring of a debt to or for the benefit of a Shareholder, in relation to Shares held
by a Shareholder, and whether by means of the purchase of an asset, the purchase, redemption or other acquisition of Shares, a
transfer of indebtedness or otherwise, and includes a dividend;
“Eligible Person” means individuals, corporations, trusts, the estates of deceased individuals, partnerships and unincorporated
associations of persons;
“Memorandum” means this Memorandum of Association of the Company;
“register of members” has the meaning specified in Regulation 2.6;
“Registrar” means the Registrar of Corporate Affairs appointed under section 229 of the Act;
“Resolution of Directors” means either:
(a)
(b)
a resolution approved at a duly convened and constituted meeting of directors of the Company or of a committee of directors of
the Company by the affirmative vote of a majority of the directors present at the meeting who voted and did not abstain; or
 
a resolution consented to in writing by all directors or by all members of a committee of directors of the Company, as the case
may be,
with each director having only one vote with respect to any such resolution;
“Resolution of Shareholders” means either:
(a)
(b)
a resolution approved at a duly convened and constituted meeting of the Shareholders by the affirmative vote of a majority of the
votes of the Shares entitled to vote thereon which were present at the meeting and were voted; or
 
a resolution consented to in writing by all of the votes of Shares entitled to vote thereon;
“Seal” means any seal which has been duly adopted as the common seal of the Company;
“Securities” means Shares and debt obligations of every kind of the Company, and including without limitation options, warrants
and rights to acquire Shares or debt obligations;
“Share” means a common share issued or to be issued by the Company;
- 2 -
“Shareholder” means an Eligible Person whose name is entered in the register of members of the Company as the holder of one or
more Shares or fractional Shares;
“Treasury Share” means a Share that was previously issued but was repurchased, redeemed or otherwise acquired by the Company
and not cancelled; and
“written” or any term of like import includes information generated, sent, received or stored by electronic, electrical, digital, magnetic,
optical, electromagnetic, biometric or photonic means, including electronic data interchange, electronic mail, telegram, telex or
telecopy, and “in writing” shall be construed accordingly.
 
In the Memorandum and the Articles, unless the context otherwise requires a reference to:
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
 
(d)
(e)
a “Regulation” is a reference to a regulation of the Articles;
 
a “Clause” is a reference to a clause of the Memorandum;
 
voting by Shareholders is a reference to the casting of the votes attached to the Shares held by the Shareholder voting;
 
the Act, the Memorandum or the Articles is a reference to the Act or those documents as amended or, in the case of the Act any
amendment or re-enactment thereof; and
 
the singular includes the plural and vice versa.
Any words or expressions defined in the Act unless the context otherwise requires bear the same meaning in the Memorandum and the
Articles unless otherwise defined herein.
 
Headings are inserted for convenience only and shall be disregarded in interpreting the Memorandum and the Articles.
 
NAME
 
The name of the Company is Xtra-Gold Resources Corp.
 
The name of the Company as at the date of its application to continue into the British Virgin Islands was Xtra-Gold Resources Corp.
 
The Company was incorporated under the Nevada Revised Statutes, Chapter 78 on 1 September 1998 as a corporation under the
name Silverwing Systems Corporation. The name of the Company was changed from Silverwing Systems Corporation to Advertain
On-Line Inc. on 19 August 1999 and then to RetinaPharma International, Inc. on 6 June 2001 before it was changed to Xtra-Gold
Resources Corp. on 19 December 2003.
The Company may change its name by way of a Resolution of Shareholders or a Resolutions of Directors. Any change of the
Company’s name will take effect on the registration by the Registrar of a notice of the change filed by the existing registered agent in
1.2
1.3
1.4
 
2.
 
2.1
 
2.2
 
2.3
2.4
3.
4.
 
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
5.
 
5.1
5.2
 
6.
 
6.1
 
6.2
6.3
 
7.
 
7.1
7.2
8.
9.
10.
the British Virgin Islands acting on behalf of the Company.
 
STATUS
 
The Company is a company limited by shares.
 
REGISTERED OFFICE AND REGISTERED AGENT
 
The first registered office of the Company is at Craigmuir Chambers, Road Town, Tortola, British Virgin Islands, the office of the first
registered agent.
 
The first registered agent of the Company is Harneys Corporate Services Limited of Craigmuir Chambers, P.O. Box 71, Road Town,
Tortola, British Virgin Islands.
 
The Company may by Resolution of Shareholders or by Resolution of Directors change the location of its registered office or change its
registered agent.
- 3 -
Any change of registered office or registered agent will take effect on the registration by the Registrar of a notice of the change filed by
the existing registered agent or a legal practitioner in the British Virgin Islands acting on behalf of the Company.
 
CAPACITY AND POWERS
 
Subject to the Act and any other British Virgin Islands legislation, the Company has, irrespective of corporate benefit:
(a)
 
(b)
full capacity to carry on or undertake any business or activity, do any act or enter into any transaction; and
 
for the purposes of paragraph (a), full rights, powers and privileges.
For the purposes of section 9(4) of the Act, there are no limitations on the business that the Company may carry on.
 
NUMBER AND CLASSES OF SHARES
 
The Company is authorised to issue an unlimited number of no par value common shares of a single class.
 
The Company may issue fractional Shares but a fractional Share shall not be entitled to exercise voting rights or to receive a dividend
or distribution, unless the fractional share results from a consolidation of shares.
 
The Company shall not issue different series of Shares.
 
RIGHTS OF SHARES
 
Each Share in the Company confers upon the Shareholder:
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
the right to one vote at a meeting of the Shareholders or on any Resolution of Shareholders;
 
the right to an equal share in any dividend paid by the Company; and
 
the right to an equal share in the distribution of the surplus assets of the Company on its liquidation.
The Company may by Resolution of Directors redeem, purchase or otherwise acquire all or any of the Shares in the Company subject
to Regulation 3 of the Articles.
 
VARIATION OF RIGHTS
 
If at any time the Shares are divided into different classes, the rights attached to any class may only be varied, whether or not the
Company is in liquidation, with the consent in writing of all of the votes of Shares of that class entitled to vote thereon or by a resolution
passed at a meeting by the holders of not less than two-thirds of the of the votes of Shares of that class entitled to vote thereon which
were present at the meeting and were voted.
 
RIGHTS NOT VARIED BY THE ISSUE OF SHARES PARI PASSU
 
The rights conferred upon the holders of the Shares of any class shall not, unless otherwise expressly provided by the terms of issue of
the Shares of that class, be deemed to be varied by the creation or issue of further Shares ranking pari passu therewith.
 
REGISTERED SHARES
10.1 The Company shall issue registered Shares only.
10.2 The Company is not authorised to issue bearer Shares, convert registered Shares to bearer Shares or exchange registered Shares for
bearer Shares.
 
TRANSFER OF SHARES
11.
 
11.1 Subject to the Articles, the Company shall, on receipt of an instrument of transfer complying with Sub- Regulation 5.1 of the Articles,
enter the name of the transferee of a Share in the register of members unless the directors resolve to refuse or delay the registration of
the transfer for reasons that shall be specified in a Resolution of Directors.
11.2 The directors may not resolve to refuse or delay the transfer of a Share unless the Shareholder has failed to pay an amount due in
- 4 -
respect of the Share.
 
AMENDMENT OF THE MEMORANDUM AND THE ARTICLES
12.
 
12.1 Subject to Clause 8, the Company may only amend the Memorandum or the Articles by Resolution of Shareholders.
 
12.2 Any amendment of the Memorandum or the Articles will take effect on the registration by the Registrar of a notice of amendment, or
restated Memorandum and Articles, filed by the registered agent.
We, HARNEYS CORPORATE SERVICES LIMITED of Craigmuir Chambers, Road Town, Tortola, British Virgin Islands for the purpose
of continuing the Company as a BVI Business Company under the laws of the British Virgin Islands hereby sign this Memorandum
of Association on behalf of the Shareholders this                  day of [                  ], 2012.
_________________________________
[name of individual]
Authorised Signatory 
HARNEYS CORPORATE SERVICES LIMITED
TERRITORY OF THE BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS
THE BVI BUSINESS COMPANIES ACT, 2004
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
OF
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP. 
A COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES
1.
 
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
REGISTERED SHARES
 
Every Shareholder is entitled, at his option, to a share certificate or a non-transferable written acknowledgement of his right to obtain a
share certificate from the Company in respect of the shares of the Company held by him, but the Company is not bound to issue more
than one Share certificate in respect of a Share or Shares held jointly by several persons, and delivery of a share certificate to one of
several joint Shareholders is sufficient delivery to all. The Company may charge a fee for a share certificate issued in respect of a
transfer.
 
A share certificate shall be signed by at least one director or officer of the Company or by or on behalf of a registrar, transfer agent,
branch transfer agent or other authenticating agent of the Company or under the Seal of the Company and the signature of the director,
officer, registrar, transfer agent, branch transfer agent or other authenticating agent may be facsimiles.
 
If a share certificate contains a printed or mechanically reproduced signature of a person, the Company may issue the share certificate,
notwithstanding that the person has ceased to be a director or an officer of the Company, and the share certificate is as valid as if he
were a director or an officer at the date of its issue.
 
Any Shareholder receiving a share certificate for registered Shares shall indemnify and hold the Company and its directors and officers
harmless from any loss or liability which it or they may incur by reason of any wrongful or fraudulent use or representation made by any
person by virtue of the possession thereof. Where the registered holder of a share certificate claims that the share certificate has been
lost, apparently destroyed or wrongfully taken, the Company shall issue a new share certificate in place of the original share certificate
if the Shareholder:
(a)
 
(b)
(c)
so requests before the Company has notice that the share certificate has been acquired by a bona fide purchaser;
 
files with the Company an indemnity bond sufficient in the Company’s opinion to protect the Company and any transfer agent,
registrar or other agent of the Company from any loss that it or any of them may suffer by complying with the request to issue a
new share certificate; and
 
satisfies any other reasonable requirements imposed by the Company.
1.5
2.
 
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
If several Eligible Persons are registered as joint holders of any Shares, any one of such Eligible Persons may give an effectual receipt
for any Distribution.
 
SHARES
 
Shares and other Securities may be issued at such times, to such Eligible Persons, for such consideration and on such terms as the
directors may by Resolution of Directors determine, subject to the limitations set out herein.
 
Section 46 of the Act (Pre-emptive rights) does not apply to the Company.
- 2 -
No Share shall be issued until the consideration for the Share is fully paid in money or in property or past services that are not less in
value than the fair equivalent of the money that the Company would have received if the Share had been issued for money, so that all
Shares issued by the Company shall be deemed issued fully paid and non-assessable, provided that no Share may be issued for
consideration in the form of a promissory note, a promise to pay or other written obligation to contribute money or property or a contract
for future services.
 
In determining whether property or past services are the fair equivalent of a money consideration, the directors may take into account
reasonable charges and expenses of organization and reorganization and payments for property and past services reasonably
expected to benefit the Company. The directors of the Company who vote for or consent to a Resolution of Directors authorizing the
issue of a Share under regulation 2.1 for consideration other than money are jointly and severally, or solidarily, liable to the Company
to make good any amount by which the consideration received is less than the fair equivalent of the money that the Company would
have received if the Share had been issued for money on the date of the Resolution of Directors.
 
No Shares may be issued for a consideration other than money, unless a Resolution of Directors has been passed stating:
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
the amount to be credited for the issue of the Shares;
 
the determination of the directors of the reasonable present cash value of the non-money consideration for the issue; and
 
that, in the opinion of the directors, the present cash value of the non-money consideration for the issue is not less than the
amount to be credited for the issue of the Shares.
2.6
The Company shall keep a register (the “register of members”) containing:
2.7
2.8
 
3.
 
3.1
3.2
3.3
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
 
(d)
the names and addresses of the Eligible Persons who hold Shares;
 
the number of each class and series of Shares held by each Shareholder;
 
the date on which the name of each Shareholder was entered in the register of members; and
 
the date on which any Eligible Person ceased to be a Shareholder.
The register of members may be in any such form as the directors may approve, but if it is in magnetic, electronic or other data storage
form, the Company must be able to produce legible evidence of its contents. Until the directors otherwise determine, the magnetic,
electronic or other data storage form shall be the original register of members.
 
A Share is deemed to be issued when the name of the Shareholder is entered in the register of members.
 
REDEMPTION OF SHARES AND TREASURY SHARES
 
The Company may purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire and hold its own Shares save that the Company may not purchase, redeem
or otherwise acquire its own Shares without the consent of Shareholders whose Shares are to be purchased, redeemed or otherwise
acquired unless the Company is permitted by the Act or any other provision in the Memorandum or Articles to purchase, redeem or
otherwise acquire the Shares without their consent.
 
The Company may only offer to purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire Shares if the Resolution of Directors authorising the purchase,
redemption or other acquisition contains a statement that the directors are satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that immediately after the
acquisition the value of the Company’s assets will exceed its liabilities and the Company will be able to pay its debts as they fall due.
 
Sections 60 (Process for acquisition of own shares), 61 (Offer to one or more shareholders) and 62 (Shares redeemed otherwise than
at the option of company) of the Act shall not apply to the Company.
Shares that the Company purchases, redeems or otherwise acquires pursuant to this Regulation may be cancelled or held as Treasury
- 3 -
3.4
3.5
3.6
Shares that the Company purchases, redeems or otherwise acquires pursuant to this Regulation may be cancelled or held as Treasury
Shares except to the extent that such Shares are in excess of 50% of the issued Shares in which case they shall be cancelled but they
shall be available for reissue.
 
All rights and obligations attaching to a Treasury Share are suspended and shall not be exercised by the Company while it holds the
Share as a Treasury Share.
 
Treasury Shares may be transferred by the Company on such terms and conditions (not otherwise inconsistent with the Memorandum
and the Articles) as the Company may by Resolution of Directors determine.
3.7 Where Shares are held by another body corporate of which the Company holds, directly or indirectly, shares having more than 50% of
the votes in the election of directors of the other body corporate, all rights and obligations attaching to the Shares held by the other body
corporate are suspended and shall not be exercised by the other body corporate.
 
MORTGAGES AND CHARGES OF SHARES
 
Shareholders may mortgage or charge their Shares.
 
There shall be entered in the register of members at the written request of the Shareholder:
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
a statement that the Shares held by him are mortgaged or charged;
 
the name of the mortgagee or chargee; and
 
the date on which the particulars specified in subparagraphs (a) and (b) are entered in the register of members.
4.
 
4.1
 
4.2
4.3 Where particulars of a mortgage or charge are entered in the register of members, such particulars may be cancelled:
(a)
 
(b)
with the written consent of the named mortgagee or chargee or anyone authorised to act on his behalf; or
 
upon evidence satisfactory to the directors of the discharge of the liability secured by the mortgage or charge and the issue of
such indemnities as the directors shall consider necessary or desirable.
4.4 Whilst particulars of a mortgage or charge over Shares are entered in the register of members pursuant to this Regulation:
5.
 
5.1
5.2
 
5.3
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
no transfer of any Share the subject of those particulars shall be effected;
 
the Company may not purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire any such Share; and
 
no replacement certificate shall be issued in respect of such Shares,
without the written consent of the named mortgagee or chargee.
 
TRANSFER OF SHARES
 
Registered Shares in the Company may be transferred by a written instrument of transfer signed by the transferor and containing the
name and address of the transferee. Where there is a share certificate, such certificate, must be endorsed by the registered holder
thereof or deposited together with the share transfer power of attorney (if applicable) properly completed by the registered holder. Such
signature must be guaranteed by an “Eligible Institution”, which means a Canadian schedule 1 chartered bank, a major trust company
in Canada, a member of the Securities Transfer Agent Medallion Program (STAMP), a member of the Stock Exchange Medallion
Program (SEMP) or a member of the New York Stock Exchange Inc. Medallion Signature Program (MSP), (members of these programs
are usually members of a recognized stock exchange in Canada and the United States, members of the Investment Industry Regulatory
Organization of Canada, members of the National Association of Securities Dealers or banks and trust companies in the United States)
or in some other manner satisfactory to the Company.
- 4 -
The transfer of a Share is effective when the name of the transferee is entered on the register of members.
 
If the directors of the Company are satisfied that an instrument of transfer relating to Shares has been signed but that the instrument has
been lost or destroyed, they may resolve by Resolution of Directors:
(a)
 
(b)
to accept such evidence of the transfer of Shares as they consider appropriate; and
 
that the transferee’s name should be entered in the register of members notwithstanding the absence of the instrument of
transfer.
5.4
Subject to the Memorandum, the personal representative of a deceased Shareholder may transfer a Share even though the personal
representative is not a Shareholder at the time of the transfer.
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
Subject to any limitations in the Memorandum, the Company must on the application of the transferor or transferee of a Share in the
Company enter in the register of members the name of the transferee of the Share.
 
The executor or administrator of a deceased Shareholder, the guardian of an incompetent Shareholder or the trustee of a bankrupt
Shareholder shall be the only person recognized by the Company as having any title to his Share but they shall not be entitled to
exercise any rights as a Shareholder until they have proceeded as set forth in the next following three Regulations.
 
The production to the Company of any document which is evidence of probate of the will, or letters of administration of the estate, or
confirmation as executor, of a deceased Shareholder or of the appointment of a guardian of an incompetent Shareholder or the trustee
of a bankrupt Shareholder shall be accepted by the Company even if the deceased, incompetent or bankrupt Shareholder is domiciled
outside the British Virgin Islands if the document evidencing the grant of probate or letters of administration, confirmation as executor,
appointment as guardian or trustee in bankruptcy is issued by a foreign court which had competent jurisdiction in the matter. For the
purpose of establishing whether or not a foreign court had competent jurisdiction in such a matter the directors may obtain appropriate
legal advice. The directors may also require an indemnity to be given by the executor, administrator, guardian or trustee in bankruptcy.
 
Any person becoming entitled by operation of law or otherwise to a Share or Shares in consequence of the death, incompetence or
bankruptcy of any Shareholder may be registered as a Shareholder upon such evidence being produced as may reasonably be
required by the directors. An application by any such person to be registered as a Shareholder shall for all purposes be deemed to be a
transfer of Shares of the deceased, incompetent or bankrupt Shareholder and the directors shall treat it as such.
 
Any person who has become entitled to a Share or Shares in consequence of the death, incompetence or bankruptcy of a Shareholder
may, instead of being registered himself, request in writing that some person be named by him be registered as the transferee of such
Share or Shares and such request shall likewise be treated as if it were a transfer.
5.10 What amounts to incompetence on the part of a person is a matter to be determined by the court having regard to all the relevant
6.
 
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
6.7
 
6.8
6.9
evidence and the circumstances of the case.
 
MEETINGS AND CONSENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS
 
Any director of the Company may convene meetings of the Shareholders at such times and in such manner and places within or
outside the British Virgin Islands as the director considers necessary or desirable but the directors shall call a meeting of Shareholders
designated as an “annual meeting” not later than eighteen months after the Company’s registration under the laws of the British Virgin
Islands and subsequently not later than fifteen months after holding the last preceding annual meeting and no later than six months
after the end of the Company’s preceding financial year.
 
Upon the written request of Shareholders entitled to exercise 10% or more of the voting rights in respect of the matter for which the
meeting is requested the directors shall convene a meeting of Shareholders.
 
The director convening a meeting shall give not less than 21 days’ notice of a meeting of Shareholders to:
- 5 -
(a)
(b)
those Shareholders whose names on the date the notice is given appear as Shareholders in the register of members of the
Company and are entitled to vote at the meeting; and
 
the other directors.
The director convening a meeting of Shareholders may fix as the record date for determining those Shareholders that are entitled to
vote at the meeting the date notice is given of the meeting and may also fix in advance a date as the record date for determining those
Shares that are entitled to vote at the meeting but the record date shall not precede by more than 60 days or by less than 21 days the
date on which the meeting is to be held.
 
A meeting of Shareholders held in contravention of the requirement to give notice is valid if Shareholders holding at least 90% of the
total voting rights on all the matters to be considered at the meeting have waived notice of the meeting and, for this purpose, the
presence of a Shareholder at the meeting shall constitute waiver in relation to all the Shares which that Shareholder holds.
 
The inadvertent failure of a director who convenes a meeting to give notice of a meeting to a Shareholder or another director, or the fact
that a Shareholder or another director has not received notice, does not invalidate the meeting.
 
A Shareholder may be represented at a meeting of Shareholders by a proxy who may speak and vote on behalf of the Shareholder.
 
The instrument appointing a proxy shall be produced at the place designated for the meeting before the time for holding the meeting at
which the person named in such instrument proposes to vote. The notice of the meeting may specify an alternative or additional place
or time at which the proxy shall be presented.
 
The instrument appointing a proxy shall comply with all applicable securities laws and shall be in substantially the following form or
such other form as the chairman of the meeting shall accept as properly evidencing the wishes of the Shareholder appointing the proxy.
[ COMPANY NAME ]
I/We being a Shareholder of the above Company HEREBY APPOINT ……………………………………. ………………… of
…………………………… or failing him ………..…………………………………… of ………………………..…… to be my/our proxy to vote for
me/us at the meeting of Shareholders to be held on the …… day of …………..…………, 20…… and at any adjournment thereof.
(Any restrictions on voting to be inserted here.)
Signed this …… day of …………..…………, 20……
 
 
……………………………………….
Shareholder
6.10 The following applies where Shares are jointly owned:
(a)
(b)
 
(c)
if two or more persons hold Shares jointly each of them may be present in person or by proxy at a meeting of Shareholders and
may speak as a Shareholder;
 
if only one of the joint owners is present in person or by proxy he may vote on behalf of all joint owners; and
 
if two or more of the joint owners are present in person or by proxy they must vote as one.
6.11 A Shareholder shall be deemed to be present at a meeting of Shareholders if he participates by telephone or other electronic means
and all Shareholders participating in the meeting are able to hear each other.
6.12 A meeting of Shareholders is duly constituted if, at the commencement of the meeting, there are present in person or by proxy not less
- 6 -
6.13
than 2 persons representing not less than 5% of the votes of the Shares or class of Shares entitled to vote on Resolutions of
Shareholders to be considered at the meeting.
 
If within two hours from the time appointed for the meeting a quorum is not present, the meeting, if convened upon the requisition of
Shareholders, shall be dissolved; in any other case it shall stand adjourned to the next business day in the jurisdiction in which the
meeting was to have been held at the same time and place or to such other time and place as the directors may determine, and if at the
adjourned meeting there are present within one hour from the time appointed for the meeting in person or by proxy not less 2 persons
representing not less than 0.5% of the votes of the Shares or each class of Shares entitled to vote on the matters to be considered by
the meeting, those present shall constitute a quorum but otherwise the meeting shall be dissolved.
6.14 At every meeting of Shareholders, the Chairman of the Board shall preside as chairman of the meeting. If there is no Chairman of the
Board or if the Chairman of the Board is not present at the meeting or is not willing or able to chair the meeting, then the CEO shall
preside over the meeting. If neither the Chairman of the Board nor the CEO is present at the meeting or willing or able to chair the
meeting, the Shareholders present shall choose one of their number to be the chairman. If the Shareholders are unable to choose a
chairman for any reason, then the person representing the greatest number of voting Shares present in person or by proxy at the
meeting shall preside as chairman failing which the oldest individual Shareholder or representative of a Shareholder present shall take
the chair.
6.15 The chairman may, with the consent of the meeting, adjourn any meeting from time to time, and from place to place, but no business
shall be transacted at any adjourned meeting other than the business left unfinished at the meeting from which the adjournment took
place.
6.16 At any meeting of the Shareholders the chairman is responsible for deciding in such manner as he considers appropriate whether any
resolution proposed has been carried or not and the result of his decision shall be announced to the meeting and recorded in the
minutes of the meeting. If the chairman has any doubt as to the outcome of the vote on a proposed resolution, he shall cause a poll to
be taken of all votes cast upon such resolution. If the chairman fails to take a poll then any Shareholder present in person or by proxy
who disputes the announcement by the chairman of the result of any vote may immediately following such announcement demand that
a poll be taken and the chairman shall cause a poll to be taken. If a poll is taken at any meeting, the result shall be announced to the
meeting and recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
6.17 Subject to the specific provisions contained in this Regulation for the appointment of representatives of Eligible Persons other than
individuals, the right of any individual to speak for or represent a Shareholder shall be determined by the law of the jurisdiction where,
and by the documents by which, the Eligible Person is constituted or derives its existence. In case of doubt, the directors may in good
faith seek legal advice from any qualified person and unless and until a court of competent jurisdiction shall otherwise rule, the
directors may rely and act upon such advice without incurring any liability to any Shareholder or the Company.
6.18 Any Eligible Person other than an individual which is a Shareholder may by resolution of its directors or other governing body authorise
such individual as it thinks fit to act as its representative at any meeting of Shareholders or of any class of Shareholders, and the
individual so authorised shall be entitled to exercise the same rights on behalf of the Shareholder which he represents as that
Shareholder could exercise if it were an individual.
6.19 The chairman of any meeting at which a vote is cast by proxy or on behalf of any Eligible Person other than an individual may call for a
notarially certified copy of such proxy or authority which shall be produced within 7 days of being so requested or the votes cast by
such proxy or on behalf of such Eligible Person shall be disregarded.
6.20 Directors of the Company may attend and speak at any meeting of Shareholders and at any separate meeting of the holders of any
class or series of Shares.
6.21 An action that may be taken by the Shareholders at a meeting may also be taken by a resolution consented to in writing, by all of the
- 7 -
votes of Shares entitled to vote thereon without the need for any notice. The consent may be in the form of counterparts, each
counterpart being signed by one or more Shareholders. If the consent is in one or more counterparts, and the counterparts bear
different dates, then the resolution shall take effect on the date of the latest counterpart.
 
MEMBERS DISSENT
 
In addition to the dissent rights provided under section 179 of the Act, a Shareholder of any class of Shares of the Company is entitled
to dissent (in the manner provided for in section 179 of the Act) and be paid fair value for his Shares if the Company purports to resolve
to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
 
(e)
amend its Memorandum or Articles to add, remove or change restrictions on the issue, transfer or ownership of Shares of that
class;
 
amend its Memorandum or Articles to add, remove or change any restriction upon the business or businesses that the Company
may carry on or upon the powers that the Company may exercise;
 
be merged or consolidated with another entity, except where such entity is the wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, the
sole Shareholder of the Company or the entity is wholly owned by the sole Shareholder of the Company;
 
be continued under the laws of another jurisdiction; or
 
sell, transfer, lease exchange or otherwise dispose of more than 50% in value of the assets of the Company other than in the
ordinary course of business of the Company.
RESERVED MATTERS
 
For avoidance of any doubt, the following actions require approval by a Resolution of Shareholders approved by not less than two-
thirds of the votes of the Shares or the class of Shares entitled to vote thereon:
(a)
(b)
(c)
the sale, transfer, lease, exchange or other disposition of more than 50% in value of the assets of the Company other than in the
ordinary course of business of the Company;
 
the merger or consolidation with another entity, except where such entity is the wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, the
sole Shareholder of the Company or the entity is wholly owned by the sole Shareholder of the Company; and
 
the continuation of the Company.
DIRECTORS
 
The directors shall be elected by Resolution of Shareholders and subject to Sub-Regulation 9.7, appointed by Resolution of Directors.
 
No person shall be appointed as a director, of the Company unless he has consented in writing to be a director.
 
Subject to Sub-Regulation 9.1, the minimum number of directors shall be three and the maximum number shall be fifteen.
 
Subject to Sub-Regulation 9.3, the actual number of directors of the Company (within the range of three to fifteen) and the number of
directors of the Company to be elected at the annual meetings of the Company specified in Sub-Regulation 6.1 shall be such number
as determined from time to time by Resolution of Directors.
- 8 -
Each director holds office for the term, if any, including on an annual basis, fixed by the Resolution of Shareholders or the Resolution of
Directors appointing him, in accordance with sub-Regulation 9.7 or until his earlier death, resignation or removal. If no term is fixed on
the election or appointment of a director, the director shall serve for a term not exceeding the close of the next annual meeting of
Shareholders following his election or appointment.
 
A director may be removed from office, with or without cause, by Resolution of Shareholders passed at a meeting of Shareholders
7.
8.
9.
 
9.1
 
9.2
 
9.3
 
9.4
9.5
9.6
9.7
9.8
called for the purposes of removing the director or for purposes including the removal of the director or by a written Resolution of
Shareholders.
 
A director may resign his office by giving written notice of his resignation to the Company and the resignation has effect from the date
the notice is received by the Company or from such later date as may be specified in the notice. A director shall resign forthwith as a
director if he is, or becomes, disqualified from acting as a director under the Act.
 
Subject to any Resolution of Shareholders to the contrary, the directors may at any time by a Resolution of Directors appoint any
person to be a director either to fill a vacancy (except a vacancy resulting from an increase in the minimum number of directors or from
a failure of the Shareholders to elect the minimum number of directors) or as an addition to the existing directors. However, the directors
may not between meetings of Shareholders, appoint an additional director if, after such appointment, the total number of directors
would be greater than one and one third times the number of directors to have been elected at the last annual meeting of Shareholders.
In the absence of a quorum of the Board of Directors or if the vacancy has arisen from a failure of the Shareholders to elect the
minimum number of directors, the Board of Directors shall forthwith call a meeting of Shareholders to fill the vacancy. If the Board of
Directors fails to call such meeting or if there are no such directors then in office, any Shareholder may call the meeting.
 
A vacancy in relation to directors occurs if a director dies or otherwise ceases to hold office prior to the expiration of his term of office.
9.9
 
9.10 The Company shall keep a register of directors containing:
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
 
(d)
the names and addresses of the persons who are directors of the Company;
 
the date on which each person whose name is entered in the register was appointed as a director of the Company;
 
the date on which each person named as a director ceased to be a director of the Company; and
 
such other information as may be prescribed by the Act.
9.11 The register of directors may be kept in any such form as the directors may approve, but if it is in magnetic, electronic or other data
storage form, the Company must be able to produce legible evidence of its contents. Until a Resolution of Directors determining
otherwise is passed, the magnetic, electronic or other data storage shall be the original register of directors.
9.12 The directors may, by Resolution of Directors, fix the emoluments of directors with respect to services to be rendered in any capacity to
the Company.
POWERS OF DIRECTORS
9.13 A director is not required to hold a Share as a qualification to office.
 
10.
 
10.1 The business and affairs of the Company shall be managed by, or under the direction or supervision of, the directors of the Company.
The directors of the Company have all the powers necessary for managing, and for directing and supervising, the business and affairs
of the Company. The directors may pay all expenses incurred preliminary to and in connection with the incorporation of the Company
and may exercise all such powers of the Company as are not by the Act or by the Memorandum or the Articles required to be exercised
by the Shareholders.
- 9 -
10.3
10.2 Each director shall exercise his powers for a proper purpose and shall not act or agree to the Company acting in a manner that
contravenes the Memorandum, the Articles or the Act. Each director, in exercising his powers or performing his duties, shall act
honestly and in good faith in what the director believes to be the best interests of the Company.
 
If the Company is the wholly owned subsidiary of a holding company, a director of the Company may, when exercising powers or
performing duties as a director, act in a manner which he believes is in the best interests of the holding company even though it may
not be in the best interests of the Company.
10.4 Any director which is a body corporate may appoint any individual as its duly authorised representative for the purpose of representing
it at meetings of the directors, with respect to the signing of consents or otherwise.
10.5 The continuing directors may act notwithstanding any vacancy in their body.
 
10.6 The directors may by Resolution of Directors exercise all the powers of the Company to incur indebtedness, liabilities or obligations
and to secure indebtedness, liabilities or obligations whether of the Company or of any third party.
10.7 All cheques, promissory notes, drafts, bills of exchange and other negotiable instruments and all receipts for moneys paid to the
Company shall be signed, drawn, accepted, endorsed or otherwise executed, as the case may be, in such manner as shall from time to
time be determined by Resolution of Directors.
10.8 For the purposes of section 175 (Disposition of assets) of the Act, the directors may by Resolution of Directors determine that any sale,
transfer, lease, exchange or other disposition is in the usual or regular course of the business carried on by the Company and such
determination is, in the absence of fraud, conclusive.
 
PROCEEDINGS OF DIRECTORS
11.
 
11.1 Any one director of the Company may call a meeting of the directors by sending a written notice to each other director.
 
11.2 The directors of the Company or any committee thereof may meet at such times and in such manner and places within or outside the
British Virgin Islands other than Canada as the directors may determine to be necessary or desirable.
11.3 A director is deemed to be present at a meeting of directors if he participates by telephone or other electronic means and all directors
participating in the meeting are able to hear each other.
11.4 A director shall be given not less than 48 hours notice of meetings of directors, but a meeting of directors held without 48 hours notice
having been given to all directors shall be valid if all the directors entitled to vote at the meeting who do not attend waive notice of the
meeting, and for this purpose the presence of a director at a meeting shall constitute waiver by that director. The inadvertent failure to
give notice of a meeting to a director, or the fact that a director has not received the notice, does not invalidate the meeting.
11.5 A director may by a written instrument appoint an alternate who need not be a director and the alternate shall be entitled to attend
meetings in the absence of the director who appointed him and to vote in place of the director until the appointment lapses or is
terminated.
11.6 A meeting of directors is duly constituted for all purposes if at the commencement of the meeting there are present in person or by
alternate not less than one-half of the total number of directors, a majority of whom shall be non resident of Canada, unless there are
only 2 directors in which case the quorum is 2.
11.7 At meetings of directors at which the Chairman of the Board is present, he shall preside as chairman of the meeting. If there is no
Chairman of the Board or if the Chairman of the Board is not present at the meeting, or willing or able to chair the meeting, the directors
present shall choose one of their number to be chairman of the meeting.
- 10 -
11.8 An action that may be taken by the directors or a committee of directors at a meeting may also be taken by a Resolution of Directors or
a resolution of a committee of directors consented to in writing by all directors or by all members of the committee, as the case may be,
without the need for any notice. The consent may be in the form of counterparts each counterpart being signed by one or more
directors. If the consent is in one or more counterparts, and the counterparts bear different dates, then the resolution shall take effect on
the date upon which the last director has consented to the resolution by signed counterparts.
 
COMMITTEES
12.
 
12.1 The directors may, by Resolution of Directors, designate one or more committees, each consisting of one or more directors, and
delegate one or more of their powers, including the power to affix the Seal, to the committee.
12.2 The directors have no power to delegate to a committee of directors any of the following powers:
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
 
(d)
 
(e)
 
(f)
 
(g)
 
(h)
to amend the Memorandum or the Articles;
 
to designate committees of directors;
 
to delegate powers to a committee of directors;
 
to appoint or remove directors;
 
to appoint or remove an agent;
 
to approve a plan of merger, consolidation or arrangement;
 
to make a declaration of solvency or to approve a liquidation plan; or
 
to make a determination that immediately after a proposed Distribution the value of the Company’s assets will exceed its
liabilities and the Company will be able to pay its debts as they fall due.
12.3 Sub-Regulations 12.2(b) and (c) do not prevent a committee of directors, where authorised by the Resolution of Directors appointing
such committee or by a subsequent Resolution of Directors, from appointing a sub-committee and delegating powers exercisable by
the committee to the sub-committee.
12.4 The meetings and proceedings of each committee of directors consisting of 2 or more directors shall be governed mutatis mutandis by
the provisions of the Articles regulating the proceedings of directors so far as the same are not superseded by any provisions in the
Resolution of Directors establishing the committee. Except that where there is a committee of directors consisting of 2 directors, the
quorum for a meeting is 2 directors.
12.5 Where the directors delegate their powers to a committee of directors they remain responsible for the exercise of that power by the
committee, unless they believed on reasonable grounds at all times before the exercise of the power that the committee would exercise
the power in conformity with the duties imposed on directors of the Company under the Act.
 
OFFICERS AND AGENTS
13.
 
13.1 The Company may by Resolution of Directors appoint officers of the Company at such times as may be considered necessary or
expedient. Such officers may consist of a Chairman of the Board of Directors, a Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) and one or more vice-
presidents, secretaries and treasurers and such other officers as may from time to time be considered necessary or expedient. Any
number of offices may be held by the same person.
13.2 The officers shall perform such duties as shall be prescribed at the time of their appointment subject to any modification in such duties
as may be prescribed thereafter by Resolution of Directors, but in the absence of any specific allocation of duties each officer as set out
below shall have the following responsibilities:
- 11 -
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Chairman of the Board of Directors – Subject to the provisions of the Act or the Articles, preside at all meetings of the
Shareholders and of the Board of Directors and have such other powers and duties as the Board of Directors may specify.
During the absence or disability of the Chairman of the Board of Directors, his duties shall be performed and his powers
exercised by the CEO.
 
CEO - Subject to any duties imposed upon the Chairman of the Board of Directors, if one is appointed, the CEO shall preside at
all meetings of Shareholders and is responsible for the general supervision, subject to the authority of the Board of Directors, of
the business and affairs of the Company.
 
Vice Presidents - During the absence or inability of the CEO to act, his duties shall be performed and his powers shall be
exercised by the vice-president, if any, or if there is more than one, by the vice-president selected by the Board of Directors. A
vice-president shall also perform such duties and exercise such powers as the CEO or the Board of Directors may from time to
time delegate to him.
 
Secretaries – A secretary shall:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
give or cause to be given all notices required to be given to Shareholders, directors, auditors and members of
committees;
 
attend all meetings of directors, Shareholders and committees and enter or cause to be entered in books kept for that
purpose minutes of all proceedings at such meetings; and
 
be the custodian of all books, papers, records, documents, corporate seals, if any, and other instruments and maintain
the register of members, minute books and records (other than financial records) of the Company save those entrusted by
Resolution of Directors to the custody of the treasurer or other officer or agent of the Company and to ensure compliance
with all procedural requirements imposed on the Company by applicable law. The secretary may delegate his duties to a
nominee from time to time.
(e)
Treasurers - A treasurer shall keep or cause to be kept full and accurate books of account in which shall be recorded all receipts
and disbursements of the Company; control the deposit of money, the safekeeping of securities and the disbursement of funds;
and render to the Board of Directors, whenever required of him, an account of the financial affairs of the Company.
13.3 The powers and duties of all other officers shall be such as the terms of their engagement call for or as the Board of Directors may
specify. Any of the powers and duties of an officer to whom an assistant has been appointed may be exercised and performed by such
assistant unless the Board of Directors otherwise directs.
13.4 The Board of Directors may from time to time and subject to the provisions of the Act, vary, add to or limit the powers and duties of any
officer.
13.5 The emoluments of all officers shall be fixed by Resolution of Directors.
 
13.6 The terms of employment of the officers shall be determined by Resolution of Directors. In the absence of written agreement to the
contrary the officers of the Company shall hold office until their successors are duly appointed, but any officer elected or appointed by
the directors may be removed at any time, with or without cause, by Resolution of Directors. Any vacancy occurring in any office of the
Company may be filled by Resolution of Directors.
13.7 The Board of Directors may at any time require any officer, employee or agent of the Company to furnish a bond for the faithful
discharge of his duties, in such form and with such surety as the Board of Directors determine. The directors may, by Resolution of
Directors, appoint any person, including a person who is a director, to be an agent of the Company.
- 12 -
13.8 An agent of the Company shall have such powers and authority of the directors, including the power and authority to affix the Seal, as
are set forth in the Articles or in the Resolution of Directors appointing the agent, except that no agent has any power or authority
prohibited under the Act.
 
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
14.
 
14.1 A director of the Company shall, forthwith after becoming aware of the fact that he is interested in a transaction entered into or to be
entered into by the Company, disclose the interest to all other directors of the Company.
14.2 For the purposes of Sub-Regulation 14.1, a disclosure to all other directors to the effect that a director is a member, director or officer of
another named entity or has a fiduciary relationship with respect to the entity or a named individual and is to be regarded as interested
in any transaction which may, after the date of the entry into the transaction or disclosure of the interest, be entered into with that entity
or individual, is a sufficient disclosure of interest in relation to that transaction.
14.3 A director of the Company who is interested in a transaction entered into or to be entered into by the Company may:
(a)
 
(b)
(c)
vote on a matter relating to the transaction;
 
attend a meeting of directors at which a matter relating to the transaction arises and be included among the directors present at
the meeting for the purposes of a quorum; and
 
sign a document on behalf of the Company, or do any other thing in his capacity as a director, that relates to the transaction,
and, subject to compliance with the Act shall not, by reason of his office be accountable to the Company for any benefit which he
derives from such transaction and no such transaction shall be liable to be avoided on the grounds of any such interest or benefit.
 
INDEMNIFICATION
15.
 
15.1 Subject to the limitations hereinafter provided the Company shall indemnify against all expenses, including legal fees, and against all
judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement and reasonably incurred in connection with legal, administrative or investigative
proceedings any person who:
(a)
(b)
is or was a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed proceedings, whether civil,
criminal, administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that the person is or was a director or officer of the Company; or
 
is or was, at the request of the Company, serving as a director of, or in any other capacity is or was acting for, another body
corporate or a partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise.
15.2 The indemnity in Sub-Regulation 15.1 only applies if the person acted honestly and in good faith with a view to the best interests of the
Company and, in the case of criminal proceedings, the person had no reasonable cause to believe that their conduct was unlawful.
15.3 The decision of the directors as to whether the person acted honestly and in good faith and with a view to the best interests of the
Company and as to whether the person had no reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful is, in the absence of fraud,
sufficient for the purposes of the Articles, unless a question of law is involved.
15.4 The termination of any proceedings by any judgment, order, settlement, conviction or the entering of a nolle prosequi does not, by itself,
create a presumption that the person did not act honestly and in good faith and with a view to the best interests of the Company or that
the person had reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful.
- 13 -
15.5
If a person referred to in Sub-Regulation 15.1 has been successful in defence of any proceedings referred to in Sub-Regulation 15.1,
the person is entitled to be indemnified against all expenses, including legal fees, and against all judgments, fines and amounts paid in
settlement and reasonably incurred by the person in connection with the proceedings.
15.6 The Company may purchase and maintain insurance in relation to any person who is or was a director, officer or liquidator of the
Company, or who at the request of the Company is or was serving as a director, officer or liquidator of, or in any other capacity is or was
acting for, another body corporate or a partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise, against any liability asserted against the
person and incurred by the person in that capacity, whether or not the Company has or would have had the power to indemnify the
person against the liability as provided in the Articles.
 
RECORDS
16.
16.1 The Company shall keep the following documents at the office of its registered agent:
(a)
the Memorandum and the Articles;
the Memorandum and the Articles;
 
the register of members, or a copy of the register of members;
 
the register of directors, or a copy of the register of directors; and
 
copies of all notices and other documents filed by the Company with the Registrar of Corporate Affairs in the previous 10 years.
(b)
 
(c)
 
(d)
16.2 Until the directors determine otherwise by Resolution of Directors, the Company shall keep the original register of members and
16.3
original register of directors at the office of its registered agent.
 
If the Company maintains only a copy of the register of members or a copy of the register of directors at the office of its registered agent,
it shall:
(a)
 
(b)
within 15 days of any change in either register, notify the registered agent in writing of the change; and
 
provide the registered agent with a written record of the physical address of the place or places at which the original register of
members or the original register of directors is kept.
16.4 The Company shall keep the following records at the office of its registered agent or at such other place or places, within or outside the
British Virgin Islands, as the directors may determine:
(a)
 
(b)
minutes of meetings and Resolutions of Shareholders and classes of Shareholders; and
 
minutes of meetings and Resolutions of Directors and committees of directors.
16.5 Where any original records referred to in this Regulation are maintained other than at the office of the registered agent of the Company,
and the place at which the original records is changed, the Company shall provide the registered agent with the physical address of the
new location of the records of the Company within 14 days of the change of location.
16.6 The records kept by the Company under this Regulation shall be in written form or either wholly or partly as electronic records
complying with the requirements of the Electronic Transactions Act, 2001 (No. 5 of 2001) as from time to time amended or re-enacted.
16.7 Each shareholder shall be entitled, upon making a request to the Company in writing, to receive a copy of the register of members of
17.
the Company.
 
REGISTER OF CHARGES
 
The Company shall maintain at the office of its registered agent a register of charges in which there shall be entered the following
particulars regarding each mortgage, charge and other encumbrance created by the Company:
- 14 -
18.
19.
(a)
 
(b)
 
(c)
 
(d)
 
(e)
 
(f)
the date of creation of the charge;
 
a short description of the liability secured by the charge;
 
a short description of the property charged;
 
the name and address of the trustee for the security or, if there is no such trustee, the name and address of the chargee;
 
unless the charge is a security to bearer, the name and address of the holder of the charge; and
 
details of any prohibition or restriction contained in the instrument creating the charge on the power of the Company to create
any future charge ranking in priority to or equally with the charge.
SEAL
 
The Company shall have a Seal an impression of which shall be kept at the office of the registered agent of the Company. The
Company may have more than one Seal and references herein to the Seal shall be references to every Seal which shall have been
duly adopted by Resolution of Directors. The directors shall provide for the safe custody of the Seal and for an imprint thereof to be kept
at the registered office. Except as otherwise expressly provided herein the Seal when affixed to any written instrument shall be
witnessed and attested to by the signature of any one director or other person so authorised from time to time by Resolution of
Directors. Such authorisation may be before or after the Seal is affixed, may be general or specific and may refer to any number of
sealings. The directors may provide for a facsimile of the Seal and of the signature of any director or authorised person which may be
reproduced by printing or other means on any instrument and it shall have the same force and validity as if the Seal had been affixed to
such instrument and the same had been attested to as hereinbefore described.
 
DISTRIBUTIONS BY WAY OF DIVIDEND
19.1 The directors of the Company may, by Resolution of Directors, authorise a Distribution by way of dividend at a time and of an amount
they think fit if they are satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that, immediately after the Distribution, the value of the Company’s assets will
exceed its liabilities and the Company will be able to pay its debts as they fall due.
19.2 Dividends may be paid in money, shares, or other property.
 
19.3 Notice of any dividend that may have been declared shall be given to each Shareholder as specified in Sub- Regulation 22.1 and all
dividends unclaimed for 3 years after having been declared may be forfeited by Resolution of Directors for the benefit of the Company.
19.4 No dividend shall bear interest as against the Company and no dividend shall be paid on Treasury Shares.
 
19.5 The directors of the Company may fix in advance a date as the record date for the purpose of determining the Shareholders entitled to
20.
receive a Distribution by way of dividend.
 
BONUS SHARES
 
The Company may issue bonus Shares and the directors of the Company may fix in advance a date as the record date for the purpose
of determining the Shareholders entitled to receive such bonus Shares.
 
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
21.
 
21.1 The Company shall keep records that are sufficient to show and explain the Company’s transactions and that will, at any time, enable
the financial position of the Company to be determined with reasonable accuracy.
21.2 The Company may by Resolution of Shareholders call for the directors to prepare periodically and make available a profit and loss
account and a balance sheet. The profit and loss account and balance sheet shall be drawn up so as to give respectively a true and fair
view of the profit and loss of the Company for a financial period and a true and fair view of the assets and liabilities of the Company as
at the end of a financial period.
- 15 -
21.3 The Company may by Resolution of Shareholders call for the accounts to be examined by auditors.
 
21.4 The first auditors shall be appointed by Resolution of Directors; subsequent auditors shall be appointed by Resolution of Directors and
such subsequent appointment shall be ratified by the Shareholders at the next meeting of Shareholders designated as an “annual
meeting”.
21.5 The auditors may be Shareholders, but no director or other officer shall be eligible to be an auditor of the Company during their
continuance in office.
21.6 The remuneration of the auditors of the Company:
(a)
 
(b)
in the case of auditors appointed by the directors, may be fixed by Resolution of Directors; and
 
subject to the foregoing, shall be fixed by Resolution of Shareholders or in such manner as the Company may by Resolution of
Shareholders determine.
21.7 The auditors shall examine each profit and loss account and balance sheet required to be laid before a meeting of the Shareholders or
otherwise given to Shareholders and shall state in a written report whether or not:
(a)
(b)
in their opinion the profit and loss account and balance sheet give a true and fair view respectively of the profit and loss for the
period covered by the accounts, and of the assets and liabilities of the Company at the end of that period; and
 
all the information and explanations required by the auditors have been obtained.
21.8 The report of the auditors shall be annexed to the accounts and shall be read at the meeting of Shareholders at which the accounts are
laid before the Company or shall be otherwise given to the Shareholders.
21.9 Every auditor of the Company shall have a right of access at all times to the books of account and vouchers of the Company, and shall
be entitled to require from the directors and officers of the Company such information and explanations as he thinks necessary for the
performance of the duties of the auditors.
21.10 The auditors of the Company shall be entitled to receive notice of, and to attend any meetings of Shareholders at which the Company’s
profit and loss account and balance sheet are to be presented.
 
NOTICES
22.
 
22.1
Any notice, information or written statement to be given by the Company to Shareholders may be given by personal service or by mail
Any notice, information or written statement to be given by the Company to Shareholders may be given by personal service or by mail
addressed to each Shareholder at the address shown in the register of members.
22.2 Any summons, notice, order, document, process, information or written statement to be served on the Company may be served by
leaving it, or by sending it by registered mail addressed to the Company, at its registered office, or by leaving it with, or by sending it by
registered mail to, the registered agent of the Company.
22.3 Service of any summons, notice, order, document, process, information or written statement to be served on the Company may be
proved by showing that the summons, notice, order, document, process, information or written statement was delivered to the registered
office or the registered agent of the Company or that it was mailed in such time as to admit to its being delivered to the registered office
or the registered agent of the Company in the normal course of delivery within the period prescribed for service and was correctly
addressed and the postage was prepaid.
 
VOLUNTARY LIQUIDATION
 
The Company may by Resolution of Shareholders appoint a voluntary liquidator.
- 16 -
CONTINUATION
 
Subject to Sub-Regulation 8, the Company may by Resolution of Shareholders continue as a company incorporated under the laws of
a jurisdiction outside the British Virgin Islands in the manner provided under those laws.
23.
24.
We, HARNEYS CORPORATE SERVICES LIMITED of Craigmuir Chambers, Road Town, Tortola, British Virgin Islands for the purpose
of continuing the Company as a BVI Business Company under the laws of the British Virgin Islands hereby sign this Articles of
Association on behalf of the Shareholders this    day of [                          ], 2012.
_________________________________
[name of individual]
Authorised Signatory 
HARNEYS CORPORATE SERVICES LIMITED
Exhibit C
Directors and Officers of Xtra-Gold BVI
Directors of Xtra-Gold BVI
Paul Zyla
Richard W. Grayston
Peter Minuk
Robert J. Casaceli 
James H. Schweitzer
Officers of Xtra-Gold BVI
Paul Zyla
John C. Ross
Richard W. Grayston
Peter Minuk
Yves P. Clement
Victor Nkansa
Chief Financial Officer
Chairman of the Board
Secretary and Treasurer
President and Chief Executive Officer
 
 
 
 
  Vice-President, Ghana Operations
Vice-President, Exploration
SECTIONS 92A.300 TO 92.A.500 OF THE NEVADA REVISED STATUTES
APPENDIX B
NRS 92A.300 Definitions. As used in NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive, unless the context otherwise requires, the words and terms
defined in NRS 92A.305 to 92A.335, inclusive, have the meanings ascribed to them in those sections.
NRS 92A.305 “Beneficial stockholder” defined. “Beneficial stockholder” means a person who is a beneficial owner of shares held in
a voting trust or by a nominee as the stockholder of record.
NRS 92A.310 “Corporate action” defined. “Corporate action” means the action of a domestic corporation.
NRS 92A.315 “Dissenter” defined. “Dissenter” means a stockholder who is entitled to dissent from a domestic corporation’s action
under NRS 92A.380 and who exercises that right when and in the manner required by NRS 92A.400 to 92A.480, inclusive.
NRS 92A.320 “Fair value” defined. “Fair value,” with respect to a dissenter’s shares, means the value of the shares determined:
1. Immediately before the effectuation of the corporate action to which the dissenter objects, excluding any appreciation or
depreciation in anticipation of the corporate action unless exclusion would be inequitable;
2. Using customary and current valuation concepts and techniques generally employed for similar businesses in the context of the
transaction requiring appraisal; and
3. Without discounting for lack of marketability or minority status.
NRS 92A.325 “Stockholder” defined. “Stockholder” means a stockholder of record or a beneficial stockholder of a domestic
corporation.
NRS 92A.330 “Stockholder of record” defined. “Stockholder of record” means the person in whose name shares are registered in
the records of a domestic corporation or the beneficial owner of shares to the extent of the rights granted by a nominee’s certificate
on file with the domestic corporation.
NRS 92A.335 “Subject corporation” defined. “Subject corporation” means the domestic corporation which is the issuer of the
shares held by a dissenter before the corporate action creating the dissenter’s rights becomes effective or the surviving or acquiring
entity of that issuer after the corporate action becomes effective.
NRS 92A.340 Computation of interest. Interest payable pursuant to NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive, must be computed from the
effective date of the action until the date of payment, at the rate of interest most recently established pursuant to NRS 99.040.
NRS 92A.350 Rights of dissenting partner of domestic limited partnership. A partnership agreement of a domestic limited
partnership or, unless otherwise provided in the partnership agreement, an agreement of merger or exchange, may provide that
contractual rights with respect to the partnership interest of a dissenting general or limited partner of a domestic limited partnership
are available for any class or group of partnership interests in connection with any merger or exchange in which the domestic
limited partnership is a constituent entity.
NRS 92A.360 Rights of dissenting member of domestic limited-liability company. The articles of organization or operating agreement
of a domestic limited-liability company or, unless otherwise provided in the articles of organization or operating agreement, an
agreement of merger or exchange, may provide that contractual rights with respect to the interest of a dissenting member are
available in connection with any merger or exchange in which the domestic limited-liability company is a constituent entity.
B-1
NRS 92A.370 Rights of dissenting member of domestic nonprofit corporation.
1. Except as otherwise provided in subsection 2, and unless otherwise provided in the articles or bylaws, any member of any
constituent domestic nonprofit corporation who voted against the merger may, without prior notice, but within 30 days after the
effective date of the merger, resign from membership and is thereby excused from all contractual obligations to the constituent or
surviving corporations which did not occur before the member’s resignation and is thereby entitled to those rights, if any, which
would have existed if there had been no merger and the membership had been terminated or the member had been expelled.
2. Unless otherwise provided in its articles of incorporation or bylaws, no member of a domestic nonprofit corporation, including, but
not limited to, a cooperative corporation, which supplies services described in chapter 704 of NRS to its members only, and no
person who is a member of a domestic nonprofit corporation as a condition of or by reason of the ownership of an interest in real
property, may resign and dissent pursuant to subsection 1.
NRS 92A.380 Right of stockholder to dissent from certain corporate actions and to obtain payment for shares.
1. Except as otherwise provided in NRS 92A.370 and 92A.390, any stockholder is entitled to dissent from, and obtain payment of the
fair value of the stockholder’s shares in the event of any of the following corporate actions:
(a) Consummation of a plan of merger to which the domestic corporation is a constituent entity:
(1) If approval by the stockholders is required for the merger by NRS 92A.120 to 92A.160, inclusive, or the articles of incorporation,
regardless of whether the stockholder is entitled to vote on the plan of merger; or
(2) If the domestic corporation is a subsidiary and is merged with its parent pursuant to NRS 92A.180.
(b) Consummation of a plan of conversion to which the domestic corporation is a constituent entity as the corporation whose
subject owner’s interests will be converted.
(c) Consummation of a plan of exchange to which the domestic corporation is a constituent entity as the corporation whose subject
owner’s interests will be acquired, if the stockholder’s shares are to be acquired in the plan of exchange.
(d) Any corporate action taken pursuant to a vote of the stockholders to the extent that the articles of incorporation, bylaws or a
resolution of the Board of Directors provides that voting or nonvoting stockholders are entitled to dissent and obtain payment for
their shares.
(e) Accordance of full voting rights to control shares, as defined in NRS 78.3784, only to the extent provided for pursuant to NRS
78.3793.
(f) Any corporate action not described in this subsection that will result in the stockholder receiving money or scrip instead of
fractional shares except where the stockholder would not be entitled to receive such payment pursuant to NRS 78.205, 78.2055 or
78.207.
B-2
2. A stockholder who is entitled to dissent and obtain payment pursuant to NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive, may not challenge
the corporate action creating the entitlement unless the action is unlawful or fraudulent with respect to the stockholder or the
domestic corporation.
3. From and after the effective date of any corporate action described in subsection 1, no stockholder who has exercised the right to
dissent pursuant to NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive, is entitled to vote his or her shares for any purpose or to receive payment of
dividends or any other distributions on shares. This subsection does not apply to dividends or other distributions payable to
stockholders on a date before the effective date of any corporate action from which the stockholder has dissented.
NRS 92A.390 Limitations on right of dissent: Stockholders of certain classes or series; action of stockholders not required for plan
of merger.
1. There is no right of dissent with respect to a plan of merger, conversion or exchange in favor of stockholders of any class or
series which is:
(a) A covered security under section 18(b)(1)(A) or (B) of the Securities Act of 1933, 15 U.S.C. § 77r(b)(1)(A) or (B), as amended;
(b) Traded in an organized market and has at least 2,000 stockholders and a market value of at least $20,000,000, exclusive of the
value of such shares held by the corporation’s subsidiaries, senior executives, directors and beneficial stockholders owning more
than 10 percent of such shares; or
(c) Issued by an open end management investment company registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the
Investment Company Act of 1940 and which may be redeemed at the option of the holder at net asset value,
unless the articles of incorporation of the corporation issuing the class or series provide otherwise.
2. The applicability of subsection 1 must be determined as of:
(a) The record date fixed to determine the stockholders entitled to receive notice of and to vote at the meeting of stockholders to act
upon the corporate action requiring dissenter’s rights; or
(b) The day before the effective date of such corporate action if there is no meeting of stockholders.
3. Subsection 1 is not applicable and dissenter’s rights are available pursuant to NRS 92A.380 for the holders of any class or series
of shares who are required by the terms of the corporate action requiring dissenter’s rights to accept for such shares anything other
than cash or shares of any class or any series of shares of any corporation, or any other proprietary interest of any other entity, that
satisfies the standards set forth in subsection 1 at the time the corporate action becomes effective.
4. There is no right of dissent for any holders of stock of the surviving domestic corporation if the plan of merger does not require
action of the stockholders of the surviving domestic corporation under NRS 92A.130.
5. There is no right of dissent for any holders of stock of the parent domestic corporation if the plan of merger does not require
action of the stockholders of the parent domestic corporation under NRS 92A.180.
NRS 92A.400 Limitations on right of dissent: Assertion as to portions only to shares registered to stockholder; assertion by
beneficial stockholder.
B-3
1. A stockholder of record may assert dissenter’s rights as to fewer than all of the shares registered in his or her name only if the
stockholder of record dissents with respect to all shares of the class or series beneficially owned by any one person and notifies the
subject corporation in writing of the name and address of each person on whose behalf the stockholder of record asserts
dissenter’s rights. The rights of a partial dissenter under this subsection are determined as if the shares as to which the partial
dissenter dissents and his or her other shares were registered in the names of different stockholders.
2. A beneficial stockholder may assert dissenter’s rights as to shares held on his or her behalf only if the beneficial stockholder:
(a) Submits to the subject corporation the written consent of the stockholder of record to the dissent not later than the time the
beneficial stockholder asserts dissenter’s rights; and
(b) Does so with respect to all shares of which he or she is the beneficial stockholder or over which he or she has power to direct the
vote.
NRS 92A.410 Notification of stockholders regarding right of dissent.
1. If a proposed corporate action creating dissenters’ rights is submitted to a vote at a stockholders’ meeting, the notice of the
meeting must state that stockholders are, are not or may be entitled to assert dissenters’ rights under NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500,
inclusive. If the domestic corporation concludes that dissenter’s rights are or may be available, a copy of NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500,
inclusive, must accompany the meeting notice sent to those record stockholders entitled to exercise dissenter’s rights.
2. If the corporate action creating dissenters’ rights is taken by written consent of the stockholders or without a vote of the
stockholders, the domestic corporation shall notify in writing all stockholders entitled to assert dissenters’ rights that the action was
taken and send them the dissenter’s notice described in NRS 92A.430.
NRS 92A.420 Prerequisites to demand for payment for shares.
1. If a proposed corporate action creating dissenters’ rights is submitted to a vote at a stockholders’ meeting, a stockholder who
wishes to assert dissenter’s rights with respect to any class or series of shares:
(a) Must deliver to the subject corporation, before the vote is taken, written notice of the stockholder’s intent to demand payment for
his or her shares if the proposed action is effectuated; and
(b) Must not vote, or cause or permit to be voted, any of his or her shares of such class or series in favor of the proposed action.
2. If a proposed corporate action creating dissenters’ rights is taken by written consent of the stockholders, a stockholder who
wishes to assert dissenters’ rights with respect to any class or series of shares must not consent to or approve the proposed
corporate action with respect to such class or series.
3. A stockholder who does not satisfy the requirements of subsection 1 or 2 and NRS 92A.400 is not entitled to payment for his or
her shares under this chapter.
NRS 92A.430 Dissenter’s notice: Delivery to stockholders entitled to assert rights; contents.
1. The subject corporation shall deliver a written dissenter’s notice to all stockholders entitled to assert dissenters’ rights.
2. The dissenter’s notice must be sent no later than 10 days after the effective date of the corporate action specified in NRS 92A.380,
and must:
B-4
(a) State where the demand for payment must be sent and where and when certificates, if any, for shares must be deposited;
(b) Inform the holders of shares not represented by certificates to what extent the transfer of the shares will be restricted after the
demand for payment is received;
(c) Supply a form for demanding payment that includes the date of the first announcement to the news media or to the stockholders
of the terms of the proposed action and requires that the person asserting dissenter’s rights certify whether or not the person
acquired beneficial ownership of the shares before that date;
(d) Set a date by which the subject corporation must receive the demand for payment, which may not be less than 30 nor more than
60 days after the date the notice is delivered and state that the stockholder shall be deemed to have waived the right to demand
payment with respect to the shares unless the form is received by the subject corporation by such specified date; and
(e) Be accompanied by a copy of NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive.
NRS 92A.440 Demand for payment and deposit of certificates; loss of rights of stockholder; withdrawal from appraisal process.
1. A stockholder who receives a dissenter’s notice pursuant to NRS 92A.430 and who wishes to exercise dissenter’s rights must:
(a) Demand payment;
(b) Certify whether the stockholder or the beneficial owner on whose behalf he or she is dissenting, as the case may be, acquired
beneficial ownership of the shares before the date required to be set forth in the dissenter’s notice for this certification; and
(c) Deposit the stockholder’s certificates, if any, in accordance with the terms of the notice.
2. If a stockholder fails to make the certification required by paragraph (b) of subsection 1, the subject corporation may elect to treat
the stockholder’s shares as after-acquired shares under NRS 92A.470.
3. Once a stockholder deposits that stockholder’s certificates or, in the case of uncertified shares makes demand for payment, that
stockholder loses all rights as a stockholder, unless the stockholder withdraws pursuant to subsection 4.
4. A stockholder who has complied with subsection 1 may nevertheless decline to exercise dissenter’s rights and withdraw from the
appraisal process by so notifying the subject corporation in writing by the date set forth in the dissenter’s notice pursuant to NRS
92A.430. A stockholder who fails to so withdraw from the appraisal process may not thereafter withdraw without the subject
corporation’s written consent.
5. The stockholder who does not demand payment or deposit his or her certificates where required, each by the date set forth in the
dissenter’s notice, is not entitled to payment for his or her shares under this chapter.
NRS 92A.450 Uncertificated shares: Authority to restrict transfer after demand for payment. The subject corporation may restrict the
transfer of shares not represented by a certificate from the date the demand for their payment is received.
B-5
NRS 92A.460 Payment for shares: General requirements.
1. Except as otherwise provided in NRS 92A.470, within 30 days after receipt of a demand for payment, the subject corporation shall
pay in cash to each dissenter who complied with NRS 92A.440 the amount the subject corporation estimates to be the fair value of
the dissenter’s shares, plus accrued interest. The obligation of the subject corporation under this subsection may be enforced by
the district court:
(a) Of the county where the subject corporation’s principal office is located;
(b) If the subject corporation’s principal office is not located in this State, in the county in which the corporation’s registered office is
located; or
(c) At the election of any dissenter residing or having its principal or registered office in this State, of the county where the dissenter
resides or has its principal or registered office.
The court shall dispose of the complaint promptly.
2. The payment must be accompanied by:
(a) The subject corporation’s balance sheet as of the end of a fiscal year ending not more than 16 months before the date of
payment, a statement of income for that year, a statement of changes in the stockholders’ equity for that year or, where such
financial statements are not reasonably available, then such reasonably equivalent financial information and the latest available
quarterly financial statements, if any;
(b) A statement of the subject corporation’s estimate of the fair value of the shares; and
(c) A statement of the dissenter’s rights to demand payment under NRS 92A.480 and that if any such stockholder does not do so
within the period specified, such stockholder shall be deemed to have accepted such payment in full satisfaction of the
corporation’s obligations under this chapter.
NRS 92A.470 Withholding payment for shares acquired on or after date of dissenter’s notice: General requirements.
1. A subject corporation may elect to withhold payment from a dissenter unless the dissenter was the beneficial owner of the shares
before the date set forth in the dissenter’s notice as the first date of any announcement to the news media or to the stockholders of
the terms of the proposed action.
2. To the extent the subject corporation elects to withhold payment, within 30 days after receipt of a demand for payment, the subject
corporation shall notify the dissenters described in subsection 1:
(a) Of the information required by paragraph (a) of subsection 2 of NRS 92A.460;
(b) Of the subject corporation’s estimate of fair value pursuant to paragraph (b) of subsection 2 of NRS 92A.460;
(c) That they may accept the subject corporation’s estimate of fair value, plus interest, in full satisfaction of their demands or demand
appraisal under NRS 92A.480;
(d) That those stockholders who wish to accept such an offer must so notify the subject corporation of their acceptance of the offer
within 30 days after receipt of such offer; and
B-6
(e) That those stockholders who do not satisfy the requirements for demanding appraisal under NRS 92A.480 shall be deemed to
have accepted the subject corporation’s offer.
3. Within 10 days after receiving the stockholder’s acceptance pursuant to subsection 2, the subject corporation shall pay in cash
the amount offered under paragraph (b) of subsection 2 to each stockholder who agreed to accept the subject corporation’s offer in
full satisfaction of the stockholder’s demand.
4. Within 40 days after sending the notice described in subsection 2, the subject corporation shall pay in cash the amount offered
under paragraph (b) of subsection 2 to each stockholder described in paragraph (e) of subsection 2.
NRS 92A.480 Dissenter’s estimate of fair value: Notification of subject corporation; demand for payment of estimate.
1. A dissenter paid pursuant to NRS 92A.460 who is dissatisfied with the amount of the payment may notify the subject corporation
in writing of the dissenter’s own estimate of the fair value of his or her shares and the amount of interest due, and demand payment
of such estimate, less any payment pursuant to NRS 92A.460. A dissenter offered payment pursuant to NRS 92A.470 who is
dissatisfied with the offer may reject the offer pursuant to NRS 92A.470 and demand payment of the fair value of his or her shares
and interest due.
2. A dissenter waives the right to demand payment pursuant to this section unless the dissenter notifies the subject corporation of
his or her demand to be paid the dissenter’s stated estimate of fair value plus interest under subsection 1 in writing within 30 days
after receiving the subject corporation’s payment or offer of payment under NRS 92A.460 or 92A.470 and is entitled only to the
payment made or offered.
NRS 92A.490 Legal proceeding to determine fair value: Duties of subject corporation; powers of court; rights of dissenter.
1. If a demand for payment remains unsettled, the subject corporation shall commence a proceeding within 60 days after receiving
the demand and petition the court to determine the fair value of the shares and accrued interest. If the subject corporation does not
commence the proceeding within the 60-day period, it shall pay each dissenter whose demand remains unsettled the amount
demanded by each dissenter pursuant to NRS 92A.480 plus interest.
2. A subject corporation shall commence the proceeding in the district court of the county where its principal office is located in this
State. If the principal office of the subject corporation is not located in the State, it shall commence the proceeding in the county
where the principal office of the domestic corporation merged with or whose shares were acquired by the foreign entity was located.
If the principal office of the subject corporation and the domestic corporation merged with or whose shares were acquired is not
located in this State, the subject corporation shall commence the proceeding in the district court in the county in which the
corporation’s registered office is located.
3. The subject corporation shall make all dissenters, whether or not residents of Nevada, whose demands remain unsettled, parties
to the proceeding as in an action against their shares. All parties must be served with a copy of the petition. Nonresidents may be
served by registered or certified mail or by publication as provided by law.
4. The jurisdiction of the court in which the proceeding is commenced under subsection 2 is plenary and exclusive. The court may
appoint one or more persons as appraisers to receive evidence and recommend a decision on the question of fair value. The
appraisers have the powers described in the order appointing them, or any amendment thereto. The dissenters are entitled to the
same discovery rights as parties in other civil proceedings.
5. Each dissenter who is made a party to the proceeding is entitled to a judgment:
B-7
(a) For the amount, if any, by which the court finds the fair value of the dissenter’s shares, plus interest, exceeds the amount paid by
the subject corporation; or
(b) For the fair value, plus accrued interest, of the dissenter’s after-acquired shares for which the subject corporation elected to
withhold payment pursuant to NRS 92A.470.
NRS 92A.500 Assessment of costs and fees in certain legal proceedings.
1. The court in a proceeding to determine fair value shall determine all of the costs of the proceeding, including the reasonable
compensation and expenses of any appraisers appointed by the court. The court shall assess the costs against the subject
corporation, except that the court may assess costs against all or some of the dissenters, in amounts the court finds equitable, to
the extent the court finds the dissenters acted arbitrarily, vexatiously or not in good faith in demanding payment.
2. The court may also assess the fees and expenses of the counsel and experts for the respective parties, in amounts the court finds
equitable:
(a) Against the subject corporation and in favor of all dissenters if the court finds the subject corporation did not substantially
comply with the requirements of NRS 92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive; or
(b) Against either the subject corporation or a dissenter in favor of any other party, if the court finds that the party against whom the
fees and expenses are assessed acted arbitrarily, vexatiously or not in good faith with respect to the rights provided by NRS
92A.300 to 92A.500, inclusive.
3. If the court finds that the services of counsel for any dissenter were of substantial benefit to other dissenters similarly situated,
and that the fees for those services should not be assessed against the subject corporation, the court may award to those counsel
reasonable fees to be paid out of the amounts awarded to the dissenters who were benefited.
4. In a proceeding commenced pursuant to NRS 92A.460, the court may assess the costs against the subject corporation, except
that the court may assess costs against all or some of the dissenters who are parties to the proceeding, in amounts the court finds
equitable, to the extent the court finds that such parties did not act in good faith in instituting the proceeding.
5. To the extent the subject corporation fails to make a required payment pursuant to NRS 92A.460, 92A.470 or 92A.480, the
dissenter may bring a cause of action directly for the amount owed and, to the extent the dissenter prevails, is entitled to recover all
expenses of the suit.
6. This section does not preclude any party in a proceeding commenced pursuant to NRS 92A.460 or 92A.490 from applying the
provisions of N.R.C.P. 68 or NRS 17.115.
B-8
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN THE PROSPECTUS
ITEM 20. INDEMNIFICATION OF DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS.
Our Bylaws
Under our Bylaws, we shall indemnify an officer or director to the fullest extent permitted by Nevada General Corporation Law. We
may advance expenses incurred in defending a proceeding by reason of the person being a director or officer, upon receipt of an
undertaking from that person to repay this advance if it is ultimately determined that they were not entitled to be indemnified.
Nevada General Corporation Law
Section 78.7502 of the NRS provides as follows:
1.      A corporation may indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending
or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, except an action by or in the right of
the corporation, by reason of the fact that he is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation, or is or was serving
at the request of the corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust or
other enterprise, against expenses, including attorneys’ fees, judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and
reasonably incurred by him in connection with the action, suit or proceeding if he acted in good faith and in a manner which he
reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the corporation, and, with respect to any criminal action or
proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful.
2.      A corporation may indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending
or completed action or suit by or in the right of the corporation to procure a judgment in its favor by reason of the fact that he is or
was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation, or is or was serving at the request of the corporation as a director,
officer, employee or agent of another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise against expenses, including
amounts paid in settlement and attorneys’ fees actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection with the defense or settlement
of the action or suit if he acted in good faith and in a manner which he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best
interests of the corporation.
3.      To the extent that a director, officer, employee or agent of a corporation has been successful on the merits or otherwise in
defense of any action, suit or proceeding referred to in subsections 1 and 2, or in defense of any claim, issue or matter therein, the
corporation shall indemnify him against expenses, including attorneys’ fees, actually and reasonably incurred by him in connection
with the defense.
Section 78.751 of the NRS provides as follows:
1.      Any discretionary indemnification under NRS 78.7502 unless ordered by a court or advanced pursuant to subsection 2, may be
made by the corporation only as authorized in the specific case upon a determination that indemnification of the director, officer,
employee or agent is proper in the circumstances. The determination must be made:
(a)      By the stockholders;
(b)      By the Board of Directors by majority vote of a quorum consisting of directors who were not parties to the action, suit or
proceeding;
II-1
(c)      If a majority vote of a quorum consisting of directors who were not parties to the action, suit or proceeding so orders, by
independent legal counsel in a written opinion; or
(d)      If a quorum consisting of directors who were not parties to the action, suit or proceeding cannot be obtained, by independent
legal counsel in a written opinion.
2.      The articles of incorporation, the bylaws or an agreement made by the corporation may provide that the expenses of officers
and directors incurred in defending a civil or criminal action, suit or proceeding must be paid by the corporation as they are incurred
and in advance of the final disposition of the action, suit or proceeding, upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of the
director or officer to repay the amount if it is ultimately determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that he is not entitled to be
indemnified by the corporation.
3.      The indemnification and advancement of expenses authorized in or ordered by a court pursuant to this section:
(a)      Does not exclude any other rights to which a person seeking indemnification or advancement of expenses may be entitled
under the articles of incorporation or any bylaw, agreement, vote of stockholders or disinterested directors or otherwise, for either
an action in his official capacity or an action in another capacity while holding his office, except that indemnification, unless ordered
by a court pursuant to NRS 78.7502 or for the advancement of expenses made pursuant to subsection 2, may not be made to or on
behalf of any director or officer if a final adjudication establishes that his acts or omissions involved intentional misconduct, fraud or
a knowing violation of the law and was material to the cause of action.
(b)      Continues for a person who has ceased to be a director, officer, employee or agent and inures to the benefit of the heirs,
executors and administrators of such a person.
Opinion of the SEC
We have been advised that, in the opinion of the SEC, indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act is against public
policy as expressed in the Securities Act, and is, therefore, unenforceable. If a claim for indemnification against such liabilities is
asserted by one of our directors, officers, or controlling persons in connection with the securities being registered, we will, unless in
the opinion of our legal counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit the question of whether such
indemnification is against public policy to a court of appropriate jurisdiction. We will then be governed by the court’s decision.
ITEM 21. EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES.
(a)
Exhibit No. Description of Document
 
2.1
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
4.1
4.2
4.3
5.1
8.1
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.15
10.16
10.17
10.18
10.19
10.20
10.21
10.22
10.23
10.24
10.25
10.26
10.27
10.28
10.29
10.30
10.31
10.32
10.33
10.34
10.35
10.36
10.37
10.38
10.39
10.40
10.41
10.42
10.43
Stock Exchange Agreement dated October 31, 2003, by and between Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. and the former shareholders
of Xtra Energy Corp. (formerly Xtra-Gold Resources, Inc.) (1)
Articles of Incorporation of Silverwing Systems Corporation filed on September 1, 1998 (1)
Articles of Amendment filed on August 19, 1999 to change our name to Advertain On-Line Inc. (1)
Articles of Amendment filed June 18, 2001 to change our name to RetinaPharma International, Inc. (1)
Articles of Amendment filed on October 8, 2001 to increase our capital stock from 25,000,000 to 100,000,000 shares (1)
Articles of Amendment filed December 16, 2003 to change our name to Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. and to increase our capital
stock from 100,000,000 to 250,000,000 shares (1)
By-laws (1)
Form of common stock purchase warrant (4)
Form of convertible debenture (1)
Form of specimen stock certificate of Xtra-Gold BVI *
Opinion of Harney Westwood & Riegels **
II-2
Tax Opinion of Hodgson Russ LLP *
2005 Equity Compensation Plan (1)
Memorandum of Agreement dated October 28, 2003, by and between Xtra Energy Corp. (formerly Xtra- Gold Resources, Inc.)
and Ranger Canyon Energy Inc. (formerly CaribGold Minerals, Inc.) (1)
Agreement dated February 16, 2004 by and between Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. and Akrokeri-Ashanti Gold Mines Inc. (1)
Share Purchase Agreement dated December 22, 2004 between Xtra-Gold Resources Corp. and 2058168 Ontario Inc., the
trustee for the former note holders of Akrokeri-Ashanti Gold Mines Inc. (1)
Share Purchase Agreement dated December 22, 2004 among Xtra-Gold Resources Corp., 2058168 Ontario Inc., the trustee for
the former debenture holders of Akrokeri-Ashanti Gold Mines Inc. and 2060768 Ontario Corp. (1)
Stock option agreement dated April 21, 2006 with Kiomi Mori, as optionee (1)
Stock option agreement dated May 1, 2006 with Yves Clement, as optionee (1)
Stock option agreement dated May 1, 2006 with Alhaji Abudulai, as optionee (1)
Stock option agreement dated August 1, 2006 with John Douglas Mills, as optionee (1)
Management consulting agreement dated May 1, 2006 with Yves Clement (1)
Management consulting agreement dated July 1, 2006 with Rebecca Kiomi Mori (1)
Management consulting agreement dated November 1, 2006 with Alhaji Nantogma Abudulai (1)
Mining lease with respect to the Kwabeng concession (1)
Mining lease with respect to the Pameng concession (1)
Prospecting license with respect to the Banso and Muoso concessions (1)
Prospecting license with respect to the Apapam concession (1)
Prospecting license with respect to the Edum Banso concession (1)
Option Agreement dated October 17, 2005 between Xtra-Gold Exploration Limited and Adom Mining Limited (1)
Consulting agreement dated January 17, 2006 between Xtra-Gold Mining Limited and Bio Consult Limited (1)
Purchase and Sale Agreement dated September 1, 2006 between Xtra Oil & Gas Ltd. and TriStar Oil & Gas Partnership (1)
Amending Agreement dated October 19, 2006 between Xtra-Gold Exploration and Adom Mining Limited (1)
Stock option agreement dated March 5, 2007 with Richard W. Grayston, as optionee (1)
Stock option agreement dated March 5, 2007 with Peter Minuk, as optionee (1)
Stock option agreement dated March 12, 2007 with Robert H. Montgomery, as optionee (1)
Stock option agreement dated March 12, 2007 with Brokton International Ltd., as optionee (1)
Stock option agreement dated March 12, 2007 with John Douglas Mills, as optionee (1)
Consulting agreement dated March 20, 2007 with JD Mining Ltd. (1)
Lease with 360 Bay Street Limited dated March 29, 2007 (1)
Termination agreement dated January 31, 2008 with JD Mining Ltd. and John Douglas Mills (1)
Mining lease with respect to the Apapam Concession (2)
Management consulting agreement dated January 3, 2009 with Brokton International Ltd. (3)
Stock option agreement dated January 15, 2010 with Radical Capital Ltd. (4)
Stock option agreement dated January 25, 2010 with Paul Zyla (4)
Stock option agreement dated February 1, 2010 with Robert Casaceli (4)
Stock option agreement dated February 1, 2010 with David Bell (4)
Amendment to option agreement dated June 1, 2010 with Paul Zyla (4)
Consulting agreement dated June 1, 2010 with Brokton International Ltd. (4)
Consulting agreement dated June 1, 2010 with Victor Nkansa (4)
Stock option agreement dated June 1, 2010 with Richard W. Grayston, as optionee (4)
Stock option agreement dated June 1, 2010 with Peter Minuk, as optionee (4)
Stock option agreement dated June 1, 2010 with Robert H. Montgomery, as optionee (4)
Stock option agreement dated June 1, 2010 with Brokton International Ltd., as optionee (4)
Stock option agreement dated June 1, 2010 with Windward Global Trading Inc., as optionee (4)
10.44
10.45
10.46
Stock option agreement dated June 1, 2010 with Laura Stein, as optionee (4)
Stock option agreement dated June 1, 2010 with Victor Nkansa, as optionee (4)
Stock option agreement dated July 1, 2010 with John C. Ross, as optionee (4)
II-3
10.47
10.48
10.49
10.50
10.51
10.52
10.53
10.54
10.55
10.56
10.57
10.58
10.59
10.60
10.61
10.62
10.63
10.64
14
21
23.1
23.2
23.3
99.1
99.2
101
Agreement dated July 1, 2010 with Ravenclaw Mining Limited (4)
Letter of intent dated July 21, 2010 with Verbina Resources Inc. (4)
Amendment to stock option agreement dated August 4, 2010 with Radical Capital Ltd. (4)
Management consulting agreement dated September 1, 2010 with Paul Zyla (4)
Management consulting agreement dated September 1, 2010 with John Ross (4)
Amending agreement (undated) between Xtra-Gold Exploration and Adom Mining Limited (4)
Escrow agreement dated November 22, 2010 with Olympia Transfer Services Inc. and Paul Zyla (4)
Renewal agreement dated November 30, 2010 with Brokton International Ltd. (4)
Letter of intent dated January 21, 2011 with Verbina Resources Inc. (4)
Management consulting agreement dated January 27, 2011 with Paul Zyla (4)
Form of stock option agreement dated February 15, 2011 with Denis Laviolette, as optionee (4)
Form of management consulting agreement dated March 1, 2011 with Yves Clement(4)
Form of stock option agreement dated March 1, 2011 with Yves Clement, as optionee (4)
Form of stock option agreement dated March 1, 2011 with Victor Nkansa, as optionee (4)
Form of stock option agreement dated March 1, 2011 with Michael Dwumfuor, as optionee (4)
Form of stock option agreement dated March 1, 2011 with Philip Schandorf, as optionee (4)
Mining lease with respect to the Banso Concession (4)
Mining lease with respect to the Muoso Concession (4)
Code of Ethics (3)
Subsidiaries of the Company (4)
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm *
Consent of Harney Westwood & Riegels (included in Exhibit 5.1) **
Consent of Hodgson Russ LLP (included in Exhibit 8.1) *
Form of proxy card *
Power of Attorney (included on signature page of initial filing of this registration statement)
Attached as Exhibits 101 to this proxy statement/prospectus are the following financial statements from our annual report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2011, and quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2012,
formatted in XBRL (“eXtensible Business Reporting Language”): (i) Consolidated Balance Sheets, (ii) Consolidated Statements
of Operations, (iii) the Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity, (iv) Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, and (vi)
related notes to these financial statements. **
*
**
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Filed herewith
Previously filed
Incorporated by reference to the registration statement on Form SB-2 on Form S-1, SEC File No. 333-139037
Incorporated by reference to the company’s 10-K annual report filed on March 27, 2009, SEC File No. 333- 139037
Incorporated by reference to the company’s 10-K annual report filed on March 31, 2010, SEC File No. 333- 139037
Incorporated by reference to the company’s 10-K annual report filed on March 31, 2011, SEC File No. 333- 139037
ITEM 22. UNDERTAKINGS.
(a)      The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(1)      To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this registration statement:
(i)      To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii)      To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration statement (or the most recent
post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set
forth in the registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of securities offered (if the
total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the
estimated maximum offering range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if,
in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than a 20% change in the maximum aggregate offering price
set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the effective registration statement;
II-4
(iii)     To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously disclosed in the registration
statement or any material change to such information in the registration statement;
(2)      That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective amendment shall
be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time
shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3)      To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being registered which remain
unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4)      That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser, each prospectus filed pursuant
to Rule 424(b) as part of a registration statement relating to an offering, other than registration statements relying on Rule 430B or
other than prospectuses filed in reliance on Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration statement as of
the date it is first used after effectiveness. Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that
is part of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the registration
statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such
first use, supersede or modify any statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the
registration statement or made in any such document immediately before such date of first use.
(5)      That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser in the initial
distribution of the securities: The undersigned registrant undertakes that in a primary offering of securities of the undersigned
registrant pursuant to this registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser,
if the securities are offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the undersigned registrant
will be a seller to the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i)      Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering required to be filed pursuant to
Rule 424;
(ii)     Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant or used or referred to
by the undersigned registrant;
(iii)   The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material information about the undersigned
registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the undersigned registrant; and
(iv)   Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant to the purchaser.
(b)      The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes that, for purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933,
each filing of the registrant’s annual report pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (and, where
applicable, each filing of an employee benefit plan’s annual report pursuant to section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934)
that is incorporated by reference in this registration statement shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the
securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
II-5
(c)      (1)      The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes as follows: that before any public reoffering of the securities registered
hereunder through use of a prospectus which is a part of this registration statement, by any person or party who is deemed to be an
underwriter within the meaning of Rule 145(c), the issuer undertakes that such reoffering prospectus will contain the information
called for by the applicable registration form with respect to reofferings by persons who may be deemed underwriters, in addition to
the information called for by the other Items of the applicable form.
(2)      The registrant undertakes that every prospectus (i) that is filed pursuant to paragraph (1) immediately preceding, or (ii)
that purports to meet the requirements of Section 10(a)(3) of the Act and is used in connection with an offering of securities subject
to Rule 415, will be filed as a part of an amendment to this registration statement and will not be used until such amendment is
effective, and that, for purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such post-effective amendment
shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at
that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(d)      Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors, officers and
controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the registrant has been advised that in the
opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Act and is,
therefore, unenforceable. If a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of expenses
incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or
proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the
registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of
appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the Act and will be
governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
(e)      The undersigned hereby undertakes to respond to requests for information that is incorporated by reference into the
prospectus pursuant to Items 4, 10(b), 11 or 13 of this Form, within one business day of receipt of such request, and to send the
incorporated documents by first class mail or other equally prompt means. This includes information contained in documents filed
after the effective date of the registration statement through the date of responding to the request.
(f)      The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes to supply by means of a post-effective amendment all information concerning a
transaction, and the company being acquired involved therein, that was not the subject of and included in this registration statement
when it became effective.
II-6
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the registrant has duly caused this registration statement to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of Toronto, Province of Ontario on September 28, 2012.
XTRA-GOLD RESOURCES CORP.
By:
/s/ Paul Zyla
Paul Zyla
Principal Executive Officer 
President and Director
/s/ John C. Ross
John C. Ross
Principal Financial and Accounting Officer 
Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, this registration statement has been signed by the following persons in the
capacities and on the dates indicated.
/s/ Paul Zyla
Paul Zyla
Principal Executive Officer 
President and Director
Date: September 28, 2012
/s/ John C. Ross
John C. Ross
Principal Financial and Accounting Officer 
Chief Financial Officer
Date: September 28, 2012
* /s/ Richard W. Grayston
Richard W. Grayston 
Chairman of the Board and Director
Date: September 28, 2012
* /s/ Peter Minuk
Peter Minuk 
Director, Secretary and Treasurer
Date: September 28, 2012
* /s/ James H. Schweitzer
James H. Schweitzer 
Director
Date: September 28, 2012
* /s/ Robert J. Casaceli
Robert J. Casaceli 
Director
Date: September 28, 2012
* By: /s/ Paul Zyla                                   
                Paul Zyla, Attorney-in-fact
II-7
II-8