
EX-99.1 2 mur-20160803xex99_1.htm EX-99.1 Dividends - Exhibit 991
Exhibit 99.1
MURPHY OIL CORPORATION ANNOUNCES DIVIDEND
EL DORADO, Arkansas, August 3, 2016 – The Board of Directors of Murphy Oil Corporation
(NYSE: MUR) today declared a quarterly cash dividend on the Common Stock of Murphy Oil
Corporation of $0.25 per share, or $1.00 per share on an annualized basis. This represents
approximately a 29 percent reduction from the previous quarterly level of $0.35 per share. The
dividend is payable September 1, 2016 to holders of record August 15, 2016.
“The decision to reduce the dividend was a difficult but prudent one based on the lack of a
sustained recovery in commodity prices,” stated Roger W. Jenkins, President and Chief
Executive Officer. “The dividend has been, and will continue to be, a top priority as it is an
essential piece of our total shareholder return value proposition. This reset better aligns our
dividend with our financial metrics and recognizes the high quality investment options within our
portfolio.”
ABOUT MURPHY OIL CORPORATION
Murphy Oil Corporation is a global independent oil and natural gas exploration and production
company. The Company’s diverse resource base includes offshore production in Southeast Asia,
Canada and Gulf of Mexico, as well as North America onshore plays in the Eagle Ford Shale,
Kaybob Duvernay and Montney. Additional information can be found on the Company’s website
at http://www.murphyoilcorp.com.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Our future expectations regarding the payment of dividends constitute forward-looking statements
as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements, which
express management’s current views concerning future events or results are subject to inherent
risks and uncertainties. Factors that could cause one or more of these forecasted events not to
occur include, but are not limited to, a failure to obtain necessary regulatory approvals, a
deterioration in the business or prospects of Murphy, adverse developments in Murphy business’
markets, adverse developments in the U.S. or global capital markets, credit markets or
economies in general. Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those
expressed or implied in our forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, the
volatility and level of crude oil and natural gas prices, the level and success rate of our
exploration programs, our ability to maintain production rates and replace reserves, customer
demand for our products, adverse foreign exchange movements, political and regulatory
instability, and uncontrollable natural hazards. For further discussion of risk factors, see Murphy’s
2015 Annual Report on Form 10-K, on file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Murphy undertakes no duty to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements.
1
Investor Contacts:
Kelly Whitley, kelly_whitley@murphyoilcorp.com, 281-675-9107
Nancy Perkins, nancy_perkins@murphyoilcorp.com, 281-675-9252
Emily McElroy, emily_mcelroy@murphyoilcorp.com, 870-864-6324
2