
Appendix 1A 
ASX Listing application and agreement
Appendix 1A
ASX Listing Application and Agreement
Rules 1.1 Cond 3, 1.7
This form is required by listing rule 1.7 to be used by an entity seeking admission to the +official list as an ASX Listing 
(for classification as an ASX Debt Listing use Appendix 1B and for classification as an ASX Foreign Exempt Listing use 
Appendix 1C). 
All entity’s seeking admission to the +official list as an ASX Listing must also provide to ASX the information and 
documents referred to in the Information Form and Checklist (ASX Listing) published on the ASX website. 
The Appendix 1A and the Information Form and Checklist (ASX Listing) given to ASX become ASX’s property and will 
be made public by way of release on ASX Markets Announcement Platform. Supporting documents may also be made 
public. This may occur prior to admission of the entity and +quotation of its +securities. If it does, publication does not 
mean that the entity will be admitted or that its +securities will be quoted.
Name of entity
Berkut Minerals Limited
ABN/ARBN/ARSN
62 610 855 064
We (the entity named above) apply for admission to the +official list of ASX Limited 
(ASX) as an ASX Listing and for +quotation of the following +securities:
+Main class of +securities
Additional +classes of 
+securities to be quoted (if any) 
[Do not include +CDIs]
Number to be quoted
+Class
19,250,001
Fully paid ordinary shares
We agree:
1.
Our admission to the +official list and classification as an ASX Listing is in ASX’s absolute 
discretion. ASX may admit us on any conditions it decides. +Quotation of our +securities 
is in ASX’s absolute discretion. ASX may quote our +securities on any conditions it 
decides. Our removal from the +official list, the suspension or ending of +quotation of 
our +securities, or a change in the category of our admission is in ASX’s absolute 
discretion. ASX is entitled immediately to suspend +quotation of our +securities or 
remove us from the +official list if we break this agreement, but the absolute discretion of 
ASX is not limited.
2.  We warrant the following to ASX:

The issue of the +securities to be quoted complies with the law and is not for an 
illegal purpose.
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms. 
 
Appendix 1A Page 1
01/05/2013
Appendix 1A 
ASX Listing application and agreement




The +securities to be quoted comply with listing rule 2.1 and there is no reason why 
the +securities should not be granted +quotation.
An offer of the +securities for sale within 12 months after their issue will not require 
disclosure under section 707(3) or section 1012C(6) of the Corporations Act.
Note: An entity may need to obtain appropriate warranties from subscribers for the securities in order to be able to give 
this warranty
Section 724 and section 1016E of the Corporations Act do not apply to any 
applications received by us in relation to any +securities to be quoted and that no‐
one has any right to return any +securities to be quoted under sections 601MB(1), 
737, 738, 992A, 992AA or 1016F of the Corporations Act at the time that we request 
that the +securities be quoted.
If we are a trust, we warrant that no person has the right to return the +securities 
to be quoted under section 1019B of the Corporations Act at the time that we 
request that the +securities be quoted.
3.  We will indemnify ASX to the fullest extent permitted by law in respect of any claim, 
action or expense arising from, or connected with, any breach of the warranties in this 
agreement.
4.  We give ASX the information and documents required by this form, including the
information and documents referred to in the Information Form and Checklist (ASX 
Listing) published on the ASX website. If any information or document is not available 
now, we will give it to ASX before +quotation of the +securities begins. We acknowledge 
that ASX is relying on the information and documents. We warrant that they are (or will 
be) true and complete.
5.  We will comply with the listing rules that are in force from time to time, even if 
+quotation of our +securities is deferred, suspended or subject to a +trading halt.
6.
The listing rules are to be interpreted:



in accordance with their spirit, intention and purpose;
by looking beyond form to substance; and
in a way that best promotes the principles on which the listing rules are based.
7.
8.
ASX has discretion to take no action in response to a breach of a listing rule. ASX may 
also waive a listing rule (except one that specifies that ASX will not waive it) either on 
our application or of its own accord on any conditions. ASX may at any time vary or 
revoke a decision on our application or of its own accord.
A document given to ASX by an entity, or on its behalf, becomes and remains the 
property of ASX to deal with as it wishes, including copying, storing in a retrieval system, 
transmitting to the public, and publishing any part of the document and permitting 
others to do so. The documents include a document given to ASX in support of the 
listing application or in compliance with the listing rules.
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms. 
 
Appendix 1A Page 2
01/05/2013
9.
10.
Appendix 1A 
ASX Listing application and agreement
In any proceedings, a copy or extract of any document or information given to ASX is of 
equal validity in evidence as the original.
Except in the case of an entity established in a jurisdiction whose laws have the effect 
that the entity’s +securities cannot be approved under the operating rules of the 
+approved CS facility:
  We will satisfy the +technical and performance requirements of the +approved CS
facility and meet any other requirements the +approved CS facility imposes in 
connection with approval of our +securities.
  When +securities are issued we will enter them in the +approved CS facility’s 
subregister holding of the applicant before they are quoted, if the applicant 
instructs us on the application form to do so.

The +approved CS facility is irrevocably authorised to establish and administer a 
subregister in respect of the +securities for which +quotation is sought.
11.
Except in the case of an entity established in a jurisdiction whose laws have the effect 
that the entity’s +securities cannot be approved under the operating rules of the 
+approved CS facility, we confirm that either:
we have given a copy of this application to the +approved CS facility in
accordance with the operating rules of the +approved CS facility ; or
we ask ASX to forward a copy of this application to the +approved CS facility.
12.
In the case of an entity established in a jurisdiction whose laws have the effect that the 
entity’s +securities cannot be approved under the operating rules of the +approved CS 
facility:

The +approved CS facility is irrevocably authorised to establish and administer a 
subregister in respect of +CDIs.
  We will make sure that +CDIs are issued over +securities if the holder of quoted
+securities asks for +CDIs.
13.
In the case of an entity established in a jurisdiction whose laws have the effect that the 
entity’s +securities cannot be approved under the operating rules of the +approved CS 
facility:
we have given a copy of this application to the approved CS facility in accordance
with the operating rules of the +approved CS facility; or
we ask ASX to forward a copy of this application to the +approved CS facility.
Dated: 24 August 2016
EXECUTED AS A DEED by 
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms. 
 
Appendix 1A Page 3
01/05/2013
the
127  of
BERKUT MINERALS LIMITED  
ACN 610 855 064  
in  accordance  with  section 
Corporations Act 2001 (Cth): 
 
 
 
Signature of director 
 
 
Michael Bohm 
Signature of director/company secretary* 
 
* Delete as applicable
Appendix 1A 
ASX Listing application and agreement
Name of director 
 
 
Justin Tremain 
Name of director/company secretary*
You must complete, date and sign this agreement so that it takes effect as a deed. If the entity is an Australian 
company, the signatures of a director and a director/company secretary will be required. If the entity is an Australian 
trust, the signatures of a director and a director/company secretary of the responsible entity of the trust will be 
required. If the entity is established outside Australia, execution will have to comply with requirements for a deed in 
both the place of establishment of the entity and in Australia. If this agreement is signed under a power of attorney, 
please attach a copy of the power of attorney. 
 
== == == == ==
+ See chapter 19 for defined terms. 
 
Appendix 1A Page 4
01/05/2013
Information Form and Checklist
(ASX Listing)
Name of entity 
Berkut Minerals Limited
ABN/ARBN/ARSN
62 610 855 064
We (the entity named above) supply the following information and documents to support our application 
for admission to the official list of ASX Limited (ASX) as an ASX Listing.
Note: the entity warrants in its Appendix 1A ASX Listing Application and Agreement that the information and documents referred to in this 
Information Form and Checklist are (or will be) true and complete and indemnifies ASX to the fullest extent permitted by law in respect of 
any claim, action or expense arising from, or connected with, any breach of that warranty. 
Any Annexures to this Information Form and Checklist form part of the Information Form and Checklist and are covered by the warranty 
referred to above. 
Terms used in this Information Form and Checklist and in any Annexures have the same meaning as in the ASX Listing Rules. 
Part 1 – Key Information 
Instructions: please complete each applicable item below. If an item is not applicable, please mark it as “N/A”.
All entities – corporate details1
Place of incorporation or 
establishment
Date of incorporation or 
establishment
Western Australia
19 February 2016
Legislation under which incorporated 
or established
Corporations Act 2001
Address of registered office in place 
of incorporation or establishment
Main business activity
78 Churchill Avenue
SUBIACO, WA 6008
Mineral Exploration
Other exchanges on which the entity 
is listed
N/A
Street address of principal 
administrative office
Postal address of principal 
administrative office
Telephone number of principal 
administrative office
78 Churchill Avenue
SUBIACO, WA 6008
78 Churchill Avenue
SUBIACO, WA 6008
+61 8 9286 6399
1
If the entity applying for admission to the official list is a stapled structure, please provide these details for each entity comprising the stapled structure.
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 1
E-mail address for investor enquiries
admin@berkutminerals.com.au
Website URL
www.berkutminerals.com.au
All entities – management details2
Full name and title of CEO/managing 
director
Full name and title of chairperson of 
directors
Ben Cairns – Chief Executive Officer
Michael Bohm – Non-Executive Chairman
Full names of all existing directors
Michael Bohm – Non-Executive Chairman
Paul Payne – Non-Executive Director
Justin Tremain – Non-Executive Director
Full names of any persons proposed 
to be appointed as additional or 
replacement directors
N/A
Full name and title of company 
secretary
Melanie Li – Company Secretary
All entities – ASX contact details3
Full name and title of ASX contact(s)
Melanie Li – Company Secretary
Business address of ASX contact(s)
78 Churchill Avenue
Business phone number of ASX 
contact(s)
Mobile phone number of ASX 
contact(s)
SUBIACO, WA 6008
+61 8 9286 6399
0431 813 716
Email address of ASX contact(s)
melanie@berkutminerals.com.au
All entities – auditor details4
Full name of auditor
Grant Thornton Audit Pty Ltd
2 
3
If the entity applying for admission to the official list is a trust, enter the management details for the responsible entity of the trust. 
Under Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 12, a listed entity must appoint a person responsible for communication with ASX. You can appoint more than one 
person to cater for situations where the primary nominated contact is not available. 
In certain cases, ASX may require the applicant to provide information about the qualifications and experience of its auditor for release to the market 
before quotation commences (see Guidance Note 1 section 2.8).
4
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 2
All entities – registry details5
Name of securities registry
Security Transfer Registrars
Address of securities registry
770 Canning Highway
Applecross WA 6153
Phone number of securities registry
+ 61 8 9315 2333
Fax number of securities registry
+ 61 8 9315 2233
Email address of securities registry
registrar@securitytransfer.com.au
Type of subregisters the entity will 
operate6
All entities – key dates
Annual balance date
Month in which annual meeting is 
usually held (or intended to be held)7
CHESS and issuer sponsored subregisters (refer Prospectus section 11.12)
30 June
November
Months in which dividends or 
distributions are usually paid (or are 
intended to be paid)
N/A
Trusts – additional details
Name of responsible entity
Duration of appointment of directors 
of responsible entity
Full names of the members of the 
compliance committee (if any)
N/A
N/A
N/A
Entities incorporated or established outside Australia – additional details
Name and address of the entity’s 
Australian agent for service of 
process
If the entity has or intends to have a 
certificated subregister for quoted 
securities, the location of the 
Australian subregister
Address of registered office in 
Australia (if any)
N/A
N/A
N/A
5 
6 
7  May not apply to some trusts.
If the entity has different registries for different classes of securities, please indicate clearly which registry details apply to which class of securities. 
Example: CHESS and issuer sponsored subregisters (see Guidance Note 1 section 3.16).
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 3
Entities listed or to be listed on another exchange or exchanges
Name of the other exchange(s) where 
the entity is or proposes to be listed
Is the ASX listing intended to be the 
entity’s primary or secondary listing
N/A
N/A
Part 2 – Checklist Confirming Compliance with Admission 
Requirements 
Instructions: please indicate in the “Location/Confirmation” column for each item below and in any Annexures where the information or 
document referred to in that item is to be found (eg in the case of information, the specific page reference in the Offer Document where that 
information is located or, in the case of a document, the folder tab number where that document is located). If the item asks for confirmation 
of a matter, you may simply enter “Confirmed”” in the “Location/Confirmation” column. If an item is not applicable, please mark it as “N/A”. 
In this regard, it will greatly assist ASX and speed up its review of the application if the various documents referred to in this Checklist and 
any Annexures (other than the 25 copies of the applicant’s Offer Document referred to in item 4) are provided in a folder separated by 
numbered tabs and if the entity’s constitution and copies of all material contracts are provided both in hard copy and in electronic format. 
Note that completion of this Checklist and any Annexures is not to be taken to represent that the entity is necessarily in full or substantial 
compliance with the ASX Listing Rules or that ASX will admit the entity to its official list. Admission to the official list is in ASX’s absolute 
discretion and ASX may refuse admission without giving any reasons (see Listing Rule 1.19). 
A reference in this Checklist and in any Annexures to the “Offer Document” means the listing prospectus, product disclosure statement or 
information memorandum lodged by the applicant with ASX pursuant to Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 3. 
If the applicant lodges a supplementary or replacement prospectus, product disclosure statement or information memorandum with ASX, 
ASX may require it to update this Checklist and any Annexures by reference to that document.
All entities – key supporting documents
Item
No 
1.  A copy of the entity’s certificate of incorporation, certificate of registration or
other evidence of status (including any change of name)
2.   A copy of the entity’s constitution (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 1A)8
3.   Either:
(a) confirmation that the entity’s constitution includes the provisions of
Appendix 15A or Appendix 15B (as applicable); or
(b) a completed checklist that the constitution complies with the Listing
Rules (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 2)9
4.   An electronic version and 25 copies of the Offer Document, as lodged with
ASIC (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 3)
5.
If the entity’s corporate governance statement10 is included in its Offer 
Document, the page reference where it is included. Otherwise, a copy of 
the entity’s corporate governance statement (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 13)
Location/Confirmation 
Refer to Annexure 12.
Refer to Annexure 2.
Confirmed. Refer to clause 32 of the 
Constitution, attached at Annexure 2, 
and also provided in electronic format.
25 copies to be provided at ASX’s 
request. Two hard copies of the 
Prospectus are provided at Annexure 3, 
and also provided in electronic format. 
 
Refer to section 9 of the Prospectus at 
Annexure 2. 
 
Refer to the Company’s Corporate 
Governance Statement at Annexure 4.
8 
9
It will assist ASX if the copy of the constitution is provided both in hard copy and in electronic format. 
An electronic copy of the checklist is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website.
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 4
No 
 
6.
7.
9.
Item 
 
If the entity will be included in the S & P All Ordinaries Index on admission 
to the official list,11 where in its Offer Document does it state that it will have 
an audit committee (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 13) 
 
If the entity will be included in the S & P / ASX 300 Index on admission to 
the official list,12 where in its Offer Document does it state that it will comply 
with the recommendations set by the ASX Corporate Governance Council 
in relation to composition and operation of the audit committee (Listing 
Rule 1.1 Condition 13)
8.   Original executed agreement with ASX that documents may be given to
ASX and authenticated electronically (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 14)13 
 
If the entity’s trading policy is included in its Offer Document, the page 
reference where it is included. Otherwise, a copy of the entity’s trading 
policy (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 15)
10.  If the entity will be included in the S & P / ASX 300 Index on admission to 
the official list,14 where in its Offer Document does it state that it will have a 
remuneration committee comprised solely of non-executive directors 
(Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 16)
11.  For each director or proposed director,15 a list of the countries in which 
they have resided over the past 10 years (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 17 
and Guidance Note 1 section 3.15)16
12.  For each director or proposed director who is or has in the past 10 years 
been a resident of Australia, an original or certified true copy of a national 
criminal history check obtained from the Australian Federal Police, a State 
or Territory police service or a broker accredited by CrimTrac which is not 
more than 12 months old (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 17 and Guidance 
Note 1 section 3.15)
Location/Confirmation 
 
Not anticipated to be applicable.
Not anticipated to be applicable.
Refer to Annexure 5.
Refer to section 9.8 and the Company’s 
Trading Policy at Annexure 6.
Not anticipated to be applicable.
Michael Bohm – Australia 
Paul Payne – Australia 
Justin Tremain - Australia 
 
Provided 22 August 2016.
10  The entity’s “corporate governance statement” is the statement disclosing the extent to which the entity will follow, as at the date of its admission to the 
official list, the recommendations set by the ASX Corporate Governance Council. If the entity does not intend to follow all the recommendations on its 
admission to the official list, the entity must separately identify each recommendation that will not be followed and state its reasons for not following the 
recommendation and what (if any) alternative governance practices it intends to adopt in lieu of the recommendation. 
If the entity is unsure whether they will be included in the S & P All Ordinaries Index on admission to the official list, they should contact ASX or S & P. 
If the entity is unsure whether they will be included in the S & P / ASX 300 Index on admission to the official list, they should contact ASX or S & P.
11 
12 
13  An electronic copy of the ASX Online Agreement is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
14 
15
If the entity is unsure whether they will be included in the S & P / ASX 300 Index on admission to the official list, they should contact ASX or S & P. 
If the entity applying for admission to the official list is a trust, references in items 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 to a director or proposed director mean a 
director or proposed director of the responsible entity of the trust.
16  The information referred to in items 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 is required so that ASX can be satisfied that the director or proposed director is of good fame
and character under Listing Rule 1 Condition 17.
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 5
Location/Confirmation 
Not applicable.
Refer to Annexure 7.
Not applicable.
Provided 22 August 2016.
Item
No 
13.  For each director or proposed director who is or has in the past 10 years 
been a resident of a country other than Australia, an original or certified 
true copy of an equivalent national criminal history check to that mentioned 
in item 12 above for each country in which the director has resided over 
the past 10 years (in English or together with a certified English translation) 
which is not more than 12 months old or, if such a check is not available in 
any such country, a statutory declaration from the director confirming that 
fact and that he or she has not been convicted in that country of: 
(a)  any  criminal  offence  involving  fraud,  dishonesty,  misrepresentation,
concealment of material facts or breach of director’s duties; or
(b)  any other criminal offence which at the time carried a maximum term of 
imprisonment of five years or more (regardless of the period, if any, for 
which he or she was sentenced),
or, if that is not the case, a statement to that effect and a detailed 
explanation of the circumstances involved (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 17 
and Guidance Note 1 section 3.15)
14.  For each director or proposed director who is or has in the past 10 years
been a resident of Australia, an original or certified true copy of a search of 
the Australian Financial Security Authority National Personal Insolvency 
Index which is not more than 12 months old (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 17 
and Guidance Note 1 section 3.15)
15.  For each director or proposed director who is or has in the past 10 years 
been a resident of a country other than Australia, an original or certified 
true copy of an equivalent national bankruptcy check to that mentioned in 
item 14 above for each country in which the director has resided over the 
past 10 years (in English or together with a certified English translation) 
which is not more than 12 months old or if such a check is not available in 
any such country, a statutory declaration from the director confirming that 
fact and that he or she has not been declared a bankrupt or been an 
insolvent under administration in that country or, if that is not the case, a 
statement to that effect and a detailed explanation of the circumstances 
involved (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 17 and Guidance Note 1 section 3.15)
16.  A statutory declaration from each director or proposed director confirming
that: 
(a)  the  director  has  not  been the subject of any criminal or civil penalty 
proceedings or other enforcement action by any government agency in 
which  he  or  she  was  found  to  have  engaged  in  behaviour  involving 
fraud, dishonesty, misrepresentation, concealment of material facts or 
breach of duty;
(b)  the  director  has  not  been  refused  membership  of,  or  had  their 
membership suspended or cancelled by, any professional body on the 
ground  that  he  or  she  has  engaged  in  behaviour  involving  fraud, 
dishonesty, misrepresentation, concealment of material facts or breach 
of duty;
(c)  the  director  has  not  been  the  subject  of  any  disciplinary  action 
(including  any  censure,  monetary  penalty  or  banning  order)  by  a 
securities  exchange  or  other  authority  responsible  for  regulating 
securities markets for failure to comply with his or her obligations as a 
director of a listed entity;
(d)  no listed entity of which he or she was a director (or, in the case of a 
listed  trust,  in  respect  of  which  he  or  she  was  a  director  of  the 
responsible  entity)  at  the  time  of  the  relevant  conduct  has  been  the 
subject  of  any  disciplinary  action  (including  any  censure,  monetary 
penalty, suspension of trading or termination of listing) by a securities 
exchange  or  other  authority  responsible  for  regulating  securities 
markets for failure to comply with its obligations under the Listing Rules 
applicable to that entity; and
(e)  the director is not aware of any pending or threatened investigation or
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 6
No
Item
enquiry  by  a  government  agency,  professional  body,  securities 
exchange  or  other  authority  responsible  for  regulating  securities 
markets that could lead to proceedings or action of the type described 
in (a), (b), (c) or (d) above,
or, if the director is not able to give such confirmation, a statement to that 
effect  and  a  detailed  explanation  of  the  circumstances  involved  (Listing 
Rule 1.1 Condition 17 and Guidance Note 1 section 3.15)
17.  A specimen certificate/holding statement for each class of securities to be
quoted or a specimen holding statement for CDIs (as applicable)
18.  Payment for the initial listing fee.17
All entities – capital structure
19.  Where in the Offer Document is there a table showing the existing and
proposed capital structure of the entity, broken down as follows: 
(a)  the number and class of each equity security and each debt security
currently on issue; and
(b)  the number and class of each equity security and each debt security 
proposed to be issued between the date of this application and the 
date the entity is admitted to the official list; and
(c)  the resulting total number of each class of equity security and debt 
security proposed to be on issue at the date the entity is admitted to 
the official list; and
(d)  the number and class of each equity security proposed to be issued
following admission in accordance with material contracts or 
agreements?
Note: This applies whether the securities are quoted or not. If the entity is proposing to issue a 
minimum, maximum or oversubscription number of securities, the table should be presented 
to disclose each scenario.
20.  For each class of securities referred to in the table mentioned in item 19,
where in the Offer Document does it disclose the terms applicable to those 
securities? 
Note: This applies whether the securities are quoted or not. 
For equity securities (other than options to acquire unissued securities or convertible debt 
securities), this should state whether they are fully paid or partly paid; if they are partly paid, 
the amount paid up and the amount owing per security; voting rights; rights to dividends or 
distributions; and conversion terms (if applicable). 
For options to acquire unissued securities, this should state the number outstanding, exercise 
prices and expiry dates. 
For debt securities or convertible debt securities, this should state their nominal or face value; 
rate of interest; dates of payment of interest; date and terms of redemption; and conversion 
terms (if applicable).
Location/Confirmation
Refer to Annexure 8.
Provided by cheque.
Refer to section 3.7 of the Prospectus 
at Annexure 3.
Refer to section 11.2 (Rights attaching 
to Shares) and 11.3 (Rights attaching to 
Options) of the Prospectus at Annexure 
3.
17  See  Guidance  Notes 15  and  15A  for  the  fees  payable  on  the  application.  You  can  also  use  the  ASX  online  equity  listing  fees  calculator: 
http://www.asx.com.au/professionals/cost-listing.htm. Payment should be made either by cheque made payable to ASX Operations Pty Ltd or by electronic 
funds transfer to the following account:
Bank: National Australia Bank 
Account Name: ASX Operations Pty Ltd 
BSB: 082 057 
A/C: 494728375 
Swift Code (Overseas Customers): NATAAU3202S
If payment is made by electronic funds transfer, please email your remittance advice to ar@asx.com.au or fax it to (612) 9227-0553, describing the payment 
as the “initial listing fee” and including the name of the entity applying for admission, the ASX home branch where the entity has lodged its application (ie 
Sydney, Melbourne or Perth) and the amount paid.
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 7
Item
No 
21.  If the entity has granted, or proposes to grant, any rights to any person, or
to any class of persons (other than through the holding of securities 
referred to in the table mentioned in item 19), to participate in an issue of 
the entity’s securities, where in the Offer Document are details of those 
rights set out?
22.  Details of all issues of securities (in all classes) in the last 5 years and the
consideration received by the entity for such issues
23.  A copy of every prospectus, product disclosure statement or information
memorandum issued by the entity in connection with any issue of 
securities (in all classes) in the last 5 years
24.  A copy of any court order in relation to a reorganisation of the entity’s
capital in the last 5 years
25.  Where in the Offer Document does it confirm that the issue/sale price of all
securities for which the entity seeks quotation is at least 20 cents in cash 
(Listing Rule 2.1 Condition 2)?
26.  If the entity has or proposes to have any options on issue, where in the
Offer Document does it confirm that the exercise price for each underlying 
security is at least 20 cents in cash (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 11)?
27.  If the entity has any partly paid securities and it is not a no liability
company, where in the Offer Document does it disclose the entity’s call 
program, including the date and amount of each proposed call and whether 
it allows for any extension for payment of a call (Listing Rule 2.1 
Condition 4)?
28.  If the entity’s free float at the time of listing is less than 10%, where in the
Offer Document does it outline the entity’s plans to increase that 
percentage to at least 10% and the timeframe over which it intends to do 
that (Guidance Note 1 sections 3.1 and 3.3)?
29.  If the entity has or proposes to have any debt securities or convertible debt 
securities on issue, a copy of any trust deed applicable to those securities
30.  Is the entity is proposing to offer any securities by way of a bookbuild? If 
so, please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that the 
entity is aware of the disclosure requirements for bookbuilds in the 
Annexure to Guidance Note 1
All entities – other information and documents
31.  Where in the Offer Document is there a description of the history of the
entity?
32.  Where in the Offer Document is there a description of the entity’s existing
and proposed activities and level of operations?
33.  Where in the Offer Document is there a description of the key features of
the entity’s business model (ie how it makes or intends to make a return for 
investors or otherwise achieve its objectives)?
Location/Confirmation 
N/A
Provided.
N/A
N/A
Refer to the Front Page, page 5, page 
10 (section F), section 2.1, section 2.6, 
page 73, section 10.4 and section 11.3 
of the Prospectus at Annexure 3. 
 
Refer to section 3.7 (note 4) and 11.3 of 
the Prospectus at Annexure 3.
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Page 6 (section A) and section 3.1 of 
the Prospectus at Annexure 3. 
 
Section 3 of the Prospectus at 
Annexure 3. 
 
Page 16 and 17 of the Independent 
Geologist’s Report contained at section 
5 of the Prospectus at Annexure 3. 
 
Refer to section 3.3 of the Prospectus 
at Annexure 3.
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 8
No 
34.  Where in the Offer Document is there a description of the material
Item 
business risks the entity faces?
35.  If the entity has any child entities, where in the Offer Document is there a
list of all child entities stating, in each case, the name, the nature of its 
business and the entity’s percentage holding in it?
36.  If the entity has any investments in associated entities for which it will apply
equity accounting, where in the Offer Document is there a list of all 
associated entities stating, in each case, the name, the nature of its 
business and the entity’s percentage holding in it?
37.  Where in the Offer Document is there a description of the entity’s proposed
dividend/distribution policy?
38.  Does the entity have or propose to have a dividend or distribution
reinvestment plan? 
If so, where are the existence and main terms of the plan disclosed in the 
Offer Document? 
 
A copy of the terms of the plan
39.  Does the entity have or propose to have an employee incentive scheme? 
 
If so, where are the existence and main terms of the scheme disclosed in 
the Offer Document? 
 
Where in the Offer Document is there a statement as to whether directors18 
are entitled to participate in the scheme and, if they are, the extent to which 
they currently participate or are proposed to participate? 
 
A copy of the terms of the scheme
40.  Has the entity entered into any material contracts (including any
Location/Confirmation 
Refer to section 4 of the Prospectus at 
Annexure 3. 
 
N/A
N/A
Refer to section 3.6 of the Prospectus 
at Annexure 3.
N/A
N/A
Refer to section 11.4 of the Prospectus 
at Annexure 3. 
 
Refer to section 11.4(a) of the 
Prospectus at Annexure 3. No current 
propositions for director participation. 
 
Refer to the Employee Share Option 
Plan at Annexure 9.
Refer to section 10 of the Prospectus at 
Annexure 3. 
 
Refer to Annexure 10 and also provided 
in electronic format.
underwriting agreement relating to the securities to be quoted on ASX)?19 
If so, where are the existence and main terms of those material contracts 
disclosed in the Offer Document? 
 
Copies of all of the material contracts referred to in the Offer Document
18 
19
If the entity applying for admission to the official list is a trust, references to a director mean a director of the responsible entity of the trust. 
It will assist ASX if the material contracts are provided both in hard copy and in electronic format.
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 9
Item
No 
41.  If the following information is included in the Offer Document, the page
reference where it is included. Otherwise, either a summary of the material 
terms of, or a copy of, any employment, service or consultancy agreement 
the entity or a child entity has entered into with: 
(a)  its chief executive officer (or equivalent) 
(b)  any of its directors or proposed directors; or 
(c)  any other person or entity who is a related party of the persons referred
to in (a) or (b) above (Listing Rule 3.16.4).
Note: if the entity applying for admission to the official list is a trust, references to a chief 
executive officer, director or proposed director mean a chief executive officer, director or 
proposed director of the responsible entity of the trust. However, the entity need not provide a 
summary of the material terms of, or a copy of, any employment, service or consultancy 
agreement the responsible entity or a related entity has entered into with any of the persons 
referred to in (a), (b) or (c) above if the costs associated with the agreement are borne by the 
responsible entity or the related entity from out of its own funds rather than from out of the 
trust.
42.  Please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that the
material contracts summarised in the Offer Document include, in addition 
to those mentioned in item 41, any other material contract(s) the entity or a 
child entity has entered into with: 
(a)  its chief executive officer (or equivalent) 
(b)  any of its directors or proposed directors; or 
(c)  any other person or entity who is a related party of the persons referred
to in (a) or (b) above
43.  Please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that all 
information that a reasonable person would expect to have a material 
effect on the price or value of the securities to be quoted is included in or 
provided with this Information Form and Checklist
44.  A copy of the entity’s most recent annual report
Entities that are trusts
45.  Evidence that the entity is a registered managed investment scheme
(Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 5)
46.  Please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that the 
responsible entity is not under an obligation to allow a security holder to 
withdraw from the trust (Listing Rule 1.1 Condition 5)
Entities applying under the profit test (Listing Rule 1.2)
47.  Evidence that the entity is a going concern or the successor of a going
concern (Listing Rule 1.2.1)
48.  Evidence that the entity has been in the same main business activity for
the last 3 full financial years (Listing Rule 1.2.2)
49.  Audited accounts for the last 3 full financial years and audit reports (Listing
Rule 1.2.3(a))
50.  If last financial year ended more than 8 months before the date of this 
application, accounts for the last half year (or longer period if available) 
and audit report or review (Listing Rule 1.2.3(b))
Location/Confirmation 
(a) Refer to section 10.3  
(b) Refer to section 10.4 
of the Prospectus at Annexure 3. 
(c) N/A 
Refer also to Annexure 10 for full 
copies of these agreements, and also 
provided in electronic format.
Confirmed.
Confirmed.
Refer to Annexure 11.
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 10
Item
No 
51.  A pro forma statement of financial position and review (Listing
Rule 1.2.3(c))20
52.  Evidence that the entity’s aggregated profit from continuing operations for
the last 3 full financial years has been at least $1 million (Listing 
Rule 1.2.4)
53.  Evidence that the entity’s profit from continuing operations in the past
12 months to a date no more than 2 months before the date of this 
application has exceeded $400,000 (Listing Rule 1.2.5)
54.  A statement from all directors21 confirming that they have made enquiries
and nothing has come to their attention to suggest that the entity is not 
continuing to earn profit from continuing operations up to the date of the 
application (Listing Rule 1.2.5A)
Entities applying under the assets test (Listing Rule 1.3)
55.  Evidence that the entity:
(a)  has, if the entity that is not an investment entity, net tangible assets of 
at least $3 million (after deducting the costs of fund raising) or a market 
capitalisation of at least $10 million; or
(b)  has, if the entity that is an investment entity other than pooled 
development fund, net tangible assets of at least $15 million; or 
(c)  is a pooled development fund with net tangible assets of at least
$2 million (Listing Rule 1.3.1 and 1.3.1A)
56.  Evidence that:
(a)  at least half of the entity’s total tangible assets (after raising any funds)
is not cash or in a form readily convertible to cash;22 or
(b)  there are commitments to spend at least half of the entity’s cash and
assets in a form readily convertible to cash (Listing Rule 1.3.2)
57.  Is there a statement in the Offer Document that there is enough working
capital to carry out the entity’s stated objectives. 
If so, where is it? 
If not, attach a statement by an independent expert confirming that the 
entity has enough working capital to carry out its stated objectives (Listing 
Rule 1.3.3(a))?
58.  Evidence that the entity’s working capital is at least $1.5 million or, if it is
not, that it would be at least $1.5 million if the entity’s budgeted revenue for 
the first full financial year that ends after listing was included in the working 
capital (Listing Rule 1.3.3(b))?23
59.  Accounts for the last 3 full financial years (or shorter period if ASX agrees)
and the audit report or review or a statement that the accounts are not 
audited or not reviewed (Listing Rule 1.3.5(a) first bullet point)
Location/Confirmation 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Refer to section 2.4 of the Prospectus 
at Annexure 3.
Refer to section 2.4 of the Prospectus 
at Annexure 3.
Refer to section 2.4 of the Prospectus 
at Annexure 3.
Refer to section 2.4 of the Prospectus 
at Annexure 3. 
Refer to page 16 and 17 of the 
Independent Geologist’s Report 
(regarding spending commitments). 
 
Refer to Annexure 11.
20  Note: the review must be conducted by a registered company auditor (or if the entity is a foreign entity, an overseas equivalent of a registered company
auditor) or independent accountant. 
If the entity applying for admission to the official list is a trust, the statement should come from all directors of the responsible entity of the trust. 
In deciding if an entity’s total tangible assets are in a form readily convertible to cash, ASX would normally not treat inventories or receivables as readily 
convertible to cash.
23  For mining exploration entities and oil and gas exploration entities, the amount must be available after allowing for the first full financial year’s budgeted 
administration costs and the cost of acquiring plant, equipment, mining tenements and/or petroleum tenements. The cost of acquiring mining tenements 
and/or petroleum tenements includes the cost of acquiring and exercising an option over them.
21 
22
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 11
Item
No 
60.  If last financial year ended more than 8 months before the date of this 
application, accounts for the last half year (or longer period if available) 
and the audit report or review or a statement that the half year accounts 
not audited or not reviewed (Listing Rule 1.3.5(a) second bullet point)
61.  A pro forma statement of financial position and review (Listing
Rule 1.3.5(c))24
Entities with restricted securities
62.  A statement setting out a list of any person (either on their own or together
with associates) who has held a relevant interest in at least 10% of the 
entity’s voting securities at any time in the 12 months before the date of 
this application
63.  A completed ASX Restricted Securities Table25
64.  Copies of all restriction agreements (Appendix 9A) entered into in relation
to restricted securities26
65.  Copies of all undertakings issued by any bank, recognised trustee or the
provider of registry services to the entity in relation to such restriction 
agreements
Location/Confirmation 
N/A
Refer to section 6.5.1 and the 
Independent Limited Assurance Report 
contained in section 6 of the 
Prospectus at Annexure 3.
Refer to Section 3.8 of the Prospectus 
at Annexure 3.
Provided.
Provided.
Provided.
24  Note: the review must be conducted by a registered company auditor (or if the entity is a foreign entity, an overseas equivalent of a registered company
auditor) or independent accountant.
25  An electronic copy of the ASX Restricted Securities Table is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
26  Note: ASX will advise which restricted securities are required to be escrowed under Listing Rule 9.1.3 as part of the admission and quotation decision. 
If properly completed restriction agreements and related undertakings have not been provided for all such securities advised by ASX, that will need to 
be rectified prior to admission occurring and quotation commencing.
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 12
No
Item
Location/Confirmation
Entities (other than mining exploration entities and oil and gas exploration entities) with classified 
assets27
66.  Within the 2 years preceding the date of the entity’s application for
admission to the official list, has the entity acquired, or entered into an 
agreement to acquire, a classified asset? 
If so, where in the Offer Document does it disclose: 
 
 
 

the date of the acquisition or agreement; 
full details of the classified asset, including any title particulars; 
the name of the vendor; 
if the vendor was not the beneficial owner of the classified asset at the 
date of the acquisition or agreement, the name of the beneficial 
owner(s);
  details of the relationship between the vendor (or, if the vendor was not
the beneficial owner of the tenement at the date of the acquisition or 
agreement, between the beneficial owner(s)) and the entity or any 
related party or promoter of the entity; and
  details of the purchase price paid or payable and all other
consideration (whether legally enforceable or not) passing directly or 
indirectly to the vendor.
Is the vendor (or, if the vendor was not the beneficial owner of the 
classified asset at the date of the acquisition or agreement, is any of the 
beneficial owner(s)) a related party or promoter of the entity? 
If so, please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that the 
consideration paid by the entity for the classified asset was solely restricted 
securities, save to the extent it involved the reimbursement of expenditure 
incurred in developing the classified asset28 or the entity was not required 
to apply the restrictions in Appendix 9B under Listing Rule 9.1.3 (Listing 
Rule 1.1 Condition 10) 
 
Please also provide a copy of the agreement(s) relating to the acquisition 
entered into by the entity and any expert’s report or valuation obtained by 
the entity in relation to the acquisition
N/A
N/A
N/A
Mining entities
67.  A completed Appendix 1A Information Form and Checklist Annexure I
(Mining Entities)29
Refer to Annexure 1.
Oil and gas entities
68.  A completed Appendix 1A Information Form and Checklist Annexure II (Oil
and Gas Entities)30
N/A
27  A “classified asset” is defined in Listing Rule 19.12 as:
(a)  an interest in a mining exploration area or oil and gas exploration area or similar tenement or interest; 
(b)  an interest in intangible property that is substantially speculative or unproven, or has not been profitably exploited for at least three years, and
which entitles the entity to develop, manufacture, market or distribute the property;
(c)  an interest in an asset which, in ASX’s opinion, cannot readily be valued; or 
(d)  an interest in an entity the substantial proportion of whose assets (held directly, or through a controlled entity) is property of the type referred to in
paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above.
28  ASX may require evidence to support expenditure claims. 
29  An electronic copy of this Appendix is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
30  An electronic copy of this Appendix is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website.
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 13
No
Item
Location/Confirmation
Entities incorporated or established outside of Australia
69.  A completed Appendix 1A Information Form and Checklist Annexure III
(Foreign Entities)31
Externally managed entities
70.  A completed Appendix 1A Information Form and Checklist Annexure IV
(Externally Managed Entities)32
Stapled entities
71.  A completed Appendix 1A Information Form and Checklist Annexure V
(Stapled Entities)33
Further documents to be provided before admission to the official list
N/A
N/A
N/A
Please note that in addition to the information and documents mentioned above, all entities will be required to provide the 
following before their admission to the official list and the quotation of their securities commences: 



 

A statement setting out the names of the 20 largest holders in each class of securities to be quoted, and the number 
and percentage of each class of securities held by those holders; 
A  distribution  schedule  of  each  class  of  equity  securities  to  be  quoted,  setting  out  the  number  of  holders  in  the 
categories: 
 
 
 
 

1 - 1,000 
1,001 - 5,000 
5,001 - 10,000 
10,001 - 100,000 
100,001 and over
The number of holders of a parcel of securities (excluding restricted securities) with a value of more than $2,000, 
based on the issue/sale price; 
Any outstanding restriction agreements (Appendix 9A) and related undertakings;34 and 
Any other information that ASX may require under Listing Rule 1.17.35
31  An electronic copy of this Appendix is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
32  An electronic copy of this Appendix is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
33  An electronic copy of this Appendix is available from the ASX Compliance Downloads page on ASX’s website. 
34  See note 26 above. 
35  Among other things, this may include evidence to verify that an entity has met Listing Rule 1 Condition 7 and achieved minimum spread without using
artificial means (see Guidance Note 1 section 3.6).
ASX Information Form and Checklist (01/09/14)
Page 14
Information Form and Checklist
Annexure I (Mining Entities)
Name of entity 
Berkut Minerals Limited
ABN/ARBN/ARSN
62 610 855 064
This Annexure forms part of the Information Form and Checklist supplied by the entity named above to 
support its application for admission to the official list of ASX Limited (ASX) as an ASX Listing. 
A reference in this Annexure to JORC means the Australasian Code for Reporting Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore 
Resources - 2012 Edition, a copy of which is included in Annexure 5A of the Listing Rules. Terms used in this Annexure which are defined 
in JORC (including, without limitation, ‘exploration target’,’ exploration results’,’ mineral resource’, ‘ore reserve’ and ‘competent person’) 
have the same meaning as in JORC.
Item
No 
General requirements 
Complete this section if the Offer Document includes any reference to an exploration target, exploration results or estimates of mineral 
resources or ore reserves. 
1.  Where in the Offer Document does it state that the exploration target,
Location/Confirmation
Page 2 of the Independent Geologist’s 
Report at section 5 of the Prospectus at 
Annexure 3 (Independent Geologist’s 
Report). 
 
(a) Section 3.3.2 of the Prospectus at 
Annexure 3 and pages 3 and 4 of the 
Independent Geologists Report. 
 
(b) Pages 3 and 4 of the Independent 
Geologist’s Report. 
 
(c) Seciton 3.3.2 of the Prospectus at 
Annexure 3 and pages 3 and 4 of the 
Independent Geologists Report. 
 
(d) Seciton 3.3.2 of the Prospectus at 
Annexure 3 and pages 3 and 4 of the 
Independent Geologists Report.
exploration results or estimates of mineral resources or ore reserves (as 
the case may be) have been prepared and reported in accordance with 
JORC (Listing Rule 5.6)?1
2.  Where in the Offer Document does it state:

that the exploration target, exploration results or estimates of mineral 
resources or ore reserves (as the case may be) are based on, and 
fairly represent, information and supporting documentation prepared by 
a named competent person2 or persons (Listing Rule 5.22(a) for 
material mining projects and JORC clause 9 for all other projects);

  whether the competent person is an employee of the mining entity or a 
related party and, if not, the name of the competent person’s employer 
(Listing Rule 5.22(b) for material mining projects and JORC clause 9 
for all other projects)? 
the name of the professional organisation of which the competent 
person is a member (Listing Rule 5.22(c) for material mining projects 
and JORC clauses 9 and 11 for all other projects); and 
that the competent person has given his or her prior written consent as 
to the form and context in which the exploration target, exploration 
results or estimates of mineral resources or ore reserves (as the case 
may be) and the supporting information are presented in the Offer 
Document (Listing Rule 5.22 for material mining projects and JORC 
clause 9 for all other projects)?

1
2
The Offer Document must use terminology consistent with the terms in Figure 1 of JORC. Terms such as ‘mining inventory’ or 
‘mineable resource’ are not allowed. 
JORC clause 11 defines a ‘competent person’ as a minerals industry professional who is a Member or Fellow of The Australasian 
Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, or of the Australian Institute of Geoscientists, or of a ‘Recognised Professional Organisation’, as 
included in a list available on the JORC and ASX websites. The  person must have a minimum of five years relevant experience in the 
style of mineralisation or type of deposit under consideration and in the activity which that person is undertaking. If the competent 
person is preparing documentation on exploration results, the relevant experience must be in exploration. If the competent person is 
estimating, or supervising the estimation of mineral resources, the relevant experience must be in the estimation, assessment and 
evaluation of mineral resources. If the competent person is estimating, or supervising the estimation of ore reserves, the relevant 
experience must be in the estimation, assessment, evaluation and economic extraction of ore reserves.
Page 1
Item
No 
 
3.  Please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that the 
Offer Document discloses any potential conflict of interest any of the 
named competent persons may have and, if it does, indicate where in the 
Offer Document that disclosure has been made (JORC clause 9)? 
 
Is there an Independent Geologist’s Report included in the Offer 
Document?
4.


If so, where does it state that any exploration target, exploration results or 
estimates of mineral resources or ore reserves (as the case may be): 
  are based on, and fairly represent, information and supporting
documentation prepared by a named competent person or persons; 
the name of the professional organisation of which the competent 
person is a member; and 
that the competent person has given his or her prior written consent as 
to the form and context in which the exploration target, exploration 
results or estimates of mineral resources or ore reserves (as the case 
may be) and the supporting information are presented in the report 
(Listing Rule 5.22 for material mining projects and JORC clause 9 for 
all other projects)?
Is the Independent Geologist’s Report either a technical assessment 
report, valuation report, or fairness and reasonableness report prepared in 
accordance with the Valmin Code? 
If so, where does it state in the report the declarations required by 
clauses 46, 47 and 48 of the Valmin Code?
5.   Does the Offer Document include a “metal equivalents” calculation?
If so, where does the Offer Document include the following information 
required under JORC clause 50: 

individual grades for all metals included in the metal equivalent 
calculation;
  except where the information is commercially sensitive, the assumed
commodity prices for all metals;3
  assumed metallurgical recoveries for all metals and a discussion of the 
basis on which the assumed recoveries are derived (metallurgical test 
work, detailed mineralogy, similar deposits, etc);4
  a clear statement that it is the entity’s opinion that all the elements
included in the metal equivalents calculation have a reasonable 
potential to be recovered and sold; and 
the calculation formula used?

Location/Confirmation 
 
Confirmed. 
Independent Geologist’s Report page 4.
Yes. 
Independent Geologist’s Report pages 
3 and 4.
The Independent Geologist’s Report is 
a technical assessment prepared in 
accordance with the VALMIN Code, 
2015. 
 
Declarations required by clause 12.1 of 
the VALMIN Code 2015 are contained 
on page 2 of the 
Independent Geologist’s Report. 
 
No
3  Actual assumed prices should be disclosed. It is not sufficient to refer to a “spot price”, without disclosing the actual price in question. 
Where the actual assumed prices used are said to be commercially sensitive, the entity must disclose sufficient information, perhaps in 
narrative rather than numerical form, for investors to understand the methodology it has used to determine these prices.
4  Estimates of metallurgical recoveries for each metal must be used to calculate meaningful metal equivalents. Reporting on the basis of
metal equivalents is not appropriate if metallurgical recovery information is not available or able to be estimated with reasonable 
confidence.
Page 2
Location/Confirmation 
Confirmed.
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Item
No 
6.   Please  enter  “Confirmed”  in  the  column  to  the  right  to  indicate  that  the 
Offer Document does not include any reference to “in situ” or “in ground” 
values (JORC clause 51).
Exploration targets 
Complete this section if the Offer Document includes any reference to an exploration target. 
7.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose a detailed explanation of the
basis for the exploration target, including whether the target is based on 
actual exploration results or on proposed exploration programmes and a 
specific description of the level of exploration activity already completed 
(JORC clause 17)?
8.  Where in the Offer Document does it state the proposed exploration 
activities designed to test the validity of the exploration target and the 
timeframe within which those activities are expected to be completed 
(JORC clause 17)?
9.  Where in the Offer Document does it include the required statement by a 
named competent person taking responsibility for the form and context in 
which the exploration target appears (JORC clause 17)?
10.  Where in the Offer Document does it include the required clarification
statement that the potential quantity and grade is conceptual in nature, that 
there has been insufficient exploration to estimate a mineral resource and 
that it is uncertain if further exploration will result in the estimation of a 
mineral resource (JORC clause 17)?5
11.  Please  enter  “Confirmed”  in  the  column  to  the  right  to  indicate  that  the
following JORC requirements have been satisfied: 

information relating to the exploration target has been expressed so 
that it cannot be misrepresented or misconstrued as an estimate of a 
mineral resource or ore reserve and the terms “resource” and “reserve” 
have not been used in this context (JORC clause 17); 
the exploration target is expressed as a tonnage and grade range and 
as an approximation only (JORC clause 17); 
the Offer Document includes a description of the process used to 
determine the grade and tonnage ranges used to describe the 
exploration target (JORC clause 17); 
there are no “headline statements” in the Offer Document referring to 
the exploration target (JORC clause 17); and 
the exploration target does not include a “metal equivalent” estimate or 
calculation (JORC clause 50).




5  Note that the clarification statement must be within the same paragraph as the first reference to the exploration target in the Offer
Document.
Page 3
No
Item
Exploration results 
Complete this section if the Offer Document includes any reference to exploration results 
12.  Where in the Offer Document is the separate report in relation to each of
the criteria in sections 1 and 2 of JORC Table 1 (Listing Rule 5.7.1)?6
13.  Where in the Offer Document is the separate table setting out the following
information for material drill-holes (unless the entity determines that the 
information is not material):7 
  easting and northing of the drill-hole collar; 
  elevation or RL of the drill-hole collar; 
  dip and azimuth of the hole; 
  down hole width and depth; and 
  end of hole (Listing Rule 5.7.2).
14.  Please  enter  “Confirmed”  in  the  column  to  the  right  to  indicate  that  the
following JORC requirements have been satisfied: 

if the exploration results relate to mineralisation not classified as a 
mineral resource or ore reserve, then estimates of tonnages and 
average grade have not been assigned to the mineralisation except as 
an exploration target in accordance with JORC clause 17 (JORC 
clause 18); 
if true widths of mineralisation are not reported, an appropriate 
qualification has been included in the Offer Document (JORC 
clause 19);

Location/Confirmation
Refer to Appendix 2: Section 1 
(Sampling Techniques and Data) and 
Section 2 (Reporting of Exploration 
Results) of the Independent Geologist’s 
Report. 
 
Refer to Appendix 1 of the Independent 
Geologist’s Report.
Confirmed

  clear diagrams and maps designed to represent the geological context 
have been included in the Offer Document which include a plan view of 
drill hole collar locations and appropriate sectional views (JORC 
clause 19); 
there has been no selected disclosure of information such as isolated 
assays, isolated drill holes, assays of panned concentrates or 
supergene enriched soils or surface samples, without placing them in 
perspective (JORC clause 19); 
if the Offer Document includes exploration results based on rock chip 
or grab sampling, the location (represented as a table, diagram or 
map), total number and assay results for the sampling have been 
included for each sample so as to ensure samples are representative 
and not selectively reported (JORC clause 19 and JORC Table 1); and 
if the Offer Document reports visual results in the absence of assays, it 
does not include any reference to the grade or economic potential of 
the mineralisation (Example D in Annexure A of Guidance Note 8).


6
If an entity that determines that any of the criteria is not material to understanding the exploration results, the entity must identify the 
criteria and explain why it has determined that it is not material to that understanding.
7  An entity that determines that a drill-hole table setting out the information described above is not material, is not required to attach the
table to the Offer Document but must explain why it has determined that the table is not material to understanding the exploration 
results.
Page 4
No
Item
Location/Confirmation
Mineral resources 
Complete this section if the Offer Document includes any reference to an estimate of mineral resources. 
15.  Where in the Offer Document does the competent person explicitly discuss 
the basis for the reasonable prospects for eventual economic extraction of 
the mineral resource (JORC clause 20)?
N/A – Refer to page 2 of the 
Independent Geologist’s Report, 
Mineral Resources have not been 
identified. 
 
N/A
16.  Where in the Offer Document does the competent person explicitly discuss
the technical and economic support for the cut-off assumption applied 
(JORC clause 20)?
17.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the relevant geology and
geological interpretation (Listing Rule 5.8.1 first bullet point)?8
18.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the entity’s sampling and
sub-sampling techniques (Listing Rule 5.8.1 second bullet point)?9
19.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the entity’s drilling
techniques (Listing Rule 5.8.1 third bullet point)?10
20.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the criteria used for 
classification, including drill and data spacing and distribution – this 
includes separately identifying the drill spacing used to classify each 
category of mineral resources (inferred, indicated and measured) where 
estimates for more than one category of mineral resource are reported 
(Listing Rule 5.8.1 fourth bullet point)?11
21.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the entity’s sample analysis
method (Listing Rule 5.8.1 fifth bullet point)?12
22.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the entity’s estimation
methodology (Listing Rule 5.8.1 sixth bullet point)?13
23.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the entity’s cut-off grade(s),
including the basis for the selected cut-off grade(s) (Listing Rule 5.8.1 
seventh bullet point)?14
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
8  Note that this information should be disclosed independently from the separate report in relation to each of the criteria in sections 1, 2
and 3 (and 5 if appropriate) of JORC Table 1 required under Listing Rule 5.8.2 mentioned in item 25 below.
9  Note that this information should be disclosed independently from the separate report in relation to each of the criteria in sections 1, 2
and 3 (and 5 if appropriate) of JORC Table 1 required under Listing Rule 5.8.2 mentioned in item 25 below.
10  Note that this information should be disclosed independently from the separate report in relation to each of the criteria in sections 1, 2
and 3 (and 5 if appropriate) of JORC Table 1 required under Listing Rule 5.8.2 mentioned in item 25 below.
11  Note that this information should be disclosed independently from the separate report in relation to each of the criteria in sections 1, 2
and 3 (and 5 if appropriate) of JORC Table 1 required under Listing Rule 5.8.2 mentioned in item 25 below.
12  Note that this information should be disclosed independently from the separate report in relation to each of the criteria in sections 1, 2
and 3 (and 5 if appropriate) of JORC Table 1 required under Listing Rule 5.8.2 mentioned in item 25 below.
13  Note that this information should be disclosed independently from the separate report in relation to each of the criteria in sections 1, 2
and 3 (and 5 if appropriate) of JORC Table 1 required under Listing Rule 5.8.2 mentioned in item 25 below.
14  Note that this information should be disclosed independently from the separate report in relation to each of the criteria in sections 1, 2
and 3 (and 5 if appropriate) of JORC Table 1 required under Listing Rule 5.8.2 mentioned in item 25 below.
Page 5

Item
No 
24.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose mining and metallurgical
methods and parameters, and other material modifying factors considered 
to date (Listing Rule 5.8.1 eighth bullet point)?15
25.  Where in the Offer Document is the separate report in relation to each of 
the criteria in sections 1, 2 and 3 (and 5 if appropriate) of JORC Table 1 
(Listing Rule 5.8.2)?16
26.  Please  enter  “Confirmed”  in  the  column  to  the  right  to  indicate  that  the
Location/Confirmation 
N/A
N/A
N/A
following JORC requirements have been satisfied: 

the mineral resource estimate has been appropriately classified 
according to increasing geological confidence (ie inferred, indicated or 
measured – JORC clause 20-24); 
if an estimation of an inferred mineral resource is presented on the 
basis of extrapolation beyond the nominal sampling spacing and taking 
into account the style of mineralisation, the report contains sufficient 
information to inform the reader of: 

the maximum distance that the resource is extrapolated beyond the 
sample points; 
the proportion of the resource that is based on extrapolated data; 
the basis on which the resource is extrapolated to these limits; and
 
 
  a diagrammatic representation of the inferred mineral resource 
showing clearly the extrapolated part of the estimated resource 
(JORC clause 21);

the mineral resource estimate has been rounded off to appropriately 
significant figures, is referred to as an estimate not as a calculation 
and, in the case of inferred mineral resources, is qualified by the term 
‘approximately’ (JORC clause 25);
  where contained metal or mineral content has been reported,
corresponding tonnages and grade have also been reported (JORC 
clause 26); 
inferred, indicated or measured resources have not been reported as a 
combined estimate unless details for the individual categories have 
also been provided (JORC clause 26); and 
resource estimates have not been aggregated with reserve estimates 
to report a single combined figure (JORC clause 26).


Ore reserves 
Complete this section if the Offer Document includes any reference to an estimate of ore reserves. 
27.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the material assumptions 
and the outcomes from any pre-feasibility study (PFS) or feasibility study 
(FS), as the case may be, defining the ore reserves (Listing Rule 5.9.1 first 
bullet point)?17
N/A
15  Note that this information should be disclosed independently from the separate report in relation to each of the criteria in sections 1, 2
and 3 (and 5 if appropriate) of JORC Table 1 required under Listing Rule 5.8.2 mentioned in item 25 below. 
If an entity that determines that any of the criteria is not material to understanding the estimate of mineral resources, the entity must 
identify the criteria and explain why it has determined that it is not material to that understanding. 
If the economic assumptions are commercially sensitive to the entity, an explanation of the methodology used to determine the 
assumptions rather than the actual figure can be reported. 
Note that the requirements for a study at the pre-feasibility or feasibility level to be completed in order to declare an ore reserve in 
clause 29 of the JORC Code 2012 and Listing Rule 5.9.1 do not come into effect until 1 December 2014.
16
17
Page 6
Item
No 
28.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the criteria used for
classification, including the classification of the mineral resources on which 
the ore reserves are based and the confidence in the modifying factors 
applied (Listing Rule 5.9.1 second bullet point)?
29.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the mining method selected
and other mining assumptions, including mining recovery factors and 
mining dilution factors (Listing Rule 5.9.1 third bullet point)?
30.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the processing method
selected and other processing assumptions, including the recovery factors 
applied and the allowances made for deleterious elements (Listing 
Rule 5.9.1 fourth bullet point)?
31.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the basis of the cut-off
grade(s) or quality parameters applied (Listing Rule 5.9.1 fifth bullet point)?
32.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose estimation methodology
(Listing Rule 5.9.1 sixth bullet point)?
33.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose material modifying factors, 
including the status of environmental approvals, mining tenements and 
approvals, other governmental factors and infrastructure requirements for 
the selected mining methods and for transportation to market (Listing 
Rule 5.9.1 seventh bullet point)?
34.  Where in the Offer Document is the separate report in relation to each of 
the criteria in sections 1, 2, 3 and 4 (and 5 if appropriate) of JORC Table 1 
(Listing Rule 5.9.2)?18
35.  Please  enter  “Confirmed”  in  the  column  to  the  right  to  indicate  that  the
following JORC requirements have been satisfied: 

the reserve estimate has been appropriately classified according to 
increasing geological confidence (ie probable or proved – JORC 
clause 29-32); 
the reserve estimate has been rounded off to appropriately significant 
figures (JORC clause 33);

Location/Confirmation 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
  where present metal or mineral content has been reported,
corresponding tonnages and grade have also been reported (JORC 
clause 34);
  proved and probable reserves have not been reported as a combined
estimate unless details for the individual categories have also been 
provided (JORC clause 34); 
reserve estimates have not been aggregated with resource estimates 
to report a single combined figure (JORC clause 36); and

  where figures for both resources and reserves are reported, a
statement has been included in the Offer Document which clearly 
indicates whether the resources are inclusive of, or additional to, the 
reserves (JORC clause 36).
18
If an entity that determines that any of the criteria is not material to understanding the estimate of ore reserves, the entity must identify 
the criteria and explain why it has determined that it is not material to that understanding.
Page 7
No
Item
Location/Confirmation
Production targets or financial information derived from production targets 
Complete this section if the Offer Document includes any reference to a production target or financial information derived from a 
production target (such as forecast revenues, forecast costs of production, forecast capex, a net present value, internal rate of return or 
payback period). 
36.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the material assumptions on
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
which the production target is based (Listing Rule 5.16.1)?
37.  Where in the Offer Document does it state that the reserves or resources 
underpinning the production target have been prepared by a competent 
person in accordance with the JORC Code (Listing Rule 5.16.2)?19
38.  Where in the Offer Document does it state the relevant proportions of ore
reserves, mineral resources, exploration target and qualifying foreign 
estimates underpinning the production target (Listing Rule 5.16.3)?
39.  Is a proportion of the production target based on an inferred mineral
resource? 
If so, please indicate where in the Offer Document the required cautionary 
statement has been included stating that:20 
“There is a low level of geological confidence associated with inferred 
mineral resources and there is no certainty that further exploration work will 
result in the determination of indicated mineral resources or that the 
production target itself will be realised” (Listing Rule 5.16.4)?
40.  Is a proportion of the production target based on an exploration target?
If so, where in the Offer Document does it include a statement of the 
factors that lead the entity to believe that it has a reasonable basis for 
reporting the production target in that context (Listing Rule 5.16.5 and 
section 8 of Guidance Note 31 Reporting on Mining Activities)? 
 
Please also indicate where in the Offer Document the required cautionary 
statement has been included stating that:21 
“The potential quantity and grade of an exploration target is conceptual in 
nature, there has been insufficient exploration to determine a mineral 
resource and there is no certainty that further exploration work will result in 
the determination of mineral resources or that the production target itself 
will be realised.” (Listing Rule 5.16.5 and section 8 of Guidance Note 31 
Reporting on Mining Activities)?
41.  Is the Production Target based solely on an inferred mineral resource?
If so, where in the Offer Document does it include a statement of the 
factors that lead the entity to believe that it has a reasonable basis for 
reporting the production target based solely on inferred mineral resources 
(Listing Rule 5.16.6 and section 8 of Guidance Note 31 Reporting on 
Mining Activities)?
19  Note that disclosing a production target that is based solely on an exploration target or solely on a combination of inferred mineral
resources and an exploration target is prohibited (Listing Rule 15.5(a)), as is disclosing a production target based solely or partly on 
historical estimates or foreign estimates (other than qualifying foreign estimates) of mineralisation (Listing Rule 15.5(b)). A production 
target that is based solely on an inferred mineral resource must comply with Listing Rule 5.16.6.
20  Note that the cautionary statement must be proximate to, and have equal prominence as, the reported production target. 
21  Note again that the cautionary statement must be proximate to, and have equal prominence as, the reported production target.
Page 8
No
Item 
 
Please indicate where in the Offer Document it states the level of 
confidence with which the inferred mineral resources are estimated and the 
basis for that level of confidence (Listing Rule 5.16.6) 
 
Please also indicate where in the Offer Document the required cautionary 
statement has been included stating that:22 
“There is a low level of geological confidence associated with inferred 
mineral resources and there is no certainty that further exploration work will 
result in the determination of indicated mineral resources or that the 
production target itself will be realised. The stated production target is 
based on the company’s current expectations of future results or events 
and should not be solely relied upon by investors when making investment 
decisions. Further evaluation work and appropriate studies are required to 
establish sufficient confidence that this target will be met.” (Listing 
Rule 5.16.6) 
 
And provide a copy of the technical report required under Listing 
Rule 5.16.6 to support the production target with a sufficient level of 
confidence and which has been prepared by, or under the supervision of, a 
named independent competent person or persons and includes the 
information referred to in Listing Rules 5.22(b) and (c)
42.  Is a proportion of the production target based on qualifying foreign
estimates that have not been verified and reported as mineral resources or 
ore reserves in accordance with the JORC Code after 3 years from the 
date the qualifying foreign estimates were initially reported? 
If so, where in the Offer Document is the statement and explanation 
referred to in Listing Rule 5.14.2 (Listing Rule 5.16.7)?
43.  Does the Offer Document include forecast financial information derived
Location/Confirmation 
 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
from a production target relating to: 

the mineral resources and ore reserves holdings of the entity (an entity 
level production target); or
  a material mining project of the entity (or two or more mining projects
which together are material to the entity)?
If so, where in the Offer Document does it include all material assumptions 
on which the forecast financial information is based (Listing Rule 5.17.1)?23 
 
Where in the Offer Document does it state the production target from which 
the forecast financial information is derived, including all the information 
contained in Listing Rule 5.16 (Listing Rule 5.17.2) 
 
If a significant proportion of the production target is based on an 
exploration target, where in the Offer Document does it state the 
implications for the forecast financial information of not including the 
exploration target in the production target (Listing Rule 5.17.3)
22  Note again that the cautionary statement must be proximate to, and have equal prominence as, the reported production target. 
23 
If the economic assumptions are commercially sensitive to the entity, an explanation of the methodology used to determine the 
assumptions rather than the actual figure can be reported. Note, however, that economic assumptions may not be commercially 
sensitive. An entity that considers that certain information is commercially sensitive should refer to section 8.6 of Guidance Note 31 on 
the steps ASX expects it to take in these circumstances.
Page 9
No
Item
Scoping studies24 
Complete this section if the Offer Document includes any reference to a scoping study. 
44.  Is the scoping study partially supported by an inferred mineral resource
and/or exploration target? 
If so, where in the Offer Document does it state both the proportion and 
relative sequencing of the inferred mineral resource and/or exploration 
target within the scoping study (JORC clause 38)?
45.  Where in the Offer Document is the cautionary statement required under
clause 38 of the JORC Code about the scoping study?25
Mining exploration entities 
Complete this section if the entity is a mining exploration entity. 
46.  Where in the Offer Document is there a map or maps of the entity’s mining
tenements prepared by a competent person, which: 

indicate the geology and other pertinent features of the tenements, 
including their extent and location in relation to a capital city or major 
town, and relative to any nearby properties which have a significant 
bearing on the potential of the tenements;
  are dated; and 

identify the competent person and the report to which they relate?
47.  Where in the Offer Document is there a schedule of the entity’s mining 
tenements prepared by a competent person, which states in relation to 
each mining tenement: 
 
 
  whether the title has been formally confirmed or approved and, if not,
the geographical area where the mining tenement is situated; 
the nature of the title to the mining tenement;
whether an application for confirmation or approval is pending and 
whether the application is subject to challenge; and 
the person in whose name the title to the mining tenement is currently 
held?

48.  Where in the Offer Document is there a statement setting out a program of
expenditure, together with a timetable for completion of an exploration 
program, in respect of each mining tenement (or, where applicable, each 
group of tenements)?
Location/Confirmation
N/A
N/A
Refer to section 3.2 of the Prospectus 
(page 19) and page 3 of the 
Independent Geologist’s Report.
Refer to page 5 of the Independent 
Geologist’s Report and page 17, Part I 
of the Solicitor’s Report on Tenements.
Refer to page 16 and 17 of the 
Independent Geologist’s Report and 
section 3.3 of the Prospectus.
24  JORC clause 38 defines a “scoping study” as an order of magnitude technical and economic study of the potential viability of mineral 
resources. It includes appropriate assessments of realistically assumed modifying factors together with any other relevant operational 
factors that are necessary to demonstrate at the time of reporting that progress to a pre-feasibility study can be reasonably justified. 
25  Note that the cautionary statement must be in the same paragraph as, or immediately following, the disclosure of the scoping study.
Page 10
Item
No 
49.  Within the 2 years preceding the date of the entity’s application for
admission to the official list, has the entity acquired, or entered into an 
agreement to acquire, an interest in a mining exploration area or similar 
mining tenement from any person?
Location/Confirmation
If so, where in the Offer Document does it disclose: 
 
 
 

the date of the acquisition or agreement; 
full details of the tenement, including any title particulars; 
the name of the vendor; 
if the vendor was not the beneficial owner of the tenement at the date 
of the acquisition or agreement, the name of the beneficial owner;
  details of any relationship between the vendor (or, if the vendor was 
not the beneficial owner of the tenement at the date of the acquisition 
or agreement, between the beneficial owner(s)) and the entity or any 
related party or promoter of the entity; and
Refer to section 3.1, 10.1 and the 
Investment Overview Section (Part A), 
page 6 of the Prospectus. 
 
Refer to page 6 of the Independent 
Geologist’s Report. 
 
Refer to page 29 (Part IV) of the 
Solicitor’s Report on Tenements.
  details of the purchase price paid or payable and all other
consideration (whether legally enforceable or not) passing directly or 
indirectly to the vendor?
Is the vendor (or, if the vendor was not the beneficial owner of the 
tenement at the date of the acquisition or agreement, is any of the 
beneficial owner(s)) a related party or promoter of the entity? 
If so, please enter “Confirmed” in the column to the right to indicate that the 
consideration paid by the entity for the tenement was solely restricted 
securities, save to the extent it involved the reimbursement of expenditure 
incurred in developing the tenement26 or the entity was not required to 
apply the restrictions in Appendix 9B under Listing Rule 9.1.3 (Listing 
Rule 1.1 Condition 10) 
 
Please also provide a copy of the agreement(s) relating to the acquisition 
entered into by the entity and any expert’s report or valuation obtained by 
the entity in relation to the acquisition
50.  Is the entity or a child entity in a joint venture arrangement to investigate or
explore a mining tenement?
If so, please provide a copy of the joint venture agreement 
 
 
Where  in  the  joint  venture  agreement  does  it  provide  that  if  the  entity 
requires  it,  the  operator  of  the  joint  venture  will  give  the  entity  all  the 
information the entity requires to comply with the Listing Rules, and that 
the information may be given to ASX for release to the market if necessary 
for the entity to comply with the Listing Rules (Listing Rule 5.45)?
N/A the vendor was not and is not a 
related party.
Refer to Earn-in and Joint Venture 
Agreement attached at Annexure 11.
N/A – Refer to Earn-in and Joint 
Venture Agreement at Annexure 11. 
 
N/A
26  ASX may require evidence to support expenditure claims.
Page 11
No
Item
Location/Confirmation
Historical or foreign estimates for a material mining project27 
Complete this section if the Offer Document includes any reference to historical or foreign estimates for a material mining project. 
51.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the source and date of the
N/A – Refer to page 2 of the 
Independent Geologist’s Report. 
 
N/A
historical estimates or foreign estimates (Listing Rule 5.12.1)?
52.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose whether the historical
estimates or foreign estimates use categories of mineralisation other than 
those defined in JORC and if so, an explanation of the differences (Listing 
Rule 5.12.2)?
53.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the relevance and materiality
of the historical estimates or foreign estimates to the entity (Listing 
Rule 5.12.3)?
54.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the reliability of the historical 
estimates or foreign estimates, including by reference to any of the criteria 
in JORC Table 1 which are relevant to understanding the reliability of the 
historical estimates or foreign estimates (Listing Rule 5.12.4)?
55.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose, to the extent known, a
summary of the work programs on which the historical estimates or foreign 
estimates are based and a summary of the key assumptions, mining and 
processing parameters and methods used to prepare the historical 
estimates or foreign estimates (Listing Rule 5.12.5)?
56.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose any more recent estimates
or data relevant to the reported mineralisation available to the entity 
(Listing Rule 5.12.6)?
57.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the evaluation and/or 
exploration work that needs to be completed to verify the historical 
estimates or foreign estimates as mineral resources or ore reserves in 
accordance with JORC (Listing Rule 5.12.7)?
58.  Where in the Offer Document does it disclose the proposed timing of any 
evaluation and/or exploration work that the entity intends to undertake and 
a comment on how the entity intends to fund that work (Listing 
Rule 5.12.8)?
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
27  An “historical estimate” is an estimate of quantity and grade of mineralisation that is based on information and supporting
documentation that was prepared prior to the introduction of JORC (1989) and which an entity has not verified as mineral resources or 
ore reserves in accordance with JORC (Listing Rule 19.12). A ”foreign estimate” is an estimate of quantity and grade of mineralisation 
that was prepared using a mineral resources classification and reporting standard from another jurisdiction prior to an entity acquiring, 
or entering into an agreement to acquire, an interest in a mining tenement that contains the deposit, and which the entity has not 
verified as mineral resources or ore reserves in accordance with JORC (Listing Rule 19.12). Note that an entity must not include 
historical estimates or foreign estimates (other than qualifying foreign estimates) of mineralisation in an economic analysis (including a 
scoping study, preliminary feasibility study, or a feasibility study) of the entity’s mineral resources and ore reserves holdings (see 
Listing Rule 5.11).
Page 12
Item
No 
59.  Where in the Offer Document does it include the required cautionary
statement that: 

the estimates are historical estimates or foreign estimates and are not 
reported in accordance with the JORC Code;
Location/Confirmation 
N/A
N/A
  a competent person has not done sufficient work to classify the
historical estimates or foreign estimates as mineral resources or ore 
reserves in accordance with the JORC Code; and 
it is uncertain that following evaluation and/or further exploration work 
that the historical estimates or foreign estimates will be able to be 
reported as mineral resources or ore reserves in accordance with the 
JORC Code (Listing Rule 5.12.9)?28

60.  Where in the Offer Document does it include the required statement by a
named competent person or persons that the information in the Offer 
Document provided under Listing Rules 5.12.2 to 5.12.7 is an accurate 
representation of the available data and studies for the project and the 
information referred to in Listing Rules 5.22(b) and (c) (Listing 
Rule 5.12.10)?
28  Note that the cautionary statement must be proximate to, and have equal prominence as, the reported historical estimates or foreign
estimates.
Page 13