
Securities Act 1997
FORM 3
Act, Section 115(2) (a)
NOTICE OF SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDING
Note:To be given to the company, the stock exchange on which it is listed and the Securities
Commission by a person who acquires a relevant interest in 5% or more of the voting
shares of a listed company, within two days after the person becomes aware that they
are a substantial shareholder. Use a separate form for each person that is a substantial
shareholder.
1‘ Name of listed Bougainville Copper Limited
company.
Note:Insert the name of the listed company in which the substantial shareholding is held.
2‘ Name of stock Australian Securities Exchange
exchange.
Note:Insert the name of the stock exchange on which the company is listed
3. Details of person that is a substantial shareholder
Given names (natural Surname or corporate Residential address or Postal address
persons only) name and registration address of registered office
number if alicable
N/A Bougainville Minerals Section 9, Allotment 4, Section 9, Allotment 4,
Limited (Company Division of Commerce, Division of Commerce,
No.1-111884) Trade & Industry, Buka, Trade & industry, Buka,
Autonomous Region of Autonomous Region of
Bougainville, 355, Papua Bougainville, 355, Papua
New Guinea New Guinea
4. Date substantial shareholding /5 August 2016
arose
Note:Insert the date on which the person named in Item 3 became a substantial shareholder
in the listed company speciﬁed at Item 1, not the date on which the person became
aware of the substantial shareholding.
80057427103


Number of shares % of shares in company

5‘ Voting shares in which a 146,175,449 36.4%
relevant interest is held.

Note:Insert the number and % of voting shares in which the person has a relevant interest as
at the date at Item 4, The terms “voting shares” and “relevant interest” are deﬁned in
Sections 112 — 114 of the Act.

6. Total number of voting shares 401,062,500
issued by the listed company.

Note:Insert the total number of voting shares issued by the listed company used for the
purpose of calculating the % at Item 5.

7. Particulars of relevant interests,

_ Details for class of shares.

Class of voting shares in F H .d d,
which relevant interests held. H Y pm or may
$35555) 0f reg'SterEd Bougainville Minerals Limited
Brief description of the nature .
of the relevant interests in the Reg'stered holder
votin shares.
grgﬁfsgasiggpjﬁlfiﬁgh the Distribution by Equity Trustees Limited pursuant to the BCL Shares
relevant interests arose e 9 Trust Deed entered into by Equity Trustees Limited on 30 June 2016,
urchase on Stock exchan' é pursuant to which the shares the subject of this notice were agreed to
p g ’ be held on trust for the Autonomous Bougainvllle Government or its
nominee (BCL Shares Trust Deed)
Number Of VDting Shares _
affected b the transaction 146’175'449
The consideration for the
transaction value in Kina i
Name ofthe other art to t _ .
the transaction if kpnovg’n . * Equity Trustees L‘m'ted
The consideration, if any, paid .
for each relevant interest Not Appl'cable
acquired in the previous 4
months
* This information is not required where the transaction took place on a stock exchange.
80067427503


Note: Where there is insufﬁcient space on the form to supply the information required, use
additional forms or annexe a separate sheet in the same format containing the
information.

8. Details of other person(s) giving a notice for the same transaction.

Given names (natural Surname or corporate Residential address or Postal address
persons only) name and registration address of registered office
number if a licable
N/A Equity Trustees Limited Level 2, 575 Bourke St, Level 2, 575 Bourke St,
Melbourne VIC 3000, Melbourne VIC 3000,
Australia Australia

Note.'If known, insert the name and address of any other person(s) believed to have given, or
to be intending to give, notice, whether a Form 3, 4 or 5, in relation to the transaction
to which this notice relates. Ifnot known, insert, “unknown”.

9. Details of any associate who also has a relevant interest in the voting shares.

Given names (natural Surname or corporate Residential address or Postal address
persons only) name and registration address of registered office
number if a licable
Bougainville Public Section 9, Allotment 4, Section 9, Allotment 4,
Investment Corporation Division of Commerce, Division of Commerce,
Limited (company Trade 8i Industry, Buka, Trade & Industry, Buka,
No.1—79386) Autonomous Region of Autonomous Region of
Bougainville, 355, Papua Bougainville, 355, Papua
New Guinea New Guinea
Nature of Association: Shareholder of Bougainville Minerals Limited
Details of Relevant Interest of Associate: Same relevant interest as Bougainville Minerals Limited
Given names (natural Surname or corporate Residential address or Postal address
persons only) name and registration address of registered ofﬁce
number if a licable
Autonomous Section 9, Allotment 4, Section 9, Allotment 4,
Bougainville Division of Commerce, Division of Commerce,
Government Trade & Industw, Buka, Trade & Industry, Buka,
Autonomous Region of Autonomous Region of
Bougainville, 355, Papua Bougainville, 355, Papua
New Guinea New Guinea
3006742750:


Nature of Association: Shareholder of Bougainvilie Public Investment Corporation Limited
Details of Relevant Interest of Associate: Same relevant interest as Bougainville Public Investment
Corgoration Limited
Note:Provide the name and address of each associate of the person submitting this notice
who has a relevant interest in voting shares in the company, and the nature of the
association with the associate and the details of the relevant interest of the associate.
10. Prescribed particulars of any agreement under which substantial shareholding
acquired.
Date of any Material terms of any agreement (whether written or oral)
areement
30 June 2016 BCL Shares Trust Deed, a co of which is Annexure A
H9 August 2016 Direction given by Autonomous Bougainville Government pursuant to clause 2.5
of the BCL Shares Trust Deed in favour of BougainVIlie Public Investment
Corporation Limited, a copy of which is Annexure B
Note: Provide the details of the material terms of any agreement, whether written or oral,
and the details of the material terms of any relevant agreement through which a
relevant interest, the subject of the notice, was acquired or otherwise arose True
copies of the documents must be submitted with this form.
11. The following documents must be submitted with this form -
A. a true copy of any document setting out the material terms of any agreement that -
(a) contributed to the person having to submit this form;
(b) is in writing or in a document in which the material terms of an oral agreement
have been reduced to writing in accordance with Section 40(5) (c) of the
Regulation; and
(c) is readily available to the person submitting the notice; or
B. where a document in Paragraph A is not readily available to the person submitting this
form, a memorandum in writing detailing the material terms of the document.
The number of pages that accompany, or are annexed to, this notice is $5 .
12. Declaration
I declare that to the best of my knowledge and belief the information in this form is true and correct.
30057427503


Signature: 6

Full Name of Person 5 ning:  M‘

Role: (80 F Date: 

Note-Where this notice is given by a body corporate it must be signed by a director or
secretary who is authorized by the board of the body corporate to give the notice.
Initials are not sufﬁcient for the full name of the person signing this form.

50057527501


,. , W, , ,srsw ,mmw # <MMM‘,
ANNEXURE A
This is the annexure A referred to in the
Form 03 Notice of Substantial Sharehoiding signed by me.
, WNEWNME‘ ‘é/oé‘boié
gnature Name Date
800674275‘01


Al'lens > < Link'la’rers
r \ Equity Tluﬁaes Limited
BCL Shares Trust
Trust Deed
L Deuische Bank Place
- Corner Hunler and Fhllllp Streets
Sydney NSW 2000 Australia
T +61 2 9230 4000 ‘
F +61 2 9230 5333 ‘
wwwalensxxzmau
a Arm mm”
mmnmwnmmnmnmmnm


BCL Shares Trust Deed Aliens : ( Li nklafers
Cantants

‘ * 1 Deﬁnitions and interprelation 1
r 1.1 Deﬁnitions 1
V 1.2 inletpreiation 4
1.3 Rounding and currency 5
1 .4 Dead binding 5
2 The Trust 5
" 2,1 Appointment olmlslae 5
2,2 Dedarallon cl lmsl 5
2.3 Name (if Tmsl 5
2.4 BCL Shares and balance of Tmst Fund 5

2.5 Beneﬁciaries in call for inansfsr 0i ECL Shara E

2.5 other rights and directions 7
, 2.7 cumin 7
_ r 3 Tmnsleu and other Dealings 7
_ 4 NetAccountlng income 7

4.1 Income of (he Tmsl 7

4.2 Expense: and-provisions oi lhe Trust 7

43 Net Accounting lmoms 7

4.4 Net income 5

5 Distributions B

6.1 Distribulable income 5

5.2 Present enmlemem B

, 5.3 Disliibulinn oi Dislribulabla lneoma 8
5.4 Capilsl distributions 9

_ 5.5 Grossad up Tax amounls 9

_ 5.6 Excess dslrlbullon 9
5 Powers of Trusts» ' 9

6.1 Powers 9

6.2 Spedlic powers and authorisation 10

6‘3 Delegation in

8.4 Advisers 10

8.5 Purpose of Trust and scope of Tmslee‘s dulies 10

7 Valuations 10

7.1 Valuallan of an A5531 1‘)

7.2 Valuation if required 11

7.3 Vaiuatlon meimd 1i

6 Holding Asssls 11

a The Trustee‘s lelladon of Liability 11

9.1 General 11

9.2 Spesii'ic 1 1

10 lndamnlﬁaa 11

10.1 Truslee‘s indemnity 11

10.2 Trusuae's indemnity continuing 11

103 Payment 11

10.4 The Truslee n01 ID incur liability 12

mm M135525Miv5 1211393991 page (i)


so]. Shares Trust Deed Aliens > z Linkiafé'i‘s
10.5 Right 01 Indemnity not aﬂected by an unrelated breach 12
10.8 Indemnity under Law 12
‘ 11 change of Trusts: 12
. 11.1 anuntary retirement 12
, 11.2 Compulsory retirement 12
' 1 1 ,3 New Truslee 12
L 1 1.4 Release 12
i 11.5 Ratiemsnl beneﬁt 12
, 12 Amendmlnts m Deed 13
L 12.1 Germs! 13
12.2 Limits an amendments 13
r’ 13 $1210me Accounts and Audit 13
13.1 Appalmment of auditors 13
- 13.2 Rdire'nenl of auditors 13
13.3 Remuneraliun uf auditors 13
13.4 Acoounls 13
13.5 Audit 13
14 ' Service of Document: 13
14.1 Service on lhe Beneficiaries 13
142 Service on the Trustee 14
15 Procedure MmraTen-nlnauon Event 15
15.1 Nwlice ufwinding up 15
15.2 Realisalinn of Tanl Fund 15
/ 15.3 Final dialribullon 15
15.4 Postponement of realisallan 15
15.5 Retention 01 property 15
15.6 Continuation of powers 1B
‘ 16 Fees 13
18.1 Tnlisiee Fees 16
I 16.2 Expenses 16
18.3 Fees paid 10 Tmslse In a dlﬁerem capacity 18
18.4 Reowery Df GST 16
16.5 Liabiilly Net of GST 16
16.5 Adjusinienl evems 16
16.1 Faymenl of Fees and Expenses 16
17 Baniﬁcinl’y‘s Liability 1']
‘ 17.1 Uahillly 17
17.2 Limilalion of lbility 17
_ 13 Other Acﬁvitius and Obligations of the Trustee 17
18,1 Olher acﬂvltles 17
18.2 Other obilnaklons 17
‘ 19 Payment: 17
19.1 Money payable 17
19.2 Failed payments 16
19.3 Deductions for Tax 0! other paymenls 18
19.4 Information from Beneﬁciaries 18
20 Governing Law and Jurisdiction 1B
mks Ao1asszsu21v5 1203mm pugs (ll)


BCL Shares Trust Dead Men: s (, Linina‘I'érs

Z1 Severablllty 19

Schadula 1 20

' BCL Share Transfer Dead 20
Schedule 2 21

, 30!. Share Transfer Form 21
Schedule 3 22

Direction 22

Schedula 4 23

Expenses 23

Schedule 5 24

- \ Nmmmﬂon of cessation 01 interest (clause 24m) 24

-_ Sch-duh 6 25
, Notiﬁcation of extension of period (dauses 25(5) and 2.502)) 25




BCL Shares Trust Deed Aliens > < Linkiaters
This Deed is made on 3 0 Tune 2015
I \ Party
, Equity Trustees Limited (ACN 004 031 293) of Level 2, 575 Bourke St, Melbourne VIC 3000

‘(the Trustee).

It is declared as iallmvs,

_ 1 Deﬁnitions and interpretation
1.1 Deﬁnitions
. _ In this Deed the following definitions apply unless the context otherwise requires.
ABE means the Autonomous Bougainville Government.
- AEG shares has the meaning given to It in dause 2.4(3).

‘ Adviser includes any adviser, consultant or expert including any barrister, solidtor. accountant.
auditor, Valuer, banker, investment manager and any other person appointed by the Trustee to
provide advice In relation to the Trust. '

AML Legislation means the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing An!
2006 (on), the FlnsnD/El Transaction Reports Act 1986 (6th) and any similar lemslation In any
jurisdiction.
Applicable Leglslation means the Australian Securities and Investments Commlsslon Act 2001
I (0th) and any other legislation applying to the Tmstee or the Trust that atteus any limitation at
the Tmetee's liability.
Asses means ail the Property. investments, rights and income at the Trust from time to time.
Asset Value at any time means the value of all Assets In the Trust Fund at that time, as most
recently miwlated in accordance with clause 7.
Austral/an Accounting Standards means:
(a) the accounting standards from time to time approved under the Corporations Act;
(b) the requirements oftha Corporations Act in relation to the preparation and wnient ct
accounts: and
to) generally amepted accounting principles and pragioes in Australia consistently applied,
except those principles and practices whim are inconsistent with the standards or
requirements referred in in paragmph (a) or (b).
,BcL means Bougalnvllie Copper Limited (Cunpeny Nu. 1-1895).
Beneﬁciaries means AEG and PNG and Benaﬂclaly means either at them
BCL Share Transform means the deed of that name in the form in Sdiedule 1 between the
Trustee and the olher parlies spedﬁed In the draft.
BcL share Transfer Form means a share transfer term in the form required by ECL's share
registry, which at the dale of this deed is In the form ul‘ the proforma in Schedule 2
BCL shares means the ardinary shares in BCL identiﬁed in the BCL Shara Transfer Deed to be
transferred to the Trustee in accordance with that deed. '
Business Day means a day on which the Trustee is open tor business other than a Saturday,
Sunday or public holiday. .
make miseszmlvs tammr pay: 1


BCL Shares Trust Deed Aliens > < Linklafers
cash ‘ricludas eheqim.
- oommenoement Date mns the date on which Ilia Trust commences in accordance with
I clause 242(a).
r Corporations Act means the Corporaﬁons Act 2001 (0th).
Danlln relation toi
(a) an interest. means to sell. transfer. assign, or mharwisa dl with the interest or any part
’ of i1 and includes taking any steps or doing anything that reduces the Beneﬁdarye
t economic Interest In the interest or any part of it
(b) a BCL Share, means to sell. transfer. assign. or otherwise deal with the BCL Share or
any part at it and lndudes taking any steps or dolng anything that reduces the Trustee‘s
/ or a Benwciarys eoonomic interest in the BCL Share or any part of it.
Dkecuon means a document In the term set out In Schedule 3.
' Dlsﬂ'ibutlbla Income has the meaning given in clause 5.1.
L ' Expenses Includes any costs. liabilities. atpenses, commissions. bmkeme tea, Taxes and
duties. Samples of expenses are given In Schedule 4.
Flnancial Year means a year endan on 30 June in each year but:
(a) the period oommenoing an the Commencement Date and ending on the talleran 30
June will be a Financial Year. and
(b)- the period commenan an 1 Juiy immediately before [he day all the assets of the Tmﬁ
_ have been realised and distributed In accordancewith clause 15 and ending on that final
’ distribution day will be a Financial Var.
Gnvarnmant Authority means a government or a governmental. Semi-governmental orjudicial
entity or authority. it also inciudx a seitvregulatory organisation established under statute or a
r securities exchange
GSThas the mashing given in section 195—1 of lheA New Tax system (Goods' and Services)
Tax Aux 1999 (cm).
Initial Sum means 310.
Input Tax Credit has the meaning given to that term by the A New Tax System (Goods and
Services Tax) Act 1999 (cm),
Interest means a Benettdary’s rights under the Trust and interests In the Trust Fund and includes
any one of those rights and interests.
, Interim Distribution Period means any period detetmined by the Trustee so long as the period
commenca and ends during the same Financial Year (but does not end on the last day of that
Financial Year).
Investment means awiype oi investment, whether in Australia. Papua New Guinea or
L elsewhere. which a natural person or corporation may make on its own behalf and not as a
trustee and indudes:
(a) (without limiting paragraph 03)) ﬁnancial products; and
(b) the pursuit oi gain or the protection against Loss by way at any of the following:
6) acquiring or holding of any Prqserm
(ii) making available ﬁnancial accommodation; or
(ii0 entering into any centred or a derivative.
nisks Aniseszsuzm izceeeeer page 2


BCL Shares Trust Deed Aliens ; s Linki‘erers
and may Involve incurring a liability or obligath at any kind.
Law includes any statute and rule at common law, rule of equity orjudgemeni and any
r ‘ agreement made with a Government Authority which applies to the Trust or the Trustee (as the
7 case may be).
' LIebIIIEes all any time means all present Iiahllitlu of the Trust but excluding the amaunt
. representing Beneﬁciaries capital. undistributed prnﬂts. interest attributable to Beneﬁciaries
accruing on Benellclary capital. tapital reserves or any ether amount representing the value of
C . rights attaching to Interests. regardless of whether charmer-lead as equity or debt in the accounts
0f the Tmst.
Loss means any losses. liabilities. costs. expenses or damages.
Month means a calendar month.
‘ ‘ Net Accounting Incame has the meaning given in clause 4.3.
Net Income has the meaning given in dausa 4.4.
Net Proceeds anr Reallsauon means the proceeds tram sale or other realisation of me Assets
after paying er pmvlding for:
, (a) air Liabilities at the Trust;
(In) any unpaid fees payable (or to be payable) to the Trustee; and
(c) any Expenses incuned in realising the Assets.
PNG means Fetmmin PNG Holdings Limited.
PNG share: has the meaning given to it in clause 2.4(a).
Property means property a! any description and includes:
(a) land and any personal properhn
, _ (b) any estate or Interest In property; ‘
(c) any debt or dress in action or any other right or interest;
‘ (d) any permil. Finance or authority or any patent. mpyrlghl. design. trade mark or other term
at intellectual property. and
(e) anything regarded as an asset for the purpmes oi Australian Accounting Standards.
RepIster means the register of Beneﬁciaries to be maintained by or on behalf of the Trustee
Security Interest means any mortgage. charge. pledge, ilan. encumbrance. anannernent for the
' retention pl title or any other similar right; interest, power or anangernent of any nature having the
r eIfeat of providing security.
Samar means Ric Tlnin Base Metals Ply. Limited (ACN 004 439 203).
Speciﬁed Proportion has the meaning gven in clause 2.4.
Tax means all Income tax. capital gains tax. capital lax. recoupment lax, land tax. sales tax.
payroll tax. Irlnge benefits tax. group tax, proﬁt lax. Interest tax. property tax, undistribuied profits
tax. GST. withholding tax. municipal rates. 51am!) duties and athertax. impostt rates. duties,
charges and levies assessed or charged or assessable or chargeable by or payable to any
natiunal. federal. state or municipal taxation or excise amhority in Australia. Papua New Guinea
or eisaiM-tera. Including any interest. penalty, charge. fee or other amount Imposed or made on or
In respect of the Iailura to tile 2 return in respect at or to pay any such tax. impost. rates. duties.
charges or levies. ‘
Tax Act means the Income Tax Assessment Act 1938 (0th) and the Income Tax AssessmenrAvt
msks Aniassmztvs l20399§97 page 3


BCL Shares Trust Deed Aliens » ( Linkiaters
1997 (cm).
\ Tannin-lion Event mears:
. (a) the sol. shares are all transferred as contemplated by dauss 2.5; or
, (b) the Tmtea is required try Law to realise the Asses and distribute the proceeds.
T mst means the met constituted by this Deed.
, TmstAudltor means the last person appointed under dause 13.1.
' 1 Trust Fund mea ns all Meets of lhe Trust
Trustee means Equity Trustees Limited (ACN 004 031 298) or any other person appointed as
trustee oftha Trust.
r’ \ Trustee Foe means the fee payable under deuse 16.1.
1.2 [Morpralzﬁon

I (a) Headings are lor convenience only and do not afract imatpretatlon.
(b) Mentioning anything otter includes, Including. for example or similar expressions. elm

\ not limit what else might as inoluciad.
(o) The following rules apply unless the context requires otherwise.

7 (i) The singular Incl udw the plural. and the converse also applies,
(ll) A gender Includes all genders
‘ (iii) it a word or phrase is deﬁned. its olhergmmmatioal forms have a mnesponding
meaning.

(iv) A reference to a person includes a coronation. trust. parlnsrship. unincorporated

body or other entity. whether or not it comprises a separate legal enﬁty and lhs
_ converse also applies.

(v) A tolerance to a clause. paragraph. subparagmph orsc'hadula is in a clause.
paragraph. subparaglaph of. orsaheduleto. his Deed.

(vi) Unless exprme stated in this Deed. a provision in this Deed does not limit
another provision in this Deed.

, (vii) A reference to a partyto this Deed or another agreement or document includes
the party’s successors. permitted substitutes and perniltted assigrs (and. where
applicable. the party's legal personal representativs),

(vii) A reference to an agreement or document (including a reference to this Deed) is
to the agreement or document as amended. supplemented. novatad or replaced.
except to the extant prohibited by this Dead or that other agreement or document.
and includes the redtais and annaxuras to that agreement or document

(ix) A reference to legislalion or to a provision of legislation indudes a modiﬁcation or
reenactment of it. a legislative provision substituted tor it and a regulation or

, statutory or legislative instrunent issued under it.

(x) A reference to‘doiials or S is to Australian currency unless otherwise stated

(xi) Awotd ur phrasevappearing in a certain context which. when used in a similar
contract in the Corporations Act «Australian Amounting Standards would have a
particular meaning. has that meaning in this Deed.

msks/tﬂlsﬁszwz‘lt‘i messaw pass 4


BCL snares Trust Deed Aliensrk Linklafers

I (xii) A reference to conduct includes an crnlasion. statement or undmaklng. whether

' or not In writing.

, (xilt) Any appointmentor the Trustee as 31 attorney under this Dead is irrevocable.
1.3 Rounding and currency
(a) All lculatlons under this Deed may be rounded up or down to the number at deolmel
' places (or nearest whole number) determined by the Trustee

/ _ (b) Where total amounts payable to or by a person Include a fmctlon at a cent, that amount

‘- ' may be rounded up or down to the nearest can as determined by the Trustee.

(c) Where the Trustee needs to convert an amount In a currency to another currency. it may

_ calwlate the converslon in such manner as it considers appropriate
\ 1.4 Deed blndlng

r 1‘ This Deed binds the Trustee, each Beneﬁciary and any person clalming through any of them as ‘n‘

eachat them hadbeen a partytn it.

s 2 The Trust
2.1 Appointment ’or trustee

The Tmstee agrees to act as tmstee ofthe Tmst.

, _ 2.2 Declaraﬂon of trust

(a) The Trust commences an the date the Senior pays the Initial Sum to the Trustee.

, (b) The Tmstee holds the BCL Shares on trust for the Beneﬁciaries in the manner spea'ﬂed
In clause 2.4 and holds the balance of the Trust Fund In the Speciﬁed Proportions hctnln
accordance with this Deed.

2.3 Name of Tmst
‘ The name or the Trust Is the ECL Shams Trust.
2.4 BcL Shares and balance at Trust Fund

(8) Provided that the ECL Shares have been transterred to the Trustee in accordance with
the BCL Share Transfer Deed. the Trustee must hold 146,175,449 oftlte BCL Shares on
trust for AEG (ﬁle AEG Shame) and 69.744540 BCL Shares On trust for PNG (the PM}!
Snares). subject to the terms of this Deed, hclu'dlng paragraph (c) and clause 2.5.

(b) Subject to paragraphs (c) and (d), the Berte’lclaries‘ proportionate Interest in the balance
of the Tant Fund (that ls. Assets other than the ESL Shares) (the Fund Balance) is as
tollows:

(i) In the case of ABS. 81.7%; and

(iI) In the case or PNG. 32.3%.

Subject to paragraphs (0) and (d)4 this Is each Beneﬁciary's Speciﬁed Proportion of the
_ Fund Balance.

(c) If either Beneﬁciary (- Defaulﬁng Beneﬁciary) does not. in accordance with clause 2.5,
direct the Trustee and accept a transfer and become the legal owner of the ECL Shares
to which It is absolutely entltled, the other Beneﬁciary will become absolutely entitled to
the Defaultirtg Berteﬂolary's Interest In the BCL shares and the other Beneﬁclenfs
Speciﬁed Proportion of the Fund Balance will become 100%. The Defaultan Beneﬁdary

ntst Aorassnsoztvs tzuasaw page 5


BOLSheree Trust Deed Allensn Linkiefe’rs
Mil cease to have an interest and the Trustee will notify the Detauiting Beneﬁciary in the
form set out In Schedule 5 within 10 Business Days of it ceasing to have that interest
r , \ Failure to deliver that notice does not attest the operation of this Deed.
' V (d) if. as at the end of the last day of the Frnendel Year or Interim Distribution Period. only
one Beneﬁciary has directed the Tmstee and accepted e trersfer in amdance with
’ dense 2.5 and the other Beneﬁcier is not a Detauiting Beneﬁciary then the Speciﬁed
Proportion of that other Bmeticlery Is, for the purposes at clauses 5.3(c), 5.4 and 153(8),
,r 100%.
~ ' 2.5 Beneﬁciaries to call for transfer of Bel. Share:
(a) AEG must (Siren the Trustee to trenster to ABG (or ['15 nominee), the ABS Shares and the
_ Trustee must transfer the ABS shares In accordance with such dimmion within '
10 Business Days of receiving the direction. The direction must be in the form otthe
Direction, accompanied by a BCL Share Transter Form signed by A36 and such other
- documents and Information required by BCL‘e share registry, and must be provided so
, that the Trustee receives It within two Months [run the Commencement Date (or any
.longer period ncnexceeding a further one Month deter-mined by the Trustee in its
‘ absolute discretion and notiﬁed to A56 in the form set out in Schedule 6 on not less than
5 Busine§ Days prior to the expiration of the initial two Month period). ABG must take
any other steps wiid'r. in the Trustee‘s opinion, are nmem to give sited to the
transfer oftheABG Sheree.

(b) PNG must direct the Trustee to (ureter to PNG (or its nominee). the PNG Shares and the
Trustee must transfer the PNG Shares In accordance with such direction within
10 Business Days of receiving the diredhn. The direaion must he in the form of the
median, accompanied by a BCL Share Transfer Form signed by PNG and such mher
documents and information required by BCL's share registry, and must be provided so
that the Trustee receives it within two Months from the Commencement Date (or any
longer pertod not exceeding a further one Month determined by the Trustee ln its
absolute discretion and notiﬁed to A36 in the form set out in‘Sct-reduie 6 on not less then
5 Business Days prior to the expiration of the inltial two Month period) PNG must take
any other steps which, in the Trustee's opinion‘ are necessary to give eﬁed to the
transfer ofthe PNG Shares.

(:2) if clause 2.4(0) applies, then the Trustee must transfer the remaining BCL shares to the

, remaining Beneﬁciary (or, it it nominated a person under paragraph (a) or paragraph (in)
(as applicable), that nominee) Mthln 10 Business Days after the remaining Beneﬁciary'
has become absolutely entitled to the Defeuiting Beneﬁciarys interest in the BCL shares,
and the remaining Beneﬁciarle" complete and exeurte (or procure that its nominee
completes and sxemiea) any document required for such transfer (including a BCL
Share Transfer Form) and provide any other documents or Information required by BCL'e
share registry, and must take any other steps which. in the Trustees opinion, are
necessary to give eﬁect to thetransfer of the remaining BCL Shares. '

(d) A Beneﬁdary mey only nominate a nominee to take transfer at its BCL shares it it
prowree that its nominee timeoust completes and exemtes any document reouired for
such tramfer (including a BCL share Transier Form) and provides any other dowmre'its
or information required by BCL'e share registry, and takes any other steps which, in the
Trustee's opinion, are necessary to g‘ve effect to the transfer of the relevant BCL shares
to the nominee

(e) The Trustee has no obligation to contact either Beneﬁciary Io determine it that Beneﬁciary
wishes to take transfer 01 ECL Shares under this clause 2.5

Risks A01 3552502 we messeer page 5


BCL Shares Trust Deed Aliens 2 4 Linida'iers
(1) The Trustee has no liability tor, and the reievant Beneﬁciary must pay. any Tax arising or
payable in connection with the transfer of the BCL Shares in emdanoe \th this
, dauee 2.5a
2.8 other rights and directions
7 (a) A Beneﬂdary's Interest is subject to the rights and obligations shaming to that Interest.
,, which are spedﬁed in this Deed,
r, (b) Ead} Beneﬁciary agrees notto interiere with any rights or powers at the Tmstee under
this Deed imiudlny in respea of any Asset
' (e) A Beneficiary must not:
_ (I) lodge a caveat enacting any Asset. in respeet of which it has no rights or powers;
or
A (It) take part In the management of the business at the Trust and has no pvwer to
' bind the Trust or other Beneficiaries,
2.7 Duration
The Trust ends 80 years (less one day) alter the Cammeneement Date or at an eerilertime
provided bythis Deed or by Law
3 Transfers and other Dealings
Except to the extent permitted or required by this Deed, a Beneﬁciary‘e Interest or any part or it
Gnciuning any interest in BCL Shares) may net be transferred or otherwke Dealt with unlss the
\ r Trustee consents to such Dealing (whim It may withhold in its ansciute discretion without any
‘ liability In the Tmsl or any Beneficiaries).
4 Net Accounting Income
I \ 4.1 Income eftheTr-ust
The income at the Tmst for each Financial Year will be determined by the Trustee in accordance
with applicable Australian Accounting Standards.
’ 4.2 Expenses and provisions ofthe Trust
For each Financial Year:
(a) the Expenses of the Trust Mil he detenntned In aeonrdanoe with applicable Australian
Accounting Standards; and
(b) pruvistons' or ather transfers tn ortrnm reserves may be made in relation to such items as
the Trushee considers apprapﬁale.
4.3 Net Accounting income
The Net Accounting Income tor each Frnandal Year will be the income at the Trust for that
Financial Year less:
(a) the Expenses. pruvislcns and reserve transfers referred to in clause 4.2. subject to my
other pmdent edlustments In amordence with applicableAuetialian Aeocunh’ng
Standards; and
(b) any Net Accounting Lass (as deﬁned below in this clause) earned forward truth a
preceding Financial Year, v
W—W


BCL Shares Tniet Deed Aliens a < Li nkiate‘ns
adjusting the amount calculated under paragraph (a) by any unrealised gain: or losses (including
revaluation of a capital Asset and the effect of marking to market any derivative contracts) so that

' the Net Accounting income (orthe period may tairiy represent the amount of income of the Trust
available for distribution by the Truatforthat Financial Year. Where the amount is negative it will
‘ _ be the NetAccountlng Loss for that Financial Yeari
444 Net Income
I The Trustee will determine (or muse to be determined) the Not lncornl for each Financial Year
_' in aooordanw with section 35(1) oi the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (0th).
5 Distributions
_ 5.1 Distributable Income
’ (a) subject to paragraph (in), Distributable income at me Trust for each Financial Vea’ is the
Net Accounting Income (as determined in accordance with dense 4.3 for that Financial
’ Year).
(it) The Tmstee may deterrnine‘beiora the end of a Financial Year that the Distributable
income tor a Financial Year will be some other amount inducing an amount eoual to the
Net income for that Financial Year.

5.2 Present entitle mart
On and trom the last day of eadi Financial Year the Beneﬁu‘aries on the Register on the last day
at the ﬁnancial Year have a vested and indeteasibie interest In. and will he presently entitled to.

y the Distriu utabie Income of the Trusttor that Financial Year (less any part of the Distributable
income which has previoust been distributed In that Financial Year as permitted _by this oiause 5)
in the proportion speciﬁed in dause 5.30:).

5.3 Distribution of Distributable Income

(a) The Trustee may determinate make an interim distribution out of Net Accounting income
accruing during any Interim Distribution Period (an Interim Dlstribuﬁon). The Trustee
must within 90 days ct Iha last day of the Interim Distribution Period pay the interim
Distribution in the Beneﬁciaries on the Rageter at the and of the last day at the interim
Distribution Period in the proportion speciﬁed In paragraph (a)

(h) Within 50 days of the end of the Finandal Year. the Trustee must pay to the Beneﬁciaries
on the Register at the end at the last day of that Financial Year an amount equal to the
Distributable Income of the Trust tor the Financial Year less any amouan previousiy
distributed during that Finanu'ai Year under paragraph (a).

(c) A Beneﬁciary an the Register at ihe end of the last day at the Financial Year or lnten‘m
Distnbutlon Period:

(i) for the purposes of dause 5.2, has a vested and Indeteasible interest in. and is
presently entItied to;

(Ii) for the purposes at paragraph (h)I Is enlttied to a distribution or; and

(iii) tor the purposes at paragraph (a). is entitled to an Interim Distribution out at Net
Accounting Income of.

the proportion of the Distn'bmable lnoom e, or such Interim Distribution of Net Accounting

vlncomewhich the Trustee determines to make, as Is equal to the Beneficiary/s Speciﬁed

Proportion on that date.

make Mt3€525021v6 120299997 ‘ me a


so]. Shares Trust Deed Aliens r < Link‘iarers
5.4 capital distributions
The Trustee may dlstrlbute capital at the Trust to the Banaﬁcianes. A Beneﬁciary is emitted to that
proportion of the capital to be distribtned as Is equal to the Speciﬁed Proportion on a date
7 7 determined by the Trusiee. A distribution may be in Cash orofAssets. Where BCL Shares are
transiened in accordance with clause 2.5 to a Beneficiaryor Its nominee. that Beneficiary will be
- treated as having received a distnbution of an amount equal to any capital gain arising upon
transfer a! the ECL Shares bythe Trustee
' H 5.5 Grosser! up Tax amounts
The grossed up amount under the Tax Act in relation in Tax audits or franklng rebates is taken to
be distributed to Beneﬁciaries in proportion to the Disinbutahie Income for a Financiai Year or an
r interim Distrﬂwtlon. as the case may he, vmlo‘i ls referable to a dividend or other income to which
they are presently entitled.
5.6 Exoess distribution
’ it it is determined that. as at the end of a Financial Year. the aggregate amounts that have been
distributed in acwrdenca with misclauss 5 exceedﬂte aoluai Distributable Income tor the
Financial Year, the excess will be taken to be a distribution of capital.
6 Powers of Trustee
6.1 Powers
(a) Subject to clause 6.1 (c), the Trustee has all the powers:
- (i) In respect of the Trust that It is possible under the Law to write! on a trustee:
(II) as though It were the absolute owner at the Assets and acting in Its personal
capacity; and .
(Iii) necessary for fulﬁlling its obligations under this Deed and at Law.
~ (b) Without limiting dause 6l1(a) but subject to clause 6.1(c). the Tmstee's powers include
the following.
(I) To acquire Propeny or dispose d Asseis for Cash or other consideration.
including realising Asses to meet any Liabil‘nie's.
Gt) To develop, improve and otherwise deal With any Assets.
all) To borrow or otherwise obtain financial aooommodation and to incur obligations
and Liabilities.
(iv) To usate Security interests over the Trust Fund or any Asset
(v) To make any kind or Investment L
(vi) To institute, defend and compromise legal promedings. Inauding animations and
' investigations.
(vii) To letter the discretion ot the Trust or Trustee.
' (c) The Trustee must not acercisa any of its powers in a manner contrary to dau5e 6.5 and is
not obliged to do so.
msia Aﬂ13$525021v5 120393997 page a


BCL Shares Trust Deed Aliens» < Linkiaterrs
6.2 Specific powers and authorisation

Wrthaut limiung dause 6.1, the Tmetee ls authorised and dineded to:

(a) enter into the BCL Share Transfer Deed (with any amendmenut that the Trustee and
other parties agree) and perform all its obligations under that deed (including ancept a
transfer bfthe ECL Shares); '

(b) transier the BCL Shares as centemplated by this Deed.

', ‘ L 8.3 Deiegatien
‘9 (a) The Trustee may appoint delegates or agents (Including a custodian to hold the BCL
Shares and any other Assets) to perform any act or exercise any powerat the T rustee
(includirg a pcm/er in turn to appoint he own agent or delegate).
, , (b) An agent or delegate may be an asoclete or employee of the Tmstee,
, , (0) An appointment may be joint

(:1) The Trustee will not be liable tor the acts or omissions 01 any delegate

(e) The Tmstee may vary or revoke any delegation made under paragraph (a) ea the Trustee
thinks tit and may exemise any power in conjunction with or to the temporary or
permanent exclusion oi a delegate.

6.4 Advisers
Without limiting clause 8.1. the Trustee may engage Advisers tn assist itwilh its duties and
‘ functions under this Deedt An Adviser may be an associate or employee of the Trustee or any
Beneﬁciary.
' 6.5 Purpose of Trust and scope of Tmstne‘a duties
(a) The role of the Trustee is to be a passive holder of the BCL Shares subject to this Deed.
' and its primary duty is to deal with the EcL Shares as contemplated by the BCL Snare
Tamer Deed and this Deed and not to otherwise Deal with the BCL Sheree

(b) The Trustee has no duty (0 otherwise invest the Tmst Fund except to hold Cash In bank

accounts opened for that purpose and is not obliged to consider the suitability of the BCL
L Shares as an investment for the TrusL

(c) Also, the Trustee must not vote on any BCL ahereholthr raciuiion. ,

(d) Without limiting clause 9,2, the Trustee is not obliged to make any enquiris regarding the
validity or bone tides oi any dominant signed by or on behalf 2 Beneﬁciary in connection
with the BCL Shares or otherwise in relation to this Deed or a Benettoiary’s Interest

(e) This clause 6.5 applies despite any other provision of this Dead and all other provisions
oi this Deed are In be eonstrued having regard to this clause 65.

(i) To the tuiiest extent permitted by Law. the Trustee has no other duties or obligations
other than ea expressly set out in this Deed and is not required to manage the Trust
Fund, enhanee the value or protect the value of the Trust Fund or to provide any reports
in the Beneﬁciaries,

7 Valuations
7,1 Valuatian of an Asset
Subject to clause 7.2. the Trustee may cause an Asset to be valued at any time.
msirs A01M52502iv512m39997 page it:


BCL Shares Tmst Deed Aliens > : Ltnkiaters
1.2 Valuation if required
The Thistee must cause an Asset to be valued ti requlred by Law and the valuation must be
I undertaken in accordance with the relevant requirements.
: 7.: Valuation matrmd
' The Trustee may determine and vary valuation methods and policies for each category at Asset.
r Unless the Tnxetee detennlnes otherwise. the value of an Asset will be its market value.
‘ 6 Holdlng Assets
All Assets will be held in the name at the Trustee
_ 9 The Trustee’s Limitation of Llablllty
‘ , 9.1 General
To the extent permitted by Law, lithe Tmstee eels without fraud, dishonesty or breach of trust the
Tnistee is not liable for any Lise to any person (including any Beneﬁciary) arising out at any
matter relating to, or connected wllh. the Trust In any case. to the maximum extenl permltted by
Law. the liablle of the Tmstee In relation to the Trust is limited tn the Assets (Including the BCL
Shares). from which the Taniee Is entitled to be, and Is In fad, indemniﬁed.
9.2 Speciﬁc
, For the avoidance of doubt. to the extent pennlned by Law. the Tmstee ie not liable for any Loss
to any person arising out of any matter where, In respect of that matter:
(a) it relied In good Ialth on the services of. or Information or advice from. or purporting to be
from. any person appolnted by the Tmstee; or
(b) it acted or retrained tram acting as required by Law; or
(c) it relied In good faith on any slgrature. marking or dowments; or
‘ (d) It acted in accordance with a directan from a Beneﬁciary In accordance with clause 2.5.
10 tndem nitles
' 10.1 Trustee's indemnity
In addition to any indemnity under any Law the Trustee has a right of Indemnity out of the Trust
Fund on a futl Indemnity basis. In respect oi any liability Incurred by the Trustee In perinrrrtlng or
exercisan any of Its powers or duties in relation to the Trust (In accordance with this Deed).
, Includan any Ilablllty incurred in acting In accordance with a direction from a Beneﬁciary in
accordaneewilh clause 2.5.
10.2 Trustee's Indemnity continuan
Such right of Indemnlty in reaped of a matter (an Indemniﬁed Matter) will not be lost or Irmalred
by reason of a separate matter (whether before or aﬂer the indemniﬁed Matter) In reaped of
which the indemntty does not apply. Also. the right of Indemnity continues to be available alter the
Trustee rellra or is removed as trustee of the Trust.
10.3 Payment »
The Tmstee may pay out at the Trust Fund any amount for whim It would be entliied to be
Indemnllled under clause 10.1,
. msies Autseszsoztvs 122392997 page 11


BCL Shares Trust Deed Aliens > ‘ L'lnklaters
10.4 The Trustee not to incur liability
The Trustee Is not required to do anything (including enter Into any contract or commitment)
I which Involves it incurring any liability (actual Dr contingent) unless its liabllity ls nmlled In a
. manner satisfactory to it In Its absolute discretion;
10.5 Rightof indemnity not affected by an unrelated breach
Where a liability Is Incurred by the Trustee In performing or exercising any of its powers or duties
in relation to the Trust (in accordance with this Deed), the Trustee may exercise any of its rights
, to be indemniﬁed or reimbursed out at the Trust Fund to rhea that ilablllty. It may do so despite
any loss incurred In relation to ma Trust or any reduction in the value of the Assels arising from
any unrelated act or omission by the Trustee or by any person suing on behalf of the anstee.
10.6 Indemnity under Law
‘ The Indemnltles conferred under this clause 10 are in addition to any Indemnity allowed by or
arising under any Law.
‘ I 11 Change oiTrustee
,‘ 11.1 Voluntary retirement
Subject to clause 11.2, the Trustee may retire on not less than 75 Busines Days' notlce to
Beneﬁciaries (or such shorter period as they agree). On retirement, the Tnetee may appoint In
writing another person to be the trustee.
11 .2 Compulsory retirement
The Trustee must retire as the trustee of the Trust when required by Law.
11 .8 New Trustee
Any repleoementtrustee must execute a deed by which It covenants to be bound by this Deed as
r it had originally been a party to It. The Trustee must also be a party to that dead and agree to
do all things reasonably necessary to iaoililate the change oi tmstm.
1 1 .4 Release
When the Tmstee retires or is removed. subjea to clause 11.3. the Trustee Is released trorn all
obligations and duties In relation to the Tmst arising after the time it retires or ls removed.
11.5 Retirement beneﬁt
The Trustee is entitled to be paid by. or reoeive a beneﬁt trom, the incoming trustee or any other
person tor:
(a) agreeing to submit a proposal for Its retirement to a meeting of Beneﬁciaries. and
nominating to the Beneficiaries the Incoming trustee as its replacement; or
_ (b) retiring as trustee,
and is not required to aooount to Beneﬁciaries ior such payment or beneﬁt. The Beneﬁnlerla
consent to the Trustee receiving any such payment or beneﬁt. The Tmstee Is also entitled to sell
part or all at Its business reiatlng h: managing the Trust to the incoming trustee (or any related
~ body corporate or assodete oi the incoming trustee) for any consideration the parties may agree
and the Eenaiciaries consent In It doing 50.
mars Aotseusoztvs 120mm ‘ page 12


ecr. Shares Trust Deed Aliens > < Link'iarers
12 Amend menls’to Deed
12.1 General
Sublet: to ciause12.z, the TrLetee may amend this Deed (including this clause) by deed.
/ 12.2 Limits an amendment:
, The rights or obligations oi Beneﬁciaries cannnt be attered In any way without the Mitten consent
_ of all Beneﬁciaries. except to the extent required to comply With a Law or to avoid a penaity or
other Imposition on the Trustee or the Trust
L 13 Statements, Accounts and Audit
 13.1 Appointment of aucﬁtors
, y The Trustee may, and it required by Law must. appoint a registered company auditor to audit the
Trust‘s financial report tar a Financial Year and pertbrm the other duties required of the auditor
under this Deed.
_ 13.2 Retirement Mauditore
The Trust Auditor may retire or be removed in awordance with its terms at engagement or as
agreed with the Trustee.
13.3 Remuneration at auditors
The remuneration of the Trust Auditor will be ﬁxed by the Trustee.
13.4 Accounts .
The ﬁnancial statements at the Trust must be kept and prepared by the Trustee in accordance
with applicable Australian Accounting Standards (ii applicable). or atherwise as determined by the
Trustee. '
13.5 Audit
it required by Law. the Trustee will cause the Trust Audiinr to audit and report on the manual
Statements [sum in the manner required by the Corporations Ad to the extent it applies).
1 4 Service of Documents
14.1 Service on the Beneﬁciaries
(a) Any notice, demand, consent or other communication (a Notice) given o_r made to a
Beneficiary underthis Deed:
(i) must be in writing and signed by me Trustee or a person duly authorised by the
Tmstee (or in the case or email, set out the tuii name and position or title at the .
Trustee or personduly authorised by the Trustee);
(it) must be delivered m the Bena'iciary by prepaid post (it posted to an address In
another country. by registered airmail) or by hand. fax or email to the address. fax
number or email address below. or the address. tax number or email address pi e
Beneﬁciary; atmrney as speciﬁed by the Beneﬁciary in a notice given under
paragraph (b):
(A) to ABG:
Attention: Ofﬁce of the President. Autonnmous Bougainviile Gui/emment
Address: Po. Box 322. Suite. Monmous Region of Bougaimliile. 355
mske Amssszsczm tzoaeesw page (2.


ECL Shares Tru§ Deed Aliens ) < Linkiat‘ers
Fax No: +375 973 9057
‘ Ema“?  W
, ’ (B) to PNG:
' Attention: Anthony Leiimer, Steve Johns
' Address: d< Norton Ruse FulbrighlAustraiia, Level 16. Grosvenor Place.
225 George Street. Sydney NSW 2000
- ~ Fax No: +51 2 9330 3111
- Email: anthgmglmeugnoﬂbnroﬂginmm,mrn,
staveﬁhnﬂnommgsgfulﬁﬂgmmm
\ (Iii) will be taken to be duly given or made:
(A) In the me otdeiivery in persun. When delivered;
(B) in the case of delivery by post, on the third Business Day after the date 01
, posting (it posted to an address in the same wuniry) or on the with
Business Day aﬁerlhe date of posting (if posted in an address in another
wuntry); and
(C) in the case of fax, on receipt by the sender of a transmission annual
report from the despelcning machine showing the relevant number at
page: and the correct destination fax number or name 911‘ recipient and
indicating that the transmission has been made wilhout error.
(D) in the lass of email, the eanleraf:
(1) the time that the Beneﬁciary receives an email from the recipient
conﬁrming reoeipi oi the email: and
(2) the time that the Beneﬁdary receives an automated message
from the intended recipient‘s information system conﬁrming
delivery of the emalll
but lithe result is that a Notice would be taken 10 be given or made on a day that.
is not a business day in the place speciﬁed by the Beneﬁciary as its postal
address under clause 14.1(a) or:
(E) in the use of delivery by hand‘ past or tax at a limsﬂia‘i is later than
5.00%: Dr
(F) in the vase of delivery by email, 51 a time that is later then 7.00pm,
in lhe place speciﬁed by the Beneﬁuiary as its pnsiai address under thls clause
141(2). it will be conclusiver taken II: have been duly given or made at the start
of business on the TIM business day In that place.
0:) By written notice left ai'nr sent to the registered ofﬁce of the Truslae urthe Trustee's
securities registry. a Beneﬁdary may request that all documents to be given by the
Trustee be served on the Baneﬁdary‘s attorney at an address, or by the electronic
means. nominated in the miles.
14.2 Service an the Trustee
(a) Any native, demand, consent or nther communication (a Nodes) given or made to the
Trustee under this Deed:
mks Antssszsozws 120329997 pegs 14


BCL Shares Trust Deed Aliens ) < Linkiai'ers
(i) must be in writing and signed by the Beneﬁciary or a person duly amhorised by
. the Beneﬁciary (or In the case of email. set out the full name and position or title
_ of the Beneﬁciary or person duly authorised by the Beneﬁa‘ary);
‘ _ GD must be delivered to the Trustee by prepaid pom (it posted to an address in
, another country, by registered airmail) or by hand. fax or email to the address. tax
_ number or email address below. or the address, fax number or email address last
‘ notified by the Trustee to the Beneﬁciary:
, ‘- Attention: Harvey Kalrrran. Btewtive General Manager
* r Address: Equity Trustees Limited. Level 2, 575 Bonita Street Melboume
Victoria 8000 Australia
-. Fax No: +51 3 8623 5200
' Email: HKaIrnan@eqt.wm.au
(Ill) will be taken to be duly given or made when received by the Trustee.

, (b) The signature to any document or other communication by the Tmstee may be written.
printed, stamped or produced eiearenioally and the signature may be that of the Tmstee
or of any director or secretary of the anstea.

15 Procedure After a Termination Event
15.1 Notice ofwlndlng up ‘
The Trustee must give Beneﬁciaries notice at a Termination Event as soon as possible anar it
has occurred. The notice must provide reasonable details of the Termination Event and
summarise the procedures contemplated try this clause 15.
' 152 Reallsatlon oanrst Fund .
Subject to clause 15.4, as soon as plactlcahle alter g‘wlng at the notice under dause 15.1 the
Tmstee must sell or realise the Assets in such manner as the Tmstee considers appropriate.
15: Final distribution
(a) The Net Proceeds From Reallsation must be distribtned among the Beneficiaries In the
Specified Proportion, The Tastes may make more than one distribution under this
clause. The Trustee is authorised to give notice Lnder sectioned or the Trustee Act
1925 (NSW) and equivalent provisions in other legislation before making any distributions
under this clause,
(b) This dausedoes not limit clause 15.5,
154 Postponement at realisation
The Trustee may postpone the sale or realisation or any Asst for as long as it thinks it is ,
desirable to do so in the interests at Beneﬁciaries, To the extent permitted by Lawme Trustee will
not be responsible for any Loss attributable to the postponement.

‘ 15.5 Retention of property

The Trustee may retain tor as long as it thinks ﬁt suﬁioient Assets as. In its opinion. may be
required to meet any outgoian or liabilities (actual or contingent) in respect of the Tmt if any
Asset retained B ultimately found not to be required, then it must be distributed to the '
Beneﬁciaries in accordance with this dense 15,

msks A0138525021v512a3l29w7 page 15


EICL shares Trust Deed Aliens ) c Linklaters
15.6 Continuation of powers
The pcrrvere. duties and rights at the Trustee (Including the rights to remuneration‘andta any
, ‘ indemnltles under this Deed or the Law) continua following 3 Termination Eventto the extent to
, _ which they are net inouhsislenl with this clause 15.
1 6 Fees
\ 16.1 Trustee Fees
' r The Trustee ls entitled to be paid a fee at “100.000 (plus GST).
‘ Subject to clause 18.7, the lee is payable out 9f the Trust Fund and is payable at a time agreed
with the Settlor.
* 16.2 Expense:
Subject to clause 16.7. ell Expenses inclined or payable by the Trustee in connection with the
Trust or In performing Its obligations under this Deed can be paid out at or reimbursed from the
Trust Fund. Amounts payable under this dause162 are in addition to fees payable under this
clause 16 and rights to indemniﬁoaliun or reimbursement eenfermd under this Deed or by Law
16.3 Fees paid to Trustee in a different capacity
The Trustee may be paid a fee or receive any other consideration, beneﬁt or relm bureament In
connection with the Tant in any capacity, including its personal caoedty. ii and to the extent that
the Trustee undertakes any wnrk In mmeciion with the Trust In any capacity other then as the
- trustee of the Trust, the Tmsiee may keep any odnslderalion It receives tor that work and is net
required to account for the consideralicn to the Trust or Beneﬁciaries.
18.4 Recovery of GST
‘ The fees payable to the Trustee under this Deed do nut include any amount referable to GST. ti
, GST is payable In respect df any supply made by the Trustee under or In connection with this
Dad, the Trustee ls entitled to be paid as additional wnslderation an amount equal to the
amount of GST payable on that supply (the GSTAmount). The Trustee will be entitled to be
reimbursed or Indemnified tar such amount out of the Trust Fund.
165 Liability Net at GST
Where any indemnity. reimbursement or similar payment under this Dead is based an any cost,
expense or other liability, R shall be reduced by any input Tax Credit entitlement In relation to the
relevant cost. expense or other liability.
16.5 Adjustment events
it an adjustment event ODWI’S in relation in a supply made under or In connection with this Deed,
the GST Amount will be recalculated to reﬂect that adiustmmt and an apprbpriete payment will
be made between lhe parties.
16.7 Payment at Fees and Expeneee
‘ Without limiting clause 19.1. the Trustee is authorised to receive payment of the Trustee Fee by,
and reimbursement of menses from. the settler (or a related body corporate of the Settlor). The '
Trustee is also authorised to enter Into an agreement reieting to sum payments.
WmW—m—W


BCL Shares Tmst Deed Aliens 3 « Linki'aters
11 Beneﬁciary'e Liability
‘ y 5 17.1 Liability
I 7 To the extent permitted by Law. no Beneﬁciary will, in its capacity as Beneﬁdary, be personally
liable for any obligation of. or liability incurred by. the Tnistee and:
' (e) a Eeneﬁdary Is nut required in indemnify the Trustee or e creditor oi the Tmstee against
any liability oi the Trustee In relation to the Trust; and
' (b) the recourse of the Trustee and any aredltnr at the Tmetee is ﬂmlted to the Assets.
Exoept as egtpresiy provided. nnthing' in this need makes the Trustee the went ate Beneﬁciary
rmr does it create any relationship between the Trustee and Bad-i Beneﬁciary other than that oi
, - trustee and beneﬁciary. -
17.2 Limitation oiliabllity
_ To the extent permitted by Law. eedt Beneﬂdery's-Iiablliiy to the Trustee 'or the Trust is limited to
I the amount, it any. Whid-i the Beneﬁciary is liable to the pay the Tmslee under this Deed. This is
subjed to any separate agreement between a Beneﬁciary end the Trustee
13 other Activities and Obligations of the Trustee
18.1 Other activities
The Trustee (in any eapau‘ry) or its related bpdles eorpurale or other associates may:
‘ (a) deal Milt the Tmstee (as trustee) or with any Beneficiary; or .

(b) be interested In any centred, transaction, or matter with the Trustee (as trustee)
(including any dowments or arrangements spedﬂ'ed in clause 52 or with any
Benet-diary): 'or

(c) act a trustee or responsible entity in relation to any other trust or managed investment
scheme; or

((1) deal with any entity in whim the Tmstee holds an investment nn behalf oi the Trust; or

(e) undertake any other business activity (Including any edit/ides relating to Property or an
investment In whim the Trust may have an interest).

and:

(I) none of them, unless they have oontrerxed otherwise. has any ohligatien (a presenter

' grant any right over any Property to the Tmst; and .

(g) in each cese set nut in paragraphs (a) in (e) iheTrustee (or any associate) may retain far
its own beneﬁt all proﬁts or benefits derived from mat activity and each Beneﬁciary
consents to any such dealing. interest er activity.

13.2 other obiigaﬂars
Al obligations of or duties on the Trustee or restrictions on Its power which might otherwise be
implied by Law are expressly excluded to the extent permitted by Law

19 Payments

19.1 Money payable

Money payable by the Tmstee to e Beneficiary may be paldJn any manner the Trustee decides.

Unless the Trustee decides otherwise, payments will be made by eiedmnlc transfer to en_

eomunt nominated by the Beneficiary. If e Beneﬁciary dues not numinate an aoeomrt then the

mske A0118525021v51203ﬂ397 page 17


BCL Shares Trust Deed Aliens » < Linkiafers
Tmsiee s not opliged to make the payment by cheque or other means and clause 192 will he
' taken to appty to the payment.
r \ 19.2 Failed payments
Where the Tmstee attempts to make a payment to a Beneﬁciary by eieotronictransier oi funds
' ' and the transfer is Linsuooessiul three times the money may be:
\ (2) held bythe Trustee for the beneﬁt of the Beneficiary: or
(b) paid by the Tmee In accordance Min applicable unclaimed money Iwislaiionr
‘ ' However. the Tmstee may also then dmw a cheque In favour at the Beneﬁciary.
Ifthe Trustee decides to make any payments to Beneﬁciaries by cheque, the Trustee may cancel
any cheque that Is not presented within six Momhs of iis date In that I356. the Trustee may take
either of the actions described above“
_ This clause apples to any other method of payment selected by the Trustee (wim any necessary
’ arranges to take account oithat means of payment).
19.3 Deductions for Tax or other payments .
The Trustee may deduct from any amount payable to a Benetio‘ary or former Emeﬁoiary (or
received from a Benéiciary or former Beneﬁciary) any amount of Tax or other payment (or an
estimate or it) whlch the Trustee reasonably believes it must or should deduct, in resped of that
Beneﬁciary or iormer Beneﬁciary
2 19.4 Information from Beneﬁciaries
r ‘ (a) Each Beneﬁciary must provide to the Trustee any iniormation requested by the Trustee
(Required Infomarion) in a notice sent to the Beneﬁciary (3 Required inlormariolr
Requeso.
(b) Subied to paragraph (c):
(i) the Trustee may Issue Required Information Requests at any time and may issue
_ supplementary Required Information Requests seeking more Imormation: and
' (II) each Beneﬁciary authorises the Trustee to use Required Inionnaiion in any way.
Including providing itto third parties.
(a) The Trustee may only issue a Required Information Requst if It believes the Required
lniormatlon Is neoessarylo:

G) comply with any law 01 Australia (including AML Legislation), Papua New Guinea
orany othariurisdiotion or a request for information by a Government Authority
wharethat request is binding on the Tmstee: or

(It) avoid amounts being withheld from any payments to the Trust or any Eerieflo‘ary:

(ill) give efied to the transfers of BCL Shares contemplated bythls Dead: or

(iv) lessen the risk at the Tmst or any Beneﬁdary suffering a material deirlmern

- (whether or not ﬁnancial)
and the Required Information Requatspedﬁes a reasonable period within which the
Beneﬁciary must prow‘de the Required Information.
(6) Ii any Required information is not proyided by the Beneficiary within the time and In the
manner speciﬁed in a Required Information Request then. despite any other provision oi
v this Deed. the Beneficiary must indemnify the Tmstee for any Loss suﬁared by the
Trustee in relation to the Beneﬁciarys isllura to provide the Required Information
make A0i3852502‘w5120399957 page 15


act. Shares Trust Deed Aliens 2 < Linkiaters
(a) Each Beneﬁu‘ery undertakes that any payme'tt of money by the Trustee in accordance
_ with instructions provided by the Beneﬁciary (or any agent at the Beneﬁciary) will not
., * breadn any iaw ofAustrelYa or any olherjurisdlmlon.
' r (t) The Trustee may enter into agreements with any Government Authority in any jurisdiction
I where the Trustee beiieves' it is reasonably necessary to do so to:
(l) evoid amounts being withheld from any payments to the Trust or any Be'teﬁclery: ‘
Dr
\ GI) lessen the risk of the Trust or any Beneficiary s'uﬂert'ng a material detriment
(whether or not ﬂnena‘el).
(g)' If the Tmstee ls required to provide any information abort Beneﬁdarles under any Law
I then, to the extent permitted by Law, each Beneﬁciary consents to the Trustee providing
, that Information.
- 20 Govemlng Law and Jurisdiction
This Deed is governed by the exclusive laws of \ﬁotoria a'nd is not governed by the laws of any
_ otherjurisdiaioni In relation to it and related non-centennial matters the Trustee and each
Beneﬁciary irrevocabiy submits to the exclusivejurtsdlction of coins with Jurisdiction there. and
waives any right to object to the venue on any ground.
21 Soverebllity
ii any provision of this Deed Is held oriourrd to be void, invalid or otherwise unenforoaable under
the laws at Victoria, then so much of it as is necessary in render ‘It valid and eniorcaable is
deemed to be severed but the remainder of this Deed remains in tuil force and effect. This Deed
' Is not to be constlusd In accordance with the laws at any other Jurisdidion.
msksltﬂt35525021v512039ﬂ97 [$9319


BCL Shams Trust Deed Aliens z < LinkTa’rers
Schedule 1

BCL Share Transfer Deed

MAMMSZEOEM 120359387 2&6 2D"! 33.53920


Ailens > z L1nk1afers
I Rio mm Limited
 Rlo 11m London lel‘ed
Rio Time Base Metals Ply, Umlted
' \ Equity Tnsises Llrr'med in ns (apacﬁy as trustee unne BCL Shares Trust

Share Transfer Deed

Demsche Bank Place

Coma Hunter and mum» 81:99::

Sydney NSW 2000 Ausuaiia

T +51 2 9230 4000

F ‘61 2 9230 5333

www.3llem‘wmau

a mum...“

Alrnmnuwumnﬁbmmmmwmmmw.


Share Transfer Deed Aliens > < Linklaters
Contents

1 Deﬁnitions and lnlnrprotaﬁon 1

' ‘ 1.1 Deﬁnitions 1
, 1.2 Imarprelatiun 2
1.3 Consents or approvals 3
' 2 Transfer of the Tranarsr sum: 3

3 Compleﬂon 3

s. - 3.1 Completion obﬂgauons 3

_ _ 3.2 interdependency 4
A Representations and warranties 4

_ 4.1 Raprasemaiions and warranties of the Tmnsfamrs 4

‘ ‘y 4.2 Representatlors and warranties of the Tmnaferee 5

5 Limitation of Liability of Transfst 5

' 5 Medea: 6
- 7 General provisions 7
~ 7.1 Costs and duty 7

12 No merger 7

7.3 Assignment 7

7.4 Further Numws 7

7.5 Entire Dead 8

7.6 No walver 8

7.7 Sevembiiity of provisions 8

7.8 Governing law and jurisdiction 8

7.9 Counterparts 8

Execution paga 9

msks Au135525667v7120399997 page (i)


Share Transfer Deed Al léns a < Lin Haters
This Dead I: made on
I ‘ Parties
7 V 1 Rio Tinto Limited (ACN 004 458 404) of Level 33. 120 Collins Street, Melbourne, VIC 3000
(RTL),
2 Rio Tinto London Limited cf 6 St James's Square London SW1Y 4A0, United Kingdom .
3 RIO TIMI: Bash Metals Pty lelﬁd (ACN OD]! 489 2021):)? Level 33, 120 Collins slimy
‘ / Melbourne, VIC mo.
(each entity in 1, 2V and 3 above being a Transferw and together the Transistors)
_ ’ 4 Equity Trustees Limited (ACN 004 031 298) of Level 2, 575 Bourke St. Melbourne Vic 3000 In
its capacity as trustee of the BBL Shares Tmst (the Transferae).
/ Recitals
A Each Transfsror is the regstered holder and beneﬁcial owner of its Transfer Shares.
B The Translators have agreed to trans-fertile Transfer shares to the Transtaree for no
consideration. and the Transferee has agreed to acquire the Transfer shares from the
Transferors. on the terms at this Deed.
_ c The Securities CommISion has Issued an exemption which perran the Transferee to acquire a
Relevant interest in the Transfer Shares under this Deed.
it is agreed $i'ollcws. .
1 Deﬁnitions and interpretation
I 1.1 Deﬂniﬂ one
The following deflnltiom ap'ply unless the uomext requires otherwise.
_ Business Day means a day other than a Saturday, Sunday or public holiday in Melbourne.
Victoria, Australia
I Company means Bougainvitle Copper Limited (Company No. 1-1895).
Cornerriorr means completion of the obligations of the parties under clause 3.1.
Completion Dare means the date scheduled for Completion. being the date of this Deed or such
* later date as may be agreed by the parties in writing.
Corporations Act means the Australian Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
Deed means this document, including any schedules or annexure lg ll.
Insolvency Em! means. for a person:
(a) being in liquidation or provisional liquidation or under administration;
(b) having a controller (as deﬁned in the Corporations Act) or analogous person appointed to
y it or any of its property;
(6) being taken under section 459F(1) of the Corporations Act to have fallen to comply wlth a
statutory demand:
((1) being unable to pay its debts or otherwise insolvent:
makx A0135525467v712m99997 pager


Share Transfer Deed Aliens : < Linklater's
(a) taking of any step that could restlt in the person becoming an insolvent under
administration:
- (i) entering into a compromise or anargement with. or assignment for the benefit of. any at
V _ its members or creditors generally. or
r (‘9) any analogous event under the laws of any applicable Jurisdiction
Relevant Interest has the meaning glven‘tn that term in the Takeovers code.
I , 7 Rio ﬂnmswvlces means Rio Trnto Services Limited (ACN 004 219 736).
I, L Sesame: Commission means the Securities Commission of Papua New Guinea,
Security Interest means an Interest or power:
(a) reserved In or over any interest in any asset imitating. withom limitation, any retention of
' , title: or
(b) orealed or otherwise arising In or over any lnteres In any asset under a bill of sale.
' mortgage. charge, lien. pledge, tmst or power by way of security tor the payment of debt
- r ' or any other monetary obligation or the entoroement at any otherohligation and whether
or not existing or agreed to be gamed or treated.
I share means 2 fully paid ordinary share issued in the capital of the Company,
some Reylnry means the company‘s Australian share registry services provider,
Computershere Investor Services Pty Ltd.
Subsidiary has the meaning given in the Corporations Act. v
Takeovers code means the Takeovers Code 1998M the independent State of Pepue New
Guinea
Transits! Snares means:
(a) with reaped to RTL: 211.774.646 Shares togemer with the beneﬁt of all rights (mdudtng
dividend rights) attached or accruing to these Shares as at me time of Completion:
(b) with respect to Rio Tints London Limited: 45.991 Shares together with the beneﬁt of all
rights (Including dividend rights) attached or accruing to those Shares as at the time at
Compieiion; and
(c) with respea to Rio Tmto Base Metsis Pty Limited: 4.099.452 Shares together with the
beneﬁt of all rights (including dividend rights) shamed or seeming to those shares as at
the time of Completion
‘ 1.: Interpretation
Headings are for convenience only and do not aﬁect interpretation. The following rules appry
‘ untese the context reqLIres otherwise,
(a) The singular indudes the plural, and the converse also applies.
(h) Agender includes ail genders.
(c) if e word or phrasa is defined. its other grammatical forms have a corresponding
meaning.
(d) A reference to a person indudas a corporation. trust. partnership. unlnmrporeted body or
other entity, whether or not it comprises a separate legal entity.
(2) A reference to a clause or sdreduie is e referenoe to a ciause of or a schedule to this
Deed.
mm A013€525487V7 129599997 page 2


Share Transfer Deed Aliens > ( Linkiaterrs

(f) A reference to a Dead or dominant (including a reference to this Deed) ls tothe Deed or
document as amended, supplemented, novsted or replaced. except to the extent
prohibited by this Dead or that other Dead or document

(9) A reference to writing lndudes any method of represean or reproducing words, ﬁgures.

/ drawings, or symbols In a visible or tangible form.

(n) A reference to a party to this Deed or another Deed or document Includes the Denys

successors. permitted substitutes and permitted assigns (and. where applicable. the
/ ' _ party‘s legal personal representatives).

‘ ' (l) A reference to legislation or to a provision of legislation Includes a modiﬁcation or re
enactment of it. a legislative provision substituted for it and a regulation or slatutory
instrument Issued under it.

(i) Mentionlng anything after lndudes, including, for example. or similar expressions, does

I not limit what else might be included. '
(It) Neil-Era in this Deed is to be interpreted against a party solely on the should that the
* paw puttorward this Dead or any part of it.
(i) A reference to any time is a referenm to that time in Melbourne. Victoria. Australia
' 1 .3 Consents or approvals
if the doing of any act, matte or thing under this Deed ls dependent on the consent or approval of
a party or is within the discretion of a party. the consent or approval may be given or the
_ discretion may be exercised oondlllahally or unconditionally or withheld by the party in its
absolue discretion.
2 Transfer of the Transfer Shares
L (a) anh Transieror as legal and beneﬁcial ownertransfers its Transfer Shares free from all
Security interests and the Transieree smokes the Transfer Shares for no consideration,
In each case on the lame sat out In this Deed.

(b) Trtle to and property in the Transfer shares remain solely with the relevant Transistor
until Completion and. subjxt to the provisions of this Deed. passes to the Trensieree
with eiieDt from Completion.

3 Completion
» 3.1 Completion obligations

On the Completion Date:

_ (a) each Transteror must deliver to the Transieree a duly executed transfer form In
registrable form, in favour of the Transferea, fortha Transferot’s Transfer Shares;

(b) the Transferee must only exewte the transfer forms received under clause 3.1(a):

(c) aao‘t Transfemr must make evaliablefor inspection by the T ransferee all other
documents and information which:

(I) the Trar‘eferor has been informed are required by the Share Registry In order to
, register the Translates on the Company/s share register- 5 the holder ct the
Transferofs Transfer Shares: and
(II) relate to the Transferer;
(d) the Trensieree must make available for inspection by the Transiemrs:
__._—______.__——____—.
make wtasszstem tznaesew me 3


Share Transfer Deed Allen‘s ; « Linktaterrs
0) all such other domments and information whldi:
(A) the Transferee has been informed are required by the share Registry in
‘ order to reglner the Transferee as the legat owner ofthe Transtercrs
’ , Transfer Shares: and
(E) retates to the Transfereet
1 (e) unless already provided to the T rensteree. each Transferor must deliver to the Transferee
,, ENVY 0f the hdtﬁng state‘nent(5) which $010545) ownership of all or the Transferors
, ‘ Tranﬂer Shaes; and
/ (f) the T ransieree and the Transforms must then Immediately deliver In person to the
Company’s relationship manager at the Share Registry (or. ttthat manager Is not
\ available. to an employee who reports to that manager):
: (i) the transfer terms {or the Transfer Shares v/nioh have been executed by the
Transterurs and bythe Transferee; and
_ (II) the documents referred to in clauses 3.1(c) and 3.1(d),
L 3.2 interdependency
L The obligations of the parties under clause 3.1 are interdependent. Completion does not occur
unless and until all at the anions in dates 8.1 have occurred
4 Representations and warranties
4.1 Representations and warranties of the Transforms

As at the date of this Deed. as at Completion. and (unless speciﬁed otherwise) at all times until

Completion, each Transteror represents and warrants to the Transferee that on of the (allowing

statements is true. accurate and not misleading with resped to itself (and in addition RTL

warrantsthet each statement is true. acwrate and not mlsieadng with respect to eem

Transfetor):

(a) (bady corporate) the Transistor Is a body corporate validly existing and duly established
under the laws of its place or its organisation:

- , (in) (capacity) the Transferor has full legal capacity and power to enter into this Deed and to
perform Its obligations underthls Deed:

(c) (authority) the Transferor has taken. or will have taken by the ﬁrm required. all corporate
salon that is necessary to authorise its entry into this Deed and the performance of its
obligations underthls Deed; ‘

(d) (power to sell) the Transtemr has the corporate authority and power to sell all of its
Transt Shares under this Deed and no person has a right. whether contingent or
other-Wee. to purchase one be after-ed for purchase all 01 It: Tmnster Shares. or any of
them. and there Is otherwise no restriction on me transfer at its Transter Shares to the
Translates on the terms of this Deed:

, (9) (document attentive) this Deed (Institutes a legal, valid and bindan obligation of the
Transfemr:

(t) (ownership) the Transteror is the legal and benefidel owner at its Transfer Shares free
from all Security interests and any other third party rights;

(9) (mnklng) to the best of its knowiedge. the Transrsror's Transfer shares rank equally In at]
respeds with all other Sheree;

W


share Transfer Deed Allen's; < Linkiaférs
(n) (no trust) the Transfemr Is not entering lntu this Deed es irustee'af any trust or
settlement; and
' ‘ (i) (somncy) the Transfardr is not subject to an insolvency Event.
4.2 Representations and warranties of the Transforee
_' 'As at the date afthis Deed. as at Completion. and (unless speciﬁed otherwise) at all times until
completion. the Transieree represents and warrants h: each Transiemr that each at the lollawing
, statements is true. accurate and mi misleading:
5 (a) (validly existing corporation) Equity Trustees Limited is a corporation duly Inaorporeted
and yalldly existing under the laws or the place at Rs incorporation:
(b) (validly existing trust) the BCL Shares Trust is duly established and validly subsisting;
_’ (c) (painter) Equity Trustees Limited is empowered by the trust deed of the ESL Shares Trim
to enter into and perform its obligations under this Deed In its capacity as trustee of the
’ BBL shares Trust:
‘ (d) (authority) Equity Trustees Limited has taken, ar will have taken by the time required, all
_ action that Is necessary to authorise Its entry Into this Deed and the perinrmaneeef its
obligations under this Deed: and
(9) (document aﬁeetive) this Deed constitutes a‘iegal, valid and binding obligation of the
Trensferee.
5 umitatlon of Liability of Transit-area
’ (a) The Transiemrs agree that the TrarSteree enters into this Deed in its capacity as trustee
oi the BoL Shares Trust and in no other capacity.
(b) The Transierors agree that the liability at the Transferee in the Transiemrs. their officers,
or agents or any other persan under or arts'mg out of this Deed In relation to the BCL
Shares Trust is limited to the amuLnt that the Transferee adualry receives in the exercise
at Its right of indemnity against the BCL shares Twat.
‘ (c) The Transremrs may enlaree their rights underlhla Deed against the Transferee only to
the extent of the Transieree'e right at indemnity out of the assets at the BCL Shares-
Trust.
(a) tithe Translators dn not recover all money owing to it by enfurdng the rights referred to
In clause 5(a) it may nut seek to recover the shortfall by:
(i) bringing proceedings against the Transferee In its personal capacity; or
, (ll) applying to have the Transferee wound up or proving in the winding up of lhe
Transferee unless another creditor has Initiated proceedings to wind up the
Transferee,
(e) The Transiamrs waive their rights and release the Tmnsteree from any personal liability
whatsoever, in respect of any loss or damage which:
(i) it may sutter as a result at the Transieree's non-perfennanee of its obligations
and liabilities under this Deed; and
(ii) mnnot he paid or satisﬁed cut of the assets or the BCL shares Trust out of which
the Transferee ls entiiied to be indemnified In reaped at any liability Incurred es
the inietee.
(f) r The limitation in this clause 5 dues not app»; to the extent that any ilabllity arises from
fraud or breach or trust by the Trenslieree as trustee oi the BCL Shares Trust. For these
mm Aﬂi55525467v7 (251399991 par.- 5


Share Transfer Deed Aliens M Li n idafers
purposes. it is agreed that the Trensteree eannot be regarded as having acted
fraudulently or in breach of trust to the extent to whim the fraud or breach of trust has

. _ been caused or contributed to by ataliure of the Transforms to fulﬁl their obligations
r r under this Deed or any other act or omission of the Transterors or any other person.
' (9) Nothing In clause 5(f) shall make the Tmnsteree liable to any claim for an amoum greater
r than the amount which the Transferee wauld have been ableto dairn and recover trern
the ESSE at the BCL Shares Tmst in relation to the relevant liabllny W the Transferee's
- right of indemniﬁcation out 01 the assets of the BCL Shares Trust had not been prejudiced
- I by the Transieree‘s Iallure to properly pedann its duties.
(h) The Transteree is not obliged ta do or retrain from doing anything underths Deed
(Including lnour any liability) unless the Transteree's liability is limited in the same manner
as set out in paragraph (a) to (g) of this clause 5.

- (l) The Tramterors acknowledge and agree that in respect at any Ileblnty or obligation
Incurred by the Transferee under or aming out of this Deed, it shall not be permitted to
set off liabilities or obligations against it nor have any recourse to, the assets at any
managed lnintnent scheme or tmsl for which the Tmnsteree has been appointed as

‘ responsible entity or nustee. other'than the BCL Shares Trust. 1
' (I) This clause 5 applies despite any other provision In this Deed and extends to all liabilities
and obligations of the Transieree in any way connected with any representations.
warranty. conduct. omission. agreement or transaction related to this Deed. In the event
of any Inconsistency. this dause 5 prevails.
6 Notices
Any notice. demand. consent or other communication (a Notice) given or made under this Deed:
(a) must be in writing and signed by the sender or a person duly authorised by the sender (or
in the case of small. set out the full name and position or title 01 the sender 01' person duty
authdrlseci by the sen ﬂu);
(b) must be dd‘wered to the intended recipient by prepaid post (it posted to an address in
- another country, by registered airmail) or by hand. tax or email to the address, fax
number or email address below or the address, fax number or email address lest notiﬁed
by the intended reclpient to the sender.
(I) to any Transteror:
Attention: Tim Paine
Address: 120 Collins Street. Melbourne VIC 3000
Fax No:+613 9283 3151
Email: TIm.Paine@rlotinib,com;
(ii) to the Transferee:
Attention: Harvey Kalman. Executive General Manager
Addras: Equity Trustees Limited. Level 2, 575 Bourke Sh‘eg Melbourne Vlmlia
3000 Austalia
Fax ND: +61 3 6623 5200
Email: HKalman@eqt.cam.au;
(c) will be taken to be duly given or made:
. (i) lntbe easeuf delivery in person. when delivered:
msks A01585254€7W125393997 page E


sham Transfer Deed Aliens : < Linkiaters
(it) in the case oi delivery try post. on the third Business Day after the detect posting
(rt posted to an address in the same century) or on the fifth Business Day ether
7 the date at posting (if posted to an address in another country): and
(iii) in the case of tax. on receipt by the sende- oi 3 transmission control report trom
I the despatching machine showing the relevant number of pages and the correct
destination fax number or name of recipient and indicating that the transmission
' has been madewiihout error;
_ (iv) In the case at email, the eartier of:
‘ ’ (A) the time that the sender receives an email from the recipient continuing
receipt ofthe email; and
_ (B) the time that the sender receives an automated message from the
/ intended recipient‘s Information system continuing delivery at the email.
L I but it the result is that a Notice would be taken to be given or made on a day that is not a
‘ businﬁs day in the place spedﬁed by the intended recipient as its postal address under
, oleusa 6th) or:
(c) in the case at detlvary by hand. post or fax, at a time that is later than
5,00pm; or
(D) in the case of detivery by email. at a time that is later than 7.00pm,
in the place speciﬁed by the intended recipient as its postal address under clause 607), it
_ will be ccndusivaiy taken to have been duly given or made atthe start oi business on the
‘ next business day inthat place.
7 General pmvlsiu ns
1.1 Goals and duty
(a) Each Transleror must bear 'rB own costs arising out at the negotiation. preparation and
execution at this Deed.
' (b) RrL must (or must procure that a related body corporate or RTL will) or the
Trenslaee‘s poets arising out of the negotiation, preparation and execution of this Deed.
(c) RTL must pay all stamp duty and any other tax that may be payable on this Deed, any
transaction evidenced by this Deed and any instrument or transaction entered into under
this Deed.
7.2 No merger
The rigits and obligations oi the parties will not merge on the completion of any transaction
contemplated try this Deed, They will survive the exeanion end deivery of any assignment or
other document entered Into for the purpose at implementing any such transaction. Each
indemnity in this Deed survives the expiry or termination of this Dad.
7.3 Assignment
No party tan assign, charge. encumber or otherwise deal with any rights and obligatians under
this Deed. or attempt or purport to do so. without the prior written consent of the other parties.
7.4 Further assurances
Each party must do anything (Induding gvlng notices or executing Deeds and decal-nerds)
necessary to give full effect to this Deed and the transactions contemplated hy It.
msks A013€525467~ﬂ 120329591 page 7


Share Transfer Deed Aliens > < Linklate [‘5
1.5 Entire Deed
 This Deed contains the entire agreement between the parties with respect to its subiect mailer. it
sets out the only conduai, representaiicns, warranties, covenants, wniﬁiiens. arrangements or
understandings (collectively Condum Misti on by the parties and supersedes all earlier Conduct
by or between the parties In comedian with iis subject matter. None oi the parties has relied on
or is relying on any other Conduct in entering into this Deed and completing the trarsadlcns
mntemplated by It.
7 ‘ 7.8 No waiver

No iailure to exudse nor any delay in exerdsing any right. power or remedy under this Deed
operates as a waiver. A single or partial exercise or waiver of me exercise of any right, power or
remedy does not preclude any oiharoriurther exera'se (If that or any other right. pointer or
remedy. A waiver ls rm valid or binding on the party granting that waiver unless made in writing

1.7 Severablllty of provisions
Any provision of this Deed that is prohibited or unenforceable in enyjurisdldlon is ineffective as to
that Jurisdiction to the extent or the prohibition or unmicmeabilliy. That does not [mandate the
remaining provisions at this Deed nor after: the validity or enforceability of that provision in any
otherlurisdlcticn.

1.B Governing law and jurisdiction
This Deed end. to the extent pennlned by law. all related matters including non-conunduei
matters is gwerned by the laws of the State of Victoria. Australia. In relation to sudi matters eadi

~ party Irrevumbty mpts the exclusive jurisdidion of courts with Jurisdiction there and waives any
, right to oblaet to the venue on any ground

7.9 Counterparts
This Deed may be execuled in any number of counterparts All cmnierparis Will be taken to
constiiuie one insirumeht.

mm A01%525457v7 120335297 page a


Share Transfer Deed Aliens ) < Lin k'iarers
Execution page
V Execmed and deiiverad as a Deed.
_ Each anomey execuiing this Deed scales that he orahe has no miles of revocaiion or suspensionoi his
or her power of anornay.
Execuled as a deed In accordance with
section 127 of the Corporatlms Ad 2001 by
’ Rio Timo Limited:

Director Signature Dim/Secretary Signaime
Print Name Print Name
Signed Sealed and Delivered for Rio Tlntu
Landon Limited by is atmmey under powa' of
attorney in the presence 0!:
Witness signature Attorney Signature
Prim Name i>rini Name

‘ Signed sealed and Delivered for Rio 11m:
Base Metals Pty. Limited by iis almrney under
power if attorney In the presence of:
Viﬁiness Signature Attorney Signalure '
Prim Name Print Name
msks Anmszsmn rzusmv page 9


Share Transfer Deeg Alleris > < Link‘lafers
r  Why )
‘ EQLHTY TRUSTEES IJM [EDACN 004 031 )
r 298 by Ils attorneys undsr Power alAﬁomey
\ daled27mMay20‘Iainthepraenceof: ) 
) SignamreofAuomey
)
)
,‘ Slgnamreufwlmsss ) NameofAﬁornayExSohedulsNumbsr
‘ )
  )
(anname) ) SIgnatureafAnomey
)
)
' l
_ Nama a! Aﬂnmey & Schedule Number
mks AO136525487W 129399991 pm 1n


BCL shares Tum Dsed Aliens 9 « Linklai'ers
Schedule 2

. - BCL share Transfer Form
msks A015652M21ﬁ123355937 28.8.2015 p39: 21


Remm your Information:
C By Man:
Ccnmnershare Immscwius PVUmibed
momma Meboume
Vlmriasm1msnalia
Enquiries:
_ Reglswed — "WW" (wnhin Mamie) 1:00 350 505
I Name“) r mum TRUSTEES LIMITED IN ITS CAPACITVAS Eﬂnmmm “4mm
, L ’ ‘l TRUSTEE OF THE BCL SHARES TRUST
, E} wwmhvesmmmmontaa
, Reg-“em -—-——-———-—————
Mdms LEVEL 2, 575 BOURKE Sr, MELBOURNE VICTORIA
3000
\ I Secumyhuherka'me Number (SRN)
/, Us
whim m
Please read the fo|lowing instructions carefuﬂy before completing Ihis farm
\ mammmmmm hwmnmw Ham-.1 magnum, me “mu Ind-x)an md nmum: rumba-nudwa ma
(um um rimmed wmummmumm Inﬁm
When was you Nova I: (mm?
mm. nth-minim WWW-ammo mmwmmsss mm. Vommmmywbmm mum Tommruyounava ahm’m
WasmmwuwmmammwmuumL ymmmirswmmurmmmwmmm.
mmmmm cumm-
mum: mm m.mnnmwmp wim m Innsbr‘almmﬂﬂ mumwmegmsm. mmwmm mum/am: mummy bu
mm
"mmmmmumrmpmmmmm am momma
51m Dmy “quit-mat m mum “cumin
Mam-ram Wmmlhkﬂmmmmm 2mm {wwamnwemq‘sm Wynn/hem, Weudenhndmnmhamypayﬂhh
msammmusmmmmmmm mm“. mmmnpemmmmmwuwmmmmnmm mmmmmmn
Doyau mu In mm mm mm on: 7mm Fem?
m mmmmebendm'nu m “we rmmudnmmmmwum Indhgﬁumalw imam!“ maymypaﬂmrusmdmm
mwlmmmmhms
maniac:an nmv
mummmmmwmsmumcmmwmm
WillnﬂeanisﬂvamemlsWMMm?
\fywnshmymhnmmbmﬂmbshw nymqu runaway lfwuimse nemuammmmmmmmuw,m
mmymmmnan-wmm Ymvlmﬂhwmishaml’mfm
' mﬂnlmmllmmumwmnlﬂmmeFunﬂ
Ynumwmmnwmnm mwnmnmmm bydu‘x‘runnFams. 01mm mmmwmmu'mmmepmmmmw Mummy.
mum-amnaamunmmmm.
Mundollwm mama
mmwnmmmnmmwmm‘umm. Wemummamw.musuﬂwnmmilmwnbmummu EDNDTDETAD-Iany nll m Bis mm m
pagan-svan ndmmmmnmmhwhwm-mm,
w
\ Your ems «mam needwdalawmpiae mlsform
“W
Seam A D mmmmhmkwmmmahrmmm
sums rummmmmmqmmmwpammmeemmmhhwmwmsmamnmm ‘
must hem ﬂewdilu unmemmﬂh wham'semd daalknmesdhqs} mamm loamy-mum.


39.1.1111: A r Cmmlalum 7:1: irauafgv [am r V  ,
Please use blaﬁ lane's and hlad< or ﬂue pen when completing this form when relevant
w. Mksmr ,
F11! mmoroamrrml mm Seams unm-mMmMMWmmuthnwumm-mmnmwnm'
< mmumﬁwm~Pbumnm-mmmmmwaunmﬁnmmhmdannm
m mnmy ﬁmm -Thas!akinwmhammpmy nrwﬂlslm’szmi m‘sunusﬂummndnnmmzmﬁm mm mm
aunt/Intro,
' mm misawﬁn
ms: mum. Puma‘uudmaysnmwmmmm WWHHW amuse. mym‘nsam mum.
_ mum ﬂuub-owmmmmzmmmm
- a:me mm
’ Mmmumm: bsingwmm(mmmhmsandfuwu)
I Wildmvﬁm -m:dnns!zr
' ‘ Muslim wart-mang m swam mmmummm madabdhmm mmxwmummmmm
r mamawmu
mmm-ammaumhmmumums mnmmuamunasmmmmsmmm.
~ r a. "gram “mnovmmsyrmmum
Pmnuﬂnmmddmml shaman mmnwmmmummnmww 31M“ warm
W9) Smummmmmmmﬁm
mudammlhuuwdmmmsml mmmmmmmummmmm
m maggot qumsmem
mmumrrulumammmmnmm mkammmdmhhlmﬂux Wmlmmmhmumwm E,
raw mmulnkmdaMszﬂwnﬁmanmwaW pawl-m limmmmmmm munva E
mwmmmm—mmmmysmmnwmmmm n
,_
o
B Ful pads! m M Buyerlxl g
Muhammmmmmm nmmmmmnmm ndmmmmm\mmm um,“ um: my a
_ mm,mmmmmmmm.
, E awn We: mm Nm (5m;
Vﬂwmwhmlﬁslm hnberdmﬁsnhﬁsm-qpbumwhd‘sﬁﬂ. mﬁddmﬂmbmmﬂem 1mm
M'sw: Requiem 7 m magma eumsr
n h lawman mxmmsmnmmm. Mummmm mmmyh midﬂlainmehm wumwmuommu
m
gm mmmz ma mt’mw are saw] an Buyeds)
mmm mm mmawymmmsuwm ms; Tn-yu um
1mm ummmwakhmummwmm- musla‘gL
I Ju’deﬁw momma::inmmmmnm.awaammmmmm
mumm lash“:de (Fwy: mammmmwmmmmsw. Mammy. wwwnmmmwm FDA
mum
Camp-1's: mmmmsMamnwoaammwu-msmmmymmoaammﬁmmymm
nymi‘gnmwdmwmhouwmhdl.
Mummies WWMMhmwMaSMWMWimmhmwaninnhmammemﬁ,
, * Dun-15m: mmqusmmmlmummmqmm” '(shrenqnirwtudgn. \Vhaumwma‘dmlmuaemesnm
mgmyummms'gnsnmmm. suwmusamwmha‘ymwhmn
M seam) an arms) must
a. muhmhmwmshmwmwmxmmmwm
n, :9”sz
z: manemmwmmmrmrmmiam
a. mmmummumhmmmmmwmmnmbn ‘
I T R F N +
i
‘
‘
‘
i


Standard Transfer Form

Hesse use am (even and black orbme pen when enmplelingws Faun. where reievam

§}._m%§ mumwwmmmmmmmm «manna-mu S‘ahwmmvycfmmm

.   ';  BOUGAIMVILLECOPPRLIMHED 3°C VICTORIA

,{ \ y;   wmmmmwmmmwammm nmwwmsm

' ‘ 1;;  gg-gjgég FUILVPAJDORDJNARVSHARES
,
.   mam

 "‘L +1—
,, 5 7?;gg'ﬂ” ‘_  m: ammqsycompmynmmnm - sum-m ,

 EQUTI’YTRUSTE LIMITED (ACN 004911 299) In Its CAPACITY AS TRUSIEE OF THE BDLSHARES TRUST

   
 wag;   mm  
- ij’v Mali? RN '
, {5, 
' 1’ 1:35;}:  m Gmnwmtxycawuaqm swam
  u.N....-.V..,n.""rv.r.vrﬁﬂ ....V....A._‘u. ‘._.‘........... ..T.T...«‘..A.~......‘.A..m_..“...n_. .
r  a!   
. 
“5;; am; '
‘ 3   Pam.......V.._.....,ou-m 

 _ I.  8m
 's‘ 01mm»

   “mm”
Mmmmmmgmuqummama»mmum:thmammwummmmmwmmnmwmsmmmm
spewm:mma.mmrm-mhmmmoummmmmwwmmm:mmmhenmsmmmmmwanemm

r mummymnmagmmmmwmmsmmummmim -
vwmmmummynmmammal:mummy-awammwumam,mmmsmxbw=amwamn
:«i 7311303131 v ‘ -
9-5 
I 

z.  ,1 Mrsmmmunaamoqmm » limICanazrySem‘m ad-Dmumnschcmmw

‘a  :4; [uuemnmmsawmm {masommssasmm wmwmymm}
ER : ;_ (mummst

4.513%", 5-5,. __.‘ — ——— —
  mammumm ummwupbnpm mummwbmm

é -};' mm: _L_l_ fmthm: _____—

3?  Dw/InthunIanw: EndlMdm

g ,1 "2.211% ,V
   nmlsgnimmmmuwmsy mamme smnwmmmmys-cml
a {55;} ‘1: 1V»? (mammgwm) (mmtﬂ‘esasqpbaﬂel sduomhawmmmanyamzyl
 ,; (manmwulum)

g :,1f'z'_;;;j.;;,
§ '1;  des’gﬂwyﬂplazapmﬂ Nemdamzmmo Nmustgv-MSOSWPM
#:1431154; on: I magma:
4%,: 15%;: 
 zf'v} DiMIPMINmN_,FJTHIMdmss MW
I T R F N +


Salim B - Documenﬁaliou Recuilements :lh'c‘Z-E' an: um: requirud in h; subumlet M ihe SELLE?)
mnemwmamwmmmmmmsmmmmmmmmmmmwummmmmmmmmnw)
mu"mummmamalgammmmwpemmkuummmmmmnmmwmwmmww
«39415
   a,   
W.”   m M j alum ‘jmnm NM ' gist; ‘ {Pf} ﬁf‘gg’f';

I \ 1+3; y Vﬁ.’i.pl‘§.‘;a« «@511:  ‘1 “‘l'fii 2‘11 ‘-  S,-   Jl'aeisii ”.
Wm. as 5mm. )WﬂwwydeMHIMBMWW
- NEW mm

, whammy» -

-  35' mmumﬁl i‘mmuméiz‘tsu:§.:5.   
v-   Amway?  .ATJ 9:12,”. 
Mira: ~ -,;-:.-;..1v< 4‘- 59;  ‘-. 'm-wm .   .,  . ,a 4:2? . a v

/ ﬁg: :‘3 weak;   mung-1:14»?  , .   . {5/35"}?   .,~'w..‘;y.;-=:§
<,  _. 1.3;- 7 my; a. ~.: «m “62;: in .. ‘ .  v5.34; (  51:1
      ﬂaming“nt

‘  '  '  . [=12 r agar-jeszxyg. Minamme  
h ‘ . v: ,,1T.‘li_;:-   ;=Wmmmugm .. >1 , g; 5‘-
[Wm

‘ ‘ mummmummuummdm.mmwmmmmmwmmummmwmm

- Wmmmmw,umuammmm:mmwmmumyvummm-mm,mmm
mmmkmwwmammwnmmmwummmuummmsmmawmmwmm

, Mummymmwum

\ , , Muhammaan
Mummy-mmmmnvammmmaummmmuhawmmLmmwmmmwmmuwmmmrmm
In. nmmmammghmmumm:

-MW ' .Jmumm‘u
.cmmymwmmm -Lagﬂyuﬂﬂbdudblpmcmuu
- dewiuhu - Mmmdbsntxbuiim mmmmm
mm
5
mmrmwﬁﬁm mm mslmll awn-mm mmliqu mm mun. E

‘ MalibuMSWMﬁlmkammewthWwdmm D
lmammhmmmhmn‘emghemmalhwslaahnunbmamulmnvmwdhp’mmmihmi 223
maven-name"mumwm-Mmmmmlmmmmm O

n
mmnonc: ,
MagnummaminSmith-murthmmbmmmmthﬂumhumvﬂﬁmmDim-uh.Wm?»

' manqmwmuwummmwmmammmmmmmmummnmwmwmmwuwwm
Wmmrsemmemem Walhl'puhm‘i mil-umpirequ Imam:th wlnwmovuymmmmmﬂun
Fm.Mvemhasbemxdmisd.

Bimcymﬁz r
mummimmuywmmmmwmdmmwmmmmmmlwmmuwmoumnlawman-immune
Wmmmmmm.mwmaummmmnemmnummmummmmnmumwmm

- mammwmammmwmImmwmmmmmmwmmmmmmmrpummueummm
mmmmmummumnmmuwhmmummm.mmmmmmmmwmmmmws
mampﬁmygmnwmhlmu


ANNEXURE B
This is the annexure A referred to in the
Form 03 Notice of Substantial Shareholding signed by me.
WW- m ié/oHaofe
Signature Name Date
300574275131


Direction to Trustee
This Direction is dated ’6 August 2016
and is given by:
Autonomous Bougainville Government of PO Box 322, Buka, Autonomous Region of
Bougainvilie, 355, Papua New Guinea (the Directing Beneﬁciary)
To:

Equity Trustees Limited (ACN 004 031 298) of Level 2, S75 Bourke St, Melbourne VIC

3000 (the Trustee) in its capacity as trustee of the BCL Shares Trust (the Trust).

1 This Is a Direction pursuant to clause 2.5 of the trust deed of the Trust dated 30 June 2016

(the Trust Deed). capitalised terms in this document have the meaning given in the Trust

Deed.

2 The Directing Beneficiary:

(a) directs the Trustee to transfer to the Directing Beneficiary's nominee Bougainville
Minerals Limited of Section 9 Allotment 4, Division of Commence, Trade &
industry, Buka, Autonomous Region of Bougainville, 355, Papua New Guinea for no
consideration all of the BCL Shares to which the Directing Beneﬁciary is absolutely
entitled under the Trust Deed and which have not previously been transferred to
the Directing Beneﬁciary or its nominees; and

(b) NOT USED;

(c) where the BCL Shares are to be transferred to the Directing Beneﬁciary‘s nominee-
represents and warrants that the nominee accepts such transfer of BCL Shares;
and

(:1) will comply with clause 2.5 of the Trust Deed in respect of such transfers of BCL
Shares; and

(a) must take any other steps which, in the Trustee‘s opinion, are necessary to give
effect to the transfer of the BCL Shares.

3 This Direction is irrevocable.

4 The Directing Beneﬁciary acknowledges and agrees that:

(a) it and its nominees will be solely responsible for paying any Tax, and meeting any
Liabilities in relation to Tax, in respect of the transfer of BCL Shares to the
Directing Beneﬁciary or its nominees; and

(b) the Trustee will be liable for any such Tax or Liabilities in relation to Tax.

5 This Direction is exclusively governed by the law in force in Victoria, Australia and is not
governed by the laws of any other jurisdiction The Directing Beneficiary submits to the
exclusive jurisdiction of the courts in that place.

ch\nxnko\sooe7421si01


Executed and delivered as a Deed Poll.

SIGNED, SEALED and DELIVERED by

the Hon. President Chief Dr John L,

Momis, GCL, MHR for and on behalf of the

Autonomous Bougainvilie

Government acting with, and in

accordance with, the advice of the

Bougainville Executive Council in the ‘

presence of:
a Q Signetur

Signatureo Witness
KEMNNeThH NANE‘

Name

PNG\RKARO\SOU674215.01

