
​ Re AGM Agenda - RNS - London Stock Exchange​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
Regulatory Story
Go to market news section
​ ​ ​
PJSC LukOil  -  LKOD
Re AGM Agenda
Released 13:38 25-Apr-2016
RNS Number : 2359W
PJSC LukOil
25 April 2016
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF PJSC LUKOIL APPROVES AGENDA OF ANNUAL
GENERAL MEETING
On 25 April 2016 a meeting of the Board of Directors of PJSC "LUKOIL" resolved to hold the
Annual General Shareholders Meeting of PJSC "LUKOIL". The Annual General Shareholders
Meeting will be held in Perm at 12:00 p.m. on 23 June 2016 at the following address: Yury
Gagarin Conference and Event Centre, ulitsa Mira 39, Perm. Registration of persons participating
in the meeting shall begin at 10:00 a.m.
It was determined that the date of preparation of the list of persons entitled to participate in the
Annual General Shareholders Meeting shall be 10 May 2016.
The postal address to which completed ballots may be sent: OOO «Registrator «Garant»,
Krasnopresnenskaya Naberezhnaya 6, Moscow, 123100. The deadline for receipt of completed
ballots shall be 20 June 2016.
The Board of Directors approved the following agenda for the Annual General Shareholders
Meeting of PJSC "LUKOIL".
1.   Approval of the 2015 Annual Report of PJSC "LUKOIL" and the annual accounting (financial)
statements, including the income statement of the Company, and also distribution of profits and
adoption of a decision on payment (declaration) of dividends based on the 2015 annual results.
2.   Election of the members of the Board of Directors of PJSC "LUKOIL".
3.   Appointment of the President of PJSC "LUKOIL".
4.   Election of the members of the Audit Commission of PJSC "LUKOIL".
5.   On the remuneration and reimbursement of expenses to members of the Board of Directors of
PJSC "LUKOIL".
6.   On the remuneration of members of the Audit Commission of PJSC "LUKOIL".
7.   Approval of the Auditor of PJSC "LUKOIL".
8.   Approval of Amendments and addenda to the Charter of Public Joint Stock Company "Oil
company "LUKOIL".
9.   Approval of Amendments and addenda to the Regulations on the Procedure for Preparing
and Holding the General Shareholders Meeting of OAO "LUKOIL".
10. Approval of Amendments and addenda to the Regulations on the Board of Directors of OAO
"LUKOIL".
11. Approval of a new version of the Regulations on the Management Committee of PJSC
"LUKOIL".
12. On the approval of an interested-party transaction.
The Board of Directors has approved the list of materials to be provided to shareholders while
preparing for the Annual General Shareholders Meeting.
The Board of Directors also approved recommendations on voting all items on the agenda.
The full text of recommendations of the Board of Directors on the Annual General Shareholders
Meeting agenda will be included in the set of documents provided to the shareholders in
preparation for the Annual General Shareholders Meeting. These documents will be available on
the Company's websites at www.lukoil.ru (in Russian) and at www.lukoil.com (in English) from
20 May 2016.
In particular it was recommended that the Annual General Shareholders Meeting adopt the
following decisions:
-   To approve the annual accounting (financial) statements, including the income statement of
the Company, and also the distribution of profits based on the 2015 annual results as follows:
The net profit of PJSC "LUKOIL"* based on the 2015 annual results equalled 302,294,681,000
roubles.
* Profits reflect unconsolidated profits of PJSC "LUKOIL" in accordance with the Russian
Accounting Standards.
The net profit in the amount of 95,263,084,560 roubles based on the 2015 annual results
(excluding the profit distributed as interim dividends of 55,286,611,575 roubles for the first nine
months of 2015) be distributed for the payment of dividends.
The rest of the profit shall be left undistributed.
To pay dividends on ordinary shares of PJSC "LUKOIL" based on the 2015 annual results in an
amount of 112 roubles per ordinary share (excluding the interim dividends of 65 roubles per
ordinary share paid for the first nine months of 2015). The total amount of dividends payable for
2015 including the earlier paid interim dividends will be 177 roubles per ordinary share. The
dividends of 112 roubles per ordinary share be paid using monetary funds from the account of
PJSC "LUKOIL":
-        Dividend payments to nominee shareholders and trust managers who are professional
market participants registered in the shareholder register of PJSC "LUKOIL" to be made not later
than 25 July 2016,
-        Dividend payments to other persons registered in the shareholder register of
PJSC "LUKOIL" to be made not later than 15 August 2016.
The costs on the transfer of dividends, regardless of the means, will be paid by PJSC "LUKOIL".
To propose that the Annual General Shareholders Meeting set 12 July 2016 as the date on which
persons entitled to receive dividends based on the 2015 annual results will be determined.
-   To elect the Board of Directors of PJSC "LUKOIL", consisting of 11 members, from the list of
candidates approved by the Board of Directors of PJSC "LUKOIL" on 4 March 2016.
-   To appoint Vagit Yu. Alekperov as the President of PJSC "LUKOIL".
-   To elect the Audit Commission of PJSC "LUKOIL" from the list of candidates approved by the
Board of Directors of PJSC "LUKOIL" on 4 March 2016.
-   To approve the independent auditor of PJSC "LUKOIL" - Joint stock company KPMG.
-   To approve Amendments and addenda to the Charter of Public Joint Stock Company "Oil
company "LUKOIL", to the Regulations on the Procedure for Preparing and Holding the General
Shareholders Meeting of OAO "LUKOIL", to the Regulations on the Board of Directors of OAO
"LUKOIL", and to approve a new version of the Regulations on the Management Committee of
PJSC "LUKOIL".
-   To approve an interested-party transaction.
This information is provided by RNS
The company news service from the London Stock Exchange
 
END
 
 
STRLLFVFSEIEFIR ​ ​ ​ 
Close
London Stock Exchange plc is not responsible for and does not check content on this
Website. Website users are responsible for checking content. Any news item (including
any prospectus) which is addressed solely to the persons and countries specified therein
should not be relied upon other than by such persons and/or outside the specified
countries. Terms and conditions, including restrictions on use and distribution apply.
©2014 London Stock Exchange plc. All rights reserved
Re AGM Agenda - RNS
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​