
This short form prospectus constitutes a public offering of these securities only in those jurisdictions where they may be lawfully 
offered for sale and therein only by persons permitted to sell such securities. No securities regulatory authority has expressed an 
opinion about the securities and it is an offence to claim otherwise.
This short form prospectus has been filed under legislation in each of the provinces of Canada that permits certain information about 
these securities to be determined after this prospectus has become final and that permits the omission from this prospectus of that 
information. The legislation requires the delivery to purchasers of a prospectus supplement containing the omitted information within 
a specified period of time after agreeing to purchase any of these securities.
Information  has  been  incorporated  by  reference  in  this  short  form  prospectus  from  documents  filed  with  securities 
commissions or similar  authorities in Canada. Copies of the documents incorporated herein by reference may be obtained on 
request without charge from the Senior Vice  President, Corporate Services of Precision Drilling Corporation, at 800, 525 — 8th 
Avenue,  S.W.,  Calgary,  Alberta,  Canada  T2P  1G1,  telephone  (403)  716-4500,  and  are  also  available  electronically 
at www.sedar.com.
SHORT FORM BASE SHELF PROSPECTUS
New Issue
August 5, 2016
Precision Drilling Corporation
$1,000,000,000 
Common Shares 
Preferred Shares 
Debt Securities
Warrants
Subscription Receipts
Units
Precision Drilling Corporation ( “Precision” or the “Corporation”) may offer, issue and sell, from time to time, the 
following securities of the Corporation under this short form base shelf prospectus (the “Prospectus”): (i) common 
shares (the  “Common  Shares”);  (ii)  preferred  shares  (the  “Preferred  Shares”);  (iii)  bonds,  debentures, notes  or 
other  evidences  of  indebtedness  of  any  kind,  nature  or  description  (the  “Debt  Securities”);  (iv)  warrants  to 
purchase  Common  Shares,  Preferred  Shares  or  Debt  Securities  (the  “Warrants”);  (v)  subscription  receipts  (the 
“Subscription  Receipts”);  and  (vi)  units  (the  “Units”  and  together  with  the  foregoing,  collectively,  the 
“Securities”)  of  up  to $1,000,000,000 aggregate  initial offering price  of Securities (or the equivalent thereof  in one 
or more  foreign  currencies or composite currencies, including United States dollars) during the 25 month period that 
this Prospectus,  including any amendments hereto, is  valid.  Securities may  be  offered  separately  or  together, in 
separate series, in amounts, at prices and on terms to be determined based on market conditions at the time of sale 
and set forth in one or more shelf  prospectus supplements (each, a “Prospectus Supplement”).
The specific terms of the Securities with respect to a particular offering will be set out in the applicable Prospectus 
Supplement and may include, where applicable: (i) in the case of Common Shares, the number of Common Shares 
offered, the issue price (in the event the offering is a fixed price distribution), the currency in which the Common 
Shares are offered and any other terms specific to the Common Shares being offered; (ii) in the case of Preferred 
Shares, the number of Preferred Shares offered, the issue price (in the event the offering is  a fixed price distribution), 
the currency in  which the Preferred Shares are offered and any other terms specific to the Preferred  Shares being 
offered; (iii) in the case of Debt Securities, the specific designation, aggregate principal amount, the currency or the 
currency  unit  for  which  the  Debt  Securities  may  be  purchased,  the  maturity,  interest  provisions,  authorized 
denominations,  offering  price,  covenants,  events  of  default,  any  terms  for  redemption  or  early  repayment,  any
exchange or conversion terms, whether the debt is senior  or subordinated and any other terms specific to the Debt 
Securities  being  offered;  (iv)  in the  case  of  Warrants,  the  designation,  number and terms  of the  Common  Shares, 
Preferred Shares or Debt Securities purchasable upon exercise of the Warrants, any procedures that will result in the 
adjustment of these numbers, the exercise price, dates and periods of exercise, the currency in which the Warrants 
are offered and any other terms specific to the Warrants being offered; (v) in the case of Subscription Receipts, the 
number of Subscription Receipts offered, the issue price, the terms, conditions and procedures for the conversion or 
exercise  of  such  Subscription  Receipts  into  or  for  Common  Shares,  Preferred  Shares  or  other  securities  and  any 
other  terms  specific to the  Subscription Receipts being  offered; and (vi)  in the  case of Units, the  designation  and 
terms  of  the Units and of the Securities comprising the  Units, including the circumstances  under which the Securities 
comprising the  Units  may  be held  or  transferred  separately,  any provisions  for  the  issuance,  payment,  settlement, 
transfer or exchange of the Units or of the Securities comprising the Units and any other terms specific to  the  Units 
being  offered.  Where  required  by  statute,  regulation  or  policy,  and  where  Securities  are  offered  in  currencies 
other than Canadian dollars, appropriate disclosure of foreign exchange rates applicable to such Securities  will  be 
included in the Prospectus Supplement describing such Securities.  The Corporation reserves the right to include in a 
Prospectus  Supplement  specific  variable  terms  pertaining  to  the  Securities  that  are  not  within  the  options  and 
parameters  set forth in this Prospectus.
All shelf information permitted under applicable laws to be omitted from this Prospectus will be contained in one or 
more Prospectus Supplements that will be delivered to prospective purchasers together with this Prospectus.  Each 
Prospectus  Supplement  will  be  deemed  to  be  incorporated  by  reference  into  this Prospectus  as  of  the  date  of  the 
Prospectus Supplement and only for the purposes of the offering of Securities to which the Prospectus Supplement 
pertains.
Prospective investors should be aware that the acquisition, holding or disposition of the Securities described 
herein may have tax consequences in the United States and Canada. This Prospectus does not, and any applicable 
Prospectus Supplement may not fully, describe these tax consequences. Prospective investors should read the 
tax discussion in any applicable Prospectus Supplement, but note that such discussion may be only a general 
summary  that  does  not  cover  all  tax  matters  that  may  be  of  importance  to  a  prospective  investor.    Each 
prospective investor is urged to consult its own tax advisors about the tax consequences relating to the purchase, 
ownership and disposition of the Securities in light of the investor’s own circumstances.
The Corporation is permitted, under a multi-jurisdictional disclosure system adopted in the United States and 
Canada,  to  prepare  this  Prospectus  in  accordance  with  Canadian  disclosure  requirements.  Prospective 
investors  should  be  aware  that  such  requirements  are  different  from  those  of  the  United  States.  The 
Corporation prepares its financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards 
as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board. Thus, the Corporation’s financial statements are 
subject to Canadian auditing and auditor independence standards and may not be comparable to the financial 
statements of United States companies.
The enforcement by investors of judgments of courts of the United States predicated upon the civil liabilities 
under  United  States  federal  securities  laws  may  be  affected  adversely  by  the  fact  that  the  Corporation  is 
incorporated under the laws of the Province of Alberta, Canada, that some of its officers and directors are 
Canadian residents, that some of the experts named in this Prospectus are residents of Canada, and that all or 
a significant portion of the assets of the Corporation and said persons are located in Canada.
THESE  SECURITIES  HAVE  NOT  BEEN  APPROVED  OR  DISAPPROVED  BY  THE  UNITED  STATES 
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (THE “SEC”) NOR HAS THE SEC OR THE SECURITIES 
COMMISSION  OF  ANY  STATE  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES  PASSED  UPON  THE  ACCURACY  OR 
ADEQUACY OF THIS PROSPECTUS. ANY REPRESENTATION TO THE CONTRARY IS A CRIMINAL 
OFFENSE.
This Prospectus constitutes a public offering of the Securities only in those jurisdictions where they may be lawfully 
offered for sale and therein only by persons permitted to sell such Securities.  The Corporation may offer and sell 
Securities  to,  or  through,  underwriters  or  dealers  and  also  may  offer  and  sell  certain  Securities  directly  to  other 
purchasers or through agents.
ii
A  Prospectus  Supplement  relating  to  each  issue  of  Securities  offered  thereby  will  set  forth  the  names  of  any 
underwriters, dealers or agents, as the case may be, involved in the sale of such Securities, and will set forth the terms 
of the offering of the Securities, including the public offering price of such Securities (or the manner of determination 
thereof if offered on a non-fixed price basis), the proceeds to, and the portion of expenses borne by the Corporation 
from such sale, any underwriting discounts or commissions and any discounts or concessions allowed, re-allowed or 
paid by any underwriter to other dealers and other material terms of the plan of distribution. Except as set out in a 
Prospectus Supplement relating to a particular  offering of Securities, the underwriters, dealers or agents, as the case 
may be, may over-allot or effect transactions intended to stabilize, maintain or otherwise affect the market price  of 
the  Securities  at  a  level  above  that  which  might  otherwise  prevail  in  the  open  market. Such  transactions may be 
commenced, interrupted or discontinued  at  any time. See  “Plan  of  Distribution”.
No  underwriter,  dealer  or  agent  in  Canada  or  the  United  States  has  been  involved  in  the  preparation of 
this Prospectus or performed any review of the contents of this Prospectus.
The  issued  and  outstanding  Common  Shares  of  the  Corporation  are  listed  on  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange  (the 
“TSX”)  under  the  symbol  “PD”  and  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  (the  “NYSE”)  under the  symbol  “PDS”. 
Unless  otherwise specified  in the applicable  Prospectus Supplement, the Preferred Shares, Debt Securities, Warrants, 
Subscription Receipts or Units will not be listed on  any securities exchange. Any offering of Preferred Shares, Debt 
Securities, Warrants, Subscription Receipts or Units would be a new issue of  securities. There is no market through 
which  the  Preferred  Shares,  Debt  Securities,  Warrants,  Subscription  Receipts  or  Units  may  be  sold  and 
purchasers may not be able to resell the Preferred Shares, Debt Securities, Warrants, Subscription Receipts or 
Units  purchased  under  this Prospectus  or  any  Prospectus  Supplement.  This  may  affect  the  pricing  of  the 
Preferred  Shares,  Debt  Securities,  Warrants,  Subscription  Receipts  or  Units  in  the  secondary  market  (if 
any),  the  transparency  and  availability  of  trading  prices  (if  any),  the  liquidity  of the Preferred Shares, 
Debt  Securities, Warrants,  Subscription  Receipts  or  Units  (if  any), and the  extent of  issuer regulation. See 
“Risk Factors”.
An  investment  in  the  Securities  involves  significant  risks.  Prospective  investors  should  carefully  read  and 
consider the risk factors described or referenced under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Prospectus, contained 
in any of the documents incorporated by reference herein, and in any applicable Prospectus Supplement, before 
purchasing Securities.
Purchasers are advised that it may not be possible for investors to enforce judgments obtained in Canada against any 
person or company that is incorporated, continued or otherwise organized under the laws of a foreign jurisdiction or 
resides outside of Canada, even if the party has appointed an agent for service of process.  See “Enforceability of 
Judgments”.
The  offering of Securities hereunder is subject to approval of certain legal matters on behalf of the Corporation by 
Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP.
The head and registered office of Precision Drilling Corporation is located at 800, 525 — 8th Avenue, S.W., Calgary, 
Alberta, T2P 1G1.
iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS ................................................................................................................................... 1 
CERTAIN AVAILABLE INFORMATION ............................................................................................................... 1 
DOCUMENTS FILED AS PART OF THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT ...................................................... 1 
CURRENCY PRESENTATION AND EXCHANGE RATE INFORMATION ..................................................... 1 
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE ............................................................................................. 2 
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS .................................................................................................................. 3 
PRECISION DRILLING CORPORATION ............................................................................................................. 4 
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS .................................................................................................................................... 4 
CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION .................................................................................................................... 5 
USE OF PROCEEDS .................................................................................................................................................. 5 
EARNINGS COVERAGE RATIO ............................................................................................................................ 5 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION ........................................................................................................................................ 5 
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON SHARES ................................................................................................................ 6 
DESCRIPTION OF PREFERRED SHARES ........................................................................................................... 7 
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES ................................................................................................................. 7 
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS ........................................................................................................................... 14 
DESCRIPTION OF SUBSCRIPTION RECEIPTS ................................................................................................ 15 
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS ...................................................................................................................................... 15 
CERTAIN INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS ................................................................................................... 16 
CREDIT RATINGS ................................................................................................................................................... 16 
RISK FACTORS ........................................................................................................................................................ 16 
ENFORCEABILITY OF JUDGMENTS ................................................................................................................. 17 
STATUTORY AND CONTRACTUAL RIGHTS OF WITHDRAWAL AND RESCISSION ............................ 18 
INTEREST OF EXPERTS ....................................................................................................................................... 19
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
In this Prospectus, Precision Drilling Corporation and its subsidiaries are collectively referred to as “Precision” or the 
“Corporation”, unless the context otherwise requires. The Corporation is responsible for the information contained in 
or incorporated by reference in this Prospectus or any applicable Prospectus Supplement. The Corporation has not 
authorized anyone to provide prospective investors with different or additional information. Prospective  investors 
should rely only on the information contained in or incorporated by reference in this Prospectus  or any Prospectus 
Supplement. The  Corporation  is  not  making  an  offer  of  these Securities in any jurisdiction where the offer is not 
permitted by law.  Prospective investors should not  assume  that  the  information  contained  in  or  incorporated  by 
reference  in  this Prospectus  or  any  Prospectus  Supplement is  accurate as of any date other than the  date of the 
applicable document. The Corporation takes no responsibility for, and can provide no assurance as to the reliability of 
any other information that others may give readers of this Prospectus.
CERTAIN AVAILABLE INFORMATION
This prospectus is part of a registration statement on Form F-10 relating to the Securities that the Corporation has filed 
with the SEC (the “Registration Statement”).  This prospectus does not contain all of the information set forth in the 
Registration Statement, certain parts of which are omitted in accordance with the rules and regulations of the SEC. United 
States investors should refer to the Registration Statement and the exhibits to the Registration Statement for further 
information with respect to the Corporation and the Securities.
The Corporation files or furnishes annual and quarterly reports, material change reports and other information with the 
securities commissions or similar regulatory authorities in each of the provinces of Canada and with the SEC. Under a 
multi-jurisdictional disclosure system adopted by the United States and Canada, these reports and other information 
(including financial information) may be prepared in accordance with the disclosure requirements in Canada, which differ 
from those in the United States. Prospective investors may read and download any public document that the Corporation 
has filed with securities commissions or similar regulatory authorities in each of the provinces of Canada on the System 
for Electronic Document Analysis and Retrieval, which is commonly known by the acronym SEDAR, and which may 
be accessed at www.sedar.com. Prospective investors may read any document that the Corporation files with or furnishes 
to the SEC at the SEC’s public reference room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C., 20549. Prospective investors 
may  also  obtain  copies  of  the  same  documents  from  the  public  reference  room  of  the  SEC  at  100  F  Street,  N.E., 
Washington, D.C., 20549 by paying a fee. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 or contact it at www.sec.gov for 
further information on the public reference room. The Corporation’s filings are also electronically available from the 
SEC’s Electronic Document Gathering and Retrieval System, which is commonly known by the acronym EDGAR, and 
which may be accessed at www.sec.gov, as well as from commercial document retrieval sources.
DOCUMENTS FILED AS PART OF THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT
The following documents are being or will be filed with the SEC as part of the Registration Statement:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
the documents referred to under the heading “Documents Incorporated by Reference”;
the consent of KPMG LLP;
the consent of our counsel Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP;
the powers of attorney from the Corporation’s directors and officers;
the form of indenture for Debt Securities; and
the Form T-1 Statement of Eligibility of the trustee.
CURRENCY PRESENTATION AND EXCHANGE RATE INFORMATION
All references to “$” in this Prospectus are to Canadian dollars and all references to “U.S.$” are to United States 
dollars. On August 4, 2016, the Bank of Canada noon rate of exchange was U.S.$1.00 = Cdn$1.30 or Cdn$1.00 = 
U.S.$0.77. For Securities issued in other than Canadian currency, potential purchasers should be aware that foreign
exchange fluctuations are likely to occur from time to time and that the Corporation does not make any representation 
with respect to currency values from time to time. Investors should consult their own advisors with respect to the 
potential risk of currency fluctuations.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Information  has  been  incorporated  by  reference  in  this  Prospectus  from  documents  filed  with  securities 
commissions and similar regulatory authorities in Canada and with the SEC.
Under applicable securities laws in Canada and the United States, the Canadian securities commissions or similar 
regulatory authorities and the SEC allow the Corporation to incorporate by reference certain information that it files 
with the Canadian securities commissions or similar regulatory authorities, which means that the Corporation can 
disclose  important  information  to  prospective  investors  by  reference  to  those  documents.  Information  that  is 
incorporated by reference is an important part of this prospectus.  The following documents of the Corporation have 
been or will be filed with the various securities commissions or similar regulatory authorities in the provinces of Canada 
and with the SEC and are specifically incorporated by reference into and form an integral part of this prospectus:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
the annual information form of the Corporation dated March 7, 2016 for the year ended December 31, 2015 
(the  “AIF”);
the audited consolidated financial statements of the Corporation as at and for the years ended December 31, 
2015 and 2014, together with the notes thereto and the auditors’ report thereon;
management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of the Corporation 
for the year ended December 31, 2015;
the  unaudited  interim  consolidated  financial  statements  of the  Corporation as  at and  for  the three and six 
months periods  ended June 30, 2016, together with the notes thereto (the “Q2 2016 Financials”);
management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of the Corporation 
for the three and six month periods ended June 30, 2016;
the  management  information circular of the Corporation dated March 28, 2016 in connection with the annual 
meeting of holders of the Common Shares (the “Shareholders”) held on May 11, 2016;
the material change report of the Corporation dated February 17, 2016 with respect to the suspension of the 
Corporation’s dividend; and
the material change report of the Corporation dated March 15, 2016 with respect to the resignation of Robert 
McNally as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer and appointment of Carey Ford as interim 
Chief Financial Officer.
Any documents  of the  type  required  by National  Instrument  44-101- Short  Form  Prospectus  Distributions,  to  be 
incorporated by reference herein including, without limitation, any material change reports (excluding confidential 
material change reports), comparative interim financial statements, comparative annual financial statements and the 
auditors’  reports  thereon,  management’s  discussion  and  analysis  of  financial  condition  and  results  of  operations, 
information circulars, annual information forms and  business acquisition reports filed by the Corporation with the 
securities  commissions  or  similar regulatory authorities  in the  provinces of Canada  subsequent  to the  date of this 
Prospectus and prior to the termination of any distribution hereunder are deemed to be incorporated by reference in 
this Prospectus.  To the extent that any document or  information incorporated by reference into this Prospectus is 
included in a report that is filed with or furnished to the SEC, such document or information shall be deemed to be 
incorporated  by  reference  as  an  exhibit  to  the  Registration  Statement  of  which  this Prospectus  forms  a  part. In 
addition, any other report filed with or furnished to the SEC by the Corporation shall be deemed to be incorporated 
by reference as an exhibit to the Registration Statement of which this Prospectus forms a part, if and to the extent 
that such report expressly so provides.
2
In addition, any similar documents the Corporation files with or furnishes to the SEC, as applicable, in periodic reports 
on Form 6-K or annual reports on Form 40-F and any other documents filed with or furnished to the SEC pursuant to 
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, in each case after the date of this Prospectus, 
shall be deemed to be incorporated into this Prospectus and the Registration Statement of which this Prospectus forms 
a  part  if  and  to  the  extent  expressly  provided  in  such  reports.  To  the  extent  that  any  document  or  information 
incorporated by reference into this Prospectus is included in a report that is filed with or furnished to the SEC on Form 
40-F or 6-K (or any successor form), such document or information shall also be deemed to be incorporated by 
reference as an exhibit to the Registration Statement of which this Prospectus forms a part. Further, the Corporation 
may incorporate by reference into the Registration Statement of which this Prospectus forms a part any report on Form 
6-K furnished to the SEC, including the exhibits thereto, if and to the extent provided in such report. The Corporation’s 
annual reports on Form 40-F and its periodic reports on Form 6-K are available on the SEC’s EDGAR system website 
at www.sec.gov.
Any  statement  contained  in a  document  incorporated  or deemed  to  be incorporated by  reference herein  shall  be 
deemed to be modified or superseded for the purposes of this Prospectus to the extent that a statement  contained 
herein or in any other subsequently filed document which also is, or is deemed to be, incorporated by reference herein 
modifies or supersedes such statement. The modifying or superseding statement need not state that it has modified or 
superseded a prior statement or include any other information set forth in the document that it modifies or supersedes. 
The making  of a  modifying  or  superseding  statement  shall  not  be  deemed an admission for any purposes that the 
modified or superseded statement, when made, constituted a misrepresentation,  an  untrue  statement  of  a  material 
fact or an omission to state a material fact that was  required to be stated or that was necessary to make a statement 
not misleading in light of the circumstances  in which it was made. Any statement so modified or superseded shall not 
be deemed, except as so modified or  superseded, to constitute a part of this Prospectus.
Upon  a  new  annual  information  form  and  corresponding  annual  financial  statements  and  related  management’s 
discussion  and  analysis  being  filed  by  the  Corporation  with,  and  where  required,  accepted  by, the  applicable 
securities commissions or similar regulatory authorities during the currency of this Prospectus, the previous annual 
information  form  and  all  annual  financial  statements,  interim  financial  statements  and  the  related  management’s 
discussion and analysis, material change reports and business acquisition reports filed prior to  the commencement of 
the Corporation’s financial year in respect of  which the new annual information form is filed  shall be deemed no 
longer  to  be  incorporated  by  reference  into  this  Prospectus  for  purposes  of  future  offers  and  sales  of  Securities 
hereunder.  Upon  interim  consolidated  financial  statements  and  the  related  management’s  discussion  and analysis 
being filed  by  the Corporation with  the applicable  securities commissions or similar  regulatory  authorities  during 
the  currency  of  this Prospectus,  all  interim  consolidated  financial  statements  and  the  related  management’s 
discussion and  analysis  filed  prior  to  the new interim  consolidated financial statements  shall be deemed no longer 
to  be  incorporated  in  this Prospectus  for  purposes  of  future  offers  and  sales  of  Securities  under  this Prospectus. 
Upon a new management information circular relating to an annual meeting of the  Shareholders  being  filed  by  the 
Corporation with the applicable securities  commissions or similar regulatory authorities during the currency of this 
Prospectus, the management information  circular for the preceding annual meeting of Shareholders shall be deemed 
no  longer  to  be  incorporated into this Prospectus for purposes of future offers and sales of Securities under this 
Prospectus.
One  or  more  Prospectus  Supplements  containing  the  specific  variable  terms  for  an  issue  of  Securities  and  other 
information  in  relation  to  those  Securities  will  be  delivered  or  made  available  to  purchasers  of  such  Securities 
together with  this  Prospectus  to  the  extent  required by  applicable  securities  laws  and will  be  deemed  to be 
incorporated by reference into this Prospectus as of the date of the Prospectus Supplement solely for the purposes of 
the offering of the Securities covered by any such Prospectus Supplement.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain  statements  contained  in  this Prospectus,  and  in certain  documents  incorporated by  reference into this 
Prospectus,  including  statements  that  contain  words  such  as  “could”,  “should”,  “can”,  “anticipate”,  “estimate”, 
“propose”, “plan”, “expect”, “believe”, “will”, “may” and similar expressions and statements relating to matters that 
are not historical facts constitute “forward-looking information” within the meaning of applicable Canadian securities 
legislation  and  “forward-looking  statements”  within  the  meaning  of  the  “safe  harbor”  provisions  of  the  United 
States  Private  Securities  Litigation  Reform  Act  of  1995  (collectively,  “forward-looking  information  and 
statements”).  In  particular,  forward-looking  information  and  statements  include,  but  are not  limited  to, forward-
3
looking information and statements under the headings “Use of Proceeds” and “Plan of Distribution”, and set forth and 
identified in the documents incorporated by reference herein.
The forward-looking information and statements contained in this Prospectus and in certain documents incorporated 
by reference herein are based on certain assumptions and analysis made by the Corporation in light of its experience 
and its perception of historical trends, current conditions and expected future developments as well as other factors it 
believes are  appropriate in the circumstances.  However, whether actual results, performance or achievements will 
conform to the Corporation’s expectations and predictions is subject to a number of known and unknown risks and 
uncertainties which could cause actual results to differ materially from the Corporation’s expectations. Such risks and 
uncertainties include, but are not limited to: volatility in the price and demand for oil and natural gas; fluctuations in 
customer spending and its impact on the demand for contract drilling, well servicing and ancillary oilfield services; the 
risks associated with the Corporation’s investments in capital assets and changing technology; shortages, delays and 
interruptions in the delivery of equipment, supplies and other key inputs; the effects of seasonal and weather conditions 
on  operations  and  facilities;  the  availability  of  qualified  personnel  and  management;  the  existence  of  competitive 
operating risks inherent in Precision’s businesses; changes in environmental and safety rules or regulations including 
increased regulatory scrutiny on horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing; terrorism, social, civil and political unrest 
in the foreign jurisdictions where Precision operates; fluctuations in foreign exchange, interest rates and tax rates; and 
other unforeseen conditions which could impact the use of services supplied by Precision and Precision’s ability to 
respond to such conditions.
The Corporation’s AIF for the most recent year ended and other documents filed with securities regulatory authorities 
describe the risks, material assumptions and other factors that could influence actual results and are incorporated 
herein by reference.  You should also carefully consider the matters discussed under “Risk Factors” included and 
incorporated by reference in this prospectus.
Consequently,  all  of  the  forward-looking  information  and  statements  made  in  this  Prospectus  and  in  certain 
documents incorporated by reference in this Prospectus are expressly qualified by these cautionary statements and 
there can be no assurance that the actual results or developments anticipated by the  Corporation will be realized or, 
even if substantially realized, that they will have the expected consequences  to or effects on the Corporation or its 
business  or  operations.  Readers  are  therefore  cautioned  not  to  place  undue  reliance  on  such  forward-looking 
information and statements. The Corporation is not  under any obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-
looking  information or  statements except as expressly  required by applicable securities laws.
Readers  should  be  aware  that  the  information  contained  or  incorporated  by  reference  in  this Prospectus 
identify  additional  forward-looking  information  and  statements  that  could  affect  the  operating  results  and 
performance of the Corporation.
PRECISION DRILLING CORPORATION
Precision is an independent provider of oil and natural gas drilling and related services and products. The Corporation 
specializes in providing onshore drilling services in most major conventional and unconventional oil and natural gas 
basins in Canada and the United States. Precision has international drilling operations in Mexico, Saudi Arabia, the 
Kurdistan region of Iraq, Kuwait, and the country of Georgia. Precision also provides well servicing and ancillary 
wellsite products and services in Canada and the United States.
Precision was formed by amalgamation under the Business Corporations Act (Alberta). The Corporation previously 
operated as an income trust, known as Precision Drilling Trust, and converted to a corporate entity on June 1, 2010, 
under a statutory plan of arrangement (the “Arrangement”). The Corporation’s principal executive offices are located 
at 800, 525 — 8th Avenue S.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2P 1G1, and its telephone number is (403) 716-4500.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
On April 22, 2016, the Corporation announced that its Board of Directors appointed Carey Ford as Senior Vice President 
and Chief Financial Officer and Veronica Foley as Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Corporation Secretary.
4
CONSOLIDATED CAPITALIZATION
There have been no material changes in the Corporation’s share and loan capital, on a consolidated basis, since the date 
of the Q2 2016 Financials. The applicable Prospectus Supplement will describe any material change, and the effect of 
such material change, on the share and loan capital of the Corporation that will result from the issuance of Securities 
pursuant to such Prospectus Supplement.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Except as may otherwise be set forth in a Prospectus Supplement, the net proceeds to be received by the Corporation 
from the issue and sale from time to time of Securities will be added to the general funds of the Corporation to be 
used to repay existing indebtedness of the Corporation, to fund capital  expenditures and for other general corporate 
purposes.  Each  Prospectus  Supplement  will  contain  specific  information concerning the use of proceeds from that 
sale of Securities. The Corporation may, from time to time, issue Securities otherwise than through the offering of 
Securities pursuant to this Prospectus.
EARNINGS COVERAGE RATIO
Earnings coverage ratios will be provided as required in the applicable Prospectus Supplement(s) with respect to any 
offering and sale of Preferred Shares or Debt Securities pursuant to this Prospectus.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
The Corporation may offer and sell the Securities (i) to underwriters or dealers purchasing as principals, (ii) directly 
to one or more purchasers, subject to compliance with any applicable dealer or broker-dealer registration requirements, 
or  (iii) 
through  agents  in  Canada,  the  United  States  and  elsewhere  where  permitted  by law,  for  cash  or  other 
consideration.  The  Securities  may  be  distributed from time to time in one or more transactions  at  fixed  prices  or 
non-fixed  prices,  such  as  prices  determined  by  reference  to  the  prevailing price of the Securities in a specified 
market, at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, or at prices to be negotiated with purchasers, which prices may 
vary as between purchasers and during the period of distribution of  the Securities.
The Prospectus Supplement for any of the Securities being offered will set forth the terms of each specific offering 
of  Securities,  including  the  name  or  names  of  any underwriters,  dealers  or  agents  involved  in  such  offering  of 
Securities, the terms of the Securities to which the Prospectus Supplement relates, including the type of Securities 
being offered,  the purchase price of the Securities offered thereby and the proceeds to, and the portion of expenses 
borne  by,  the Corporation  from  the  sale  of  such  Securities,  any  underwriting  fees  or  discounts  and  other  items 
constituting  underwriters’  compensation,  and  any  discounts  or  concessions  allowed  or  re-allowed  or  paid  to 
underwriters, dealers or agents.
If underwriters purchase Securities as principal, the Securities offered thereby will be acquired by the underwriters for 
their own account and may be resold from time to time in one or more transactions, including negotiated transactions, 
at a fixed public offering price or at varying prices determined at the time of sale. Securities may be either offered to 
the  public  through  underwriting  syndicates  represented  by  managing  underwriters  or  by  underwriters  without  a 
syndicate. Only underwriters named in the relevant Prospectus Supplement are deemed to be underwriters in connection 
with the Securities offered by that Prospectus Supplement. The obligations of the underwriters to purchase Securities 
will  be  subject  to  the  conditions  precedent  agreed  upon by  the  parties  and  outlined  in  the  applicable  Prospectus 
Supplement, and the underwriters will be obligated to purchase all Securities under that offering if any are purchased. 
Any public offering price and any discounts or concessions allowed or re-allowed or paid to underwriters, dealers or 
agents may be changed from time to time. The Securities may also be sold: (i) directly by the Corporation at prices and 
upon terms agreed to by the purchaser and the Corporation; or (ii) through agents designated by the Corporation from 
time to time. Any agent involved in the offering and sale of the Securities pursuant to this Prospectus will be named, 
and any commissions  payable  by  the  Corporation  to  such  agent  will  be  set  forth,  in  the  applicable  Prospectus 
Supplement.  Unless  otherwise indicated in the Prospectus Supplement, any agent would be acting on a “best efforts” 
basis for the period of  its appointment.
The Corporation may agree to pay the underwriters a commission for various services relating to the issue and sale 
of any Securities offered under any Prospectus Supplement.  Underwriters, dealers and agents who participate in the
5
distribution  of  the  Securities  may  be  entitled  under  agreements  to  be  entered  into  with  the  Corporation  to 
indemnification by the Corporation against certain liabilities, including liabilities  under  securities  legislation,  or  to 
contribution with respect to payments which such underwriters, dealers or agents  may be required to make in respect 
thereof.
Agents, underwriters or dealers may make sales of Securities in privately negotiated transactions and/or any other 
method permitted  by  law,  including  sales deemed  to  be an  “at-the-market”  offering  as  defined  in  and subject  to 
limitations imposed by and the terms of any regulatory approvals required and obtained under, applicable Canadian 
securities laws which includes sales made directly on an existing trading market for the Common Shares, or sales 
made to or through a market maker other than on an exchange. In connection with any offering of Securities, except 
with  respect  to  “at-the-market”  offerings,  underwriters  may  over-allot  or  effect  transactions  which  stabilize  or 
maintain the market price of the offered Securities at a level above that which might otherwise prevail in the open 
market. Such transactions may be commenced, interrupted or discontinued at any time. No underwriter or dealer 
involved in an “at-the-market” offering, as defined under applicable Canadian securities laws, no affiliate of such an 
underwriter or dealer and no person or company acting jointly or in concert with such an underwriter or dealer will 
over-allot Securities in connection with such distribution or effect any other transactions that are intended to stabilize 
or maintain the market price of the Securities.
The Corporation may authorize agents or underwriters to solicit offers by eligible institutions to purchase Securities 
from the Corporation at the public offering price set forth in the applicable Prospectus Supplement under delayed 
delivery  contracts  providing  for  payment  and  delivery  on  a  specified  date  in  the  future.  The  conditions  to  these 
contracts and the commissions payable for solicitation of these contracts will be set forth in the applicable Prospectus 
Supplement.
Any offering of Securities, other than Common Shares, will be a new issue of securities with no established trading 
market.  Unless  otherwise  specified  in  the applicable  Prospectus  Supplement,  such  Securities  will not  be listed  on 
any securities exchange.  Certain dealers may make a market in such Securities, but will not be obligated to do so 
and may discontinue any market making at any time without notice. No assurance can be given that any dealer will 
make a market in such Securities or as to the liquidity of the trading market, if any, for such Securities.
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON SHARES
The following description is subject to, and qualified by reference to, the terms and provisions of Precision’s articles 
and by-laws.
Each  Common  Share  entitles  the holder to  receive  notice  of  and  to  attend  all meetings  of the  Shareholders  other 
than  meetings  at  which  only  the  holders  of  another  class  or  series  are  entitled  to  vote.  Each  Common  Share 
entitles the holder to one vote.  The Shareholders, in the discretion of the Board of  Directors, are entitled to receive 
out of any monies properly applicable to the payment of dividends, and after the payment of any dividends payable 
on the Preferred Shares of any series or  any other  series ranking prior to the  Common Shares as to the payment of 
dividends, any dividends declared and payable on the Common Shares.
Upon any liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of the Corporation, or other distribution of the Corporation’s assets 
among its Shareholders for  the purposes of  winding-up the affairs of the Corporation, the holders of the Common 
Shares are entitled to share on a share-for-share basis in the distribution, except for the prior rights of the holders of 
the Preferred Shares of any series, or any other class ranking prior to the Common Shares.
There are no pre-emptive or conversion rights and the Common Shares are not subject to redemption. All Common 
Shares  currently  outstanding  and  to  be  outstanding  upon  the  exercise  of  any securities  convertible  into  Common 
Shares, are or will be, fully paid and non-assessable.
In connection with the Arrangement, the unitholders of Precision Drilling Trust approved the adoption of a shareholder 
rights plan for the Corporation (the “Shareholder Rights Plan”). Pursuant to the Shareholder Rights Plan, one right 
(a “Right”) was  issued by the Corporation in respect of each Common Share that was outstanding at the close  of 
business  on  June 1, 2010.  One  Right  will  also  be  issued  for  each  additional  Common  Share  issued  after  June 1, 
2010, including in respect of any Common Shares issued pursuant to a Prospectus Supplement, subject to the terms 
and  conditions of the Shareholder Rights Plan.
6
DESCRIPTION OF PREFERRED SHARES
The  Preferred  Shares  may  be  issued  in  one  or  more  series,  each  series  to  consist  of  such  number  of  shares  as 
determined by resolution of the  Board of Directors.  The  Board of Directors, by resolution duly passed before the 
issue of the Preferred Shares of each series, may fix the designation, rights, restrictions, conditions and limitations 
attaching  to  the  Preferred  Shares  of  each  series,  including,  but  without  in  any  way  limiting  or  restricting  the 
generality of the foregoing, the rate or amount of cumulative preferential dividends, the date or dates and places of 
payment thereof, the date or dates from which such preferential dividends shall accrue, the rights and obligations, if 
any, of the Corporation to purchase the Preferred Shares of such series and to redeem the same, the price and the 
terms and conditions of any such purchase or redemption, and conversion rights, if any.
The Preferred Shares of each series may have priority over the Common Shares in payment of dividends and in the 
distribution of assets in the event of liquidation, dissolution or winding-up of the Corporation or any  other  distribution 
of the assets of the Corporation among Shareholders for the purpose of winding up the affairs of the  Corporation. 
The number of Preferred Shares that may be authorized for issuance at any given time can be no more  than one half 
of the issued and outstanding Common Shares at the time of the issuance of such Preferred Shares.
The particular terms and provisions of the Preferred Shares offered by any Prospectus Supplement, and the extent to 
which  the  general  terms  and  provisions  described  below  may  apply  thereto,  will  be  described  in  the  Prospectus 
Supplement filed in respect of such Preferred Shares.
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
Solely for the purposes of this section and the description of the Debt Securities, and unless otherwise stated 
herein or in an applicable Prospectus Supplement, the term “Corporation” refers only to Precision Drilling Corporation 
and not to any of its subsidiaries. The following description sets forth certain general terms and provisions of Debt 
Securities that may be issued hereunder, is not intended to be complete and may not describe all of the provisions of 
the Indenture or any of the Debt Securities that may be important to you. The Debt Securities may be offered separately 
or together with other Securities, as the case may be. The specific terms of Debt Securities, including the extent to 
which the general terms described in this section apply to those Debt Securities, will be set forth in the applicable 
Prospectus Supplement. Accordingly, for a description of the terms of a particular issue of Debt Securities, you should 
carefully read both this Prospectus and the applicable Prospectus Supplement.
The  Debt  Securities  will  be  issued  in  one  or  more  series  under  an  indenture  (as  amended,  restated, 
supplemented  or  replaced  from  time  to  time,  the  “Indenture”)  to  be  entered  into  among  the  Corporation, 
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., as U.S. trustee (the “U.S. Trustee”), and Computershare Trust Company of 
Canada, as Canadian trustee (the “Canadian Trustee” and, together with the U.S. Trustee, the “Trustees”). To the 
extent applicable, the Indenture will be subject to and governed by the United States Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as 
amended (the “Indenture Act”). A copy of the form of the Indenture to be entered into has been filed with the SEC 
as an exhibit to the Registration Statement of which this Prospectus forms a part and will be filed with the securities 
commissions or similar authorities in each of the provinces and territories of Canada when it is entered into. The 
description of certain provisions of the Indenture in this section do not purport to be complete and are subject to, and 
are qualified in their entirety by reference to, the provisions of the Indenture. Terms used in this summary that are not 
otherwise defined herein have the respective meanings ascribed to them in the Indenture. For additional information, 
you should carefully read the Indenture.
The Corporation may issue Debt Securities and incur additional indebtedness other than through the offering
of Debt Securities pursuant to this Prospectus or any Prospectus Supplement.
General
The Indenture does not limit the aggregate principal amount of Debt Securities that the Corporation may 
issue under the Indenture and does not limit the amount of other indebtedness that the Corporation may incur. The 
Indenture provides that the Corporation may issue Debt Securities from time to time in one or more series which may 
be denominated and payable in U.S. dollars, Canadian dollars or any other currency.
7
The particular terms relating to Debt Securities offered by a Prospectus Supplement (the “Offered Debt 
Securities”) will be described in the related Prospectus Supplement. The terms of the Debt Securities will include 
those set forth in the Indenture, any related documents and those made a part of the Indenture in accordance with the 
Indenture Act. Such terms may include, but may not be limited to, any of the following:
•
the title and any limit on the aggregate principal amount of the Offered Debt Securities;
•  whether the Offered Debt Securities will be secured or unsecured;
•  whether the Offered Debt Securities are convertible into or exchangeable for other securities and, if so,
the terms and conditions upon which such securities will be convertible or exchangeable;
•  whether the Offered Debt Securities are senior or subordinated Debt Securities and, if subordinated, the
terms of such subordination;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the percentage or percentages of principal amount at which such Offered Debt Securities will be issued;
the interest rate(s) or the method for determining the interest rate(s);
the dates on which interest will accrue or the method for determining dates on which interest will accrue 
and dates on which interest will be payable;
the dates on which the Offered Debt Securities may be issued, the maturity date and other dates of 
payment of principal;
redemption or early repayment provisions;
authorized denominations if other than denominations of US$2,000 and multiples of US$1,000 in excess 
thereof;
the form of the Offered Debt Securities;
amount of discount or premium, if any, with which such Offered Debt Securities will be issued;
•  whether such Offered Debt Securities will be issued in whole or in part in the form of one or more global
securities;
•
the identity of the depositary for global securities;
•  whether a temporary security is to be issued with respect to such series and whether any interest payable 
prior to the issuance of definitive securities of the series will be credited to the account of the persons 
entitled thereto;
•
•
•
•
•
•
the terms upon which beneficial interests in a temporary global security may be exchanged in whole or 
in part for beneficial interests in a definitive global security or for individual definitive securities;
any covenants, including maintenance of certain financial ratios, applicable to the particular Offered 
Debt Securities being issued;
the terms of any guarantee applicable to the particular Offered Debt Securities being issued;
any defaults and events of default applicable to the particular Offered Debt Securities being issued;
any restriction or condition on the transferability of the Offered Debt Securities;
the currency, currencies or currency units in which the purchase price for, the principal of and any 
premium and any interest on, such Offered Debt Securities will be payable;
8
•
•
the  time  period  within  which,  the  manner  in  which  and  the  terms  and  conditions  upon  which  the 
purchaser of the Offered Debt Securities can select the payment currency;
the securities exchange(s) or automated quotation system(s) on which the Offered Debt Securities will 
be listed or admitted to trading, as applicable, if any;
•  whether any underwriter(s) will act as market maker(s) for the Offered Debt Securities;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the extent to which a secondary market for the Offered Debt Securities is expected to develop;
the  Corporation’s  obligation  or  right  to  redeem,  purchase  or  repay  Offered  Debt  Securities  under  a 
sinking fund, amortization or analogous provision;
provisions relating to the modification of the indenture both with and without the consent of holders of 
Offered Debt Securities issued under the Indenture;
place or places where the Corporation may pay principal, premium, if any, and interest and where holders 
may present the Offered Debt Securities for registration of transfer, exchange or conversion;
place or places where notices and demands relating to the Offered Debt Securities and the Indentures 
may be made;
if other than the principal amount of the Offered Debt Securities, the portion of the principal amount of 
the Offered Debt Securities that is payable upon declaration of acceleration of maturity;
any index or formula used to determine the amount of payments of principal, premium, if any, or interest 
on the Offered Debt Securities and the method of determining these amounts;
any provisions relating to compensation and reimbursement of the Trustees;
provisions, if any, granting special rights to holders of the Offered Debt Securities upon the occurrence 
of specified events; and
additional terms not inconsistent with the provisions of the Indenture.
The Corporation may offer and sell Debt Securities, including original issue discount securities, at par or at 
a discount below their stated principal amount. Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable Prospectus Supplement, 
the Indenture also permits the Corporation, without the consent of the holders of any Debt Securities, to increase the 
principal amount of any series of Debt Securities the Corporation has previously issued under the Indenture and to 
issue such increased principal amount. Any such additional Debt Securities, together with all other outstanding Debt 
Securities of that series, will constitute a single series of securities under the Indenture. Such additional Debt Securities 
will have the same terms as to ranking, redemption, waivers, amendments or otherwise as the applicable series of Debt 
Securities, and will vote together as one class on all matters with respect to such series of Debt Securities.
The Corporation may offer and sell Debt Securities, including original issue discount securities, at par or at 
a  discount,  in  some  cases  substantial,  below  their  stated  principal  amount.  The  Corporation  will  describe  in  the 
applicable Prospectus Supplement any material Canadian and U.S. federal income tax consequences and other special 
considerations applicable to any discounted Debt Securities or other Debt Securities offered and sold at par which are 
treated as having been issued at a discount for Canadian and/or U.S. federal income tax purposes. Any taxes withheld 
or deducted from payments in respect of Debt Securities and paid to the relevant tax authority shall be deemed to have 
been paid to the applicable holder.
Denominations, Payment, Interest, Registration and Transfer
Unless the applicable Prospectus Supplement states otherwise, any Debt Securities of any series that the 
Corporation issues in registered form will be issued in denominations of US$2,000 and multiples of US$1,000. The 
Corporation expects most Debt Securities to be issued in fully registered form without coupons.
9
Unless the applicable Prospectus Supplement states otherwise, the principal of, and any premium or interest 
on, any series of Debt Securities will be payable in the currency designated in the Prospectus Supplement at the 
corporate trust office of the U.S. Trustee. At the option of the Corporation, however, payment of interest may be made 
by check delivered to the address of the person entitled to the interest payment as it appears in the security register for 
the series or, in accordance with arrangements satisfactory to the U.S. Trustee, by wire transfer of funds to an account 
designated by that person. The Corporation may at any time designate additional paying agents or rescind designation 
of  any  paying  agents  or  approve  a  change  in  the  office  through  which  any  paying  agent  acts,  except  that  the 
Corporation will be required to maintain a paying agent in each place of payment for any series. All monies that the 
Corporation pays to a paying agent for the payment of any principal of, or any premium, make-whole amount, interest 
or additional amounts on, any Debt Security which remains unclaimed at the end of two years after that payment 
became due and payable will be repaid to the Corporation. After that time, the holder of the Debt Security will be able 
to look only to the Corporation for payment.
Any interest that the Corporation does not punctually pay on any interest payment date with respect to a Debt
Security will cease to be payable to the holder on the applicable regular record date and may either:
•
•
be paid to the holder at the close of business on a special record date for the payment of defaulted interest, 
to be determined by the U.S. Trustee; or
be paid at any time in any other lawful manner, as more fully described in the Indenture.
Subject to certain limitations imposed upon Debt Securities issued in book-entry form, Debt Securities of 
any series will be exchangeable for other Debt Securities of the same series and of the same total principal amount 
and authorized denomination or denominations upon the surrender of the Debt Securities at the corporate trust office 
of the U.S. Trustee. In addition, subject to certain limitations imposed upon Debt Securities issued in book-entry form, 
the Debt Securities of any series may be surrendered for conversion, transfer or exchange at the corporate trust office 
of the U.S. Trustee. Every Debt Security surrendered for conversion, transfer or exchange must be duly endorsed or 
accompanied by a written instrument of transfer in form satisfactory to the Corporation, the U.S. Trustee and the 
registrar. There will be no service charge for any transfer or exchange of any Debt Securities, but the Corporation may 
require holders to pay any tax, assessment or other governmental charge payable in connection with the transfer or 
exchange.
Neither the Corporation nor either of the Trustees will be required to do any of the following:
•
•
issue, register the transfer of or exchange Debt Securities of any series during a period beginning at the 
opening of business 15 calendar days before the day of the transmission of a notice of redemption of 
Debt Securities of such series selected for redemption and ending at the close of business on the day of 
such transmission; or
register, transfer or exchange any Debt Security called for redemption in whole or in part, except the 
unredeemed portion of any Debt Security being only partially redeemed.
10
Global Securities
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable Prospectus Supplement, the Debt Securities of a series may be 
issued in whole or in part in the form of one or more Global Securities that will be deposited with, or on behalf of, a 
depositary (the “Depositary”) identified in the applicable Prospectus Supplement. Global Securities will be issued in 
registered form and in either temporary or definitive form. Unless and until it is exchanged in whole or in part for the 
individual Debt Securities, a Global Security may not be transferred except as a whole by the Depositary for such 
Global Security to a nominee of such Depositary or by a nominee of such Depositary to such Depositary or another 
nominee of such Depositary or by such Depositary or any such nominee to a successor of such Depositary or a nominee 
of such successor. The specific terms of the depositary arrangement with respect to any Debt Securities of a series and 
the rights of and limitations upon owners of beneficial interests in a Global Security will be described in the applicable 
Prospectus Supplement.
Events of Default
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable Prospectus Supplement, the term “Event of Default” with respect
to Debt Securities of any series means any of the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
default in the payment of any interest on any Debt Security of that series when it becomes due and 
payable, and continuance of such default for a period of 30 days;
default in the payment of the principal of (or any premium on) any Debt Security of that series at its 
maturity, upon redemption or otherwise;
default in the payment of any sinking fund installment, if any, when the same becomes due by the terms 
of the Debt Securities of that series, and continuance of such default for a period of 30 days;
default in the performance, or breach, of any other covenant or agreement of the Corporation in the 
Indenture in respect of the Debt Securities of that series (other than a covenant or agreement for which 
default or breach is specifically dealt with elsewhere in the Indenture), where such default or breach 
continues for a period of 90 days after written notice thereof to the Corporation;
certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization; or
any other event of default provided with respect to the Debt Securities of that series.
If an Event of Default (other than an Event of Default in the case of certain events of bankruptcy) occurs and 
is continuing with respect to Debt Securities of any series, then the Trustees or the holders of not less than 25% in 
principal amount of the outstanding Debt Securities of that series may require the principal amount (or, if the Debt 
Securities of that series are original issue discount securities or indexed securities, such portion of the principal amount 
as may be specified in the terms of that series) of all the outstanding Debt Securities of that series and any accrued but 
unpaid interest on such Debt Securities be paid immediately. However, at any time after a declaration of acceleration 
with respect to Debt Securities of any series or all series affected (or of all series, as the case may be) has been made 
and before a judgment or decree for payment of the money due has been obtained, the holders of a majority in principal 
amount of the outstanding Debt Securities of such series, or of all series affected (or of all series, as the case may be), 
by written notice to the  Corporation and the Trustees, may, under certain circumstances, rescind and annul such 
acceleration. If an Event of Default in the case of certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization exists, 
the principal  amount  of  all Debt  Securities outstanding under  the Indenture  shall  automatically,  and without  any 
declaration or other action on the part of the Trustees or any holder of such outstanding debt, become immediately 
due and payable. The applicable Prospectus Supplement will contain provisions relating to acceleration of the maturity 
of a portion of the principal amount of original issue discount securities or indexed securities upon the occurrence of 
any Event of Default and the continuation thereof.
11
Subject to the provisions of the Indenture relating to the duties of the Trustees, if an Event of Default then 
exists, the Trustees will be under no obligation to exercise any of its rights or powers under the Indenture (other than 
the payment of any amounts on the Debt Securities furnished to it pursuant to the Indenture) at the request or direction 
of any of the holders, unless the holders have offered to the Trustees security and/or indemnity satisfactory to the 
Trustees. Subject to the provisions for the security and/or indemnification of the Trustees, the holders of a majority in 
aggregate principal amount of a series of outstanding Debt Securities have the right to direct the time, method and 
place  of  conducting  any  proceeding  for  any  remedy  available  to  the  Trustees,  or  exercising  any  trust  or  power 
conferred on the Trustees in connection with the Debt Securities of that series.
No  holder  of  a  Debt  Security  of  any  series  will  have  any  right  to  institute  any  proceedings,  judicial  or
otherwise, unless:
•
•
•
such holder has previously given to the Trustees written notice of a continuing Event of Default with 
respect to the Debt Securities of that series;
the holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the outstanding Debt Securities of all series affected 
by such Event of Default have made written request and have offered security or indemnity satisfactory 
to the Trustees to institute such proceedings as trustee; and
the Trustees have failed to institute such proceeding, and have not received from the holders of a majority 
of in the aggregate principal amount of outstanding Debt Securities of all series affected by such Event 
of Default a direction inconsistent with such request, within 60 days after such request.
However,  these  limitations  do  not  apply  to  a  suit  instituted  by  the  holder  of  a  Debt  Security  for  the 
enforcement of payment of principal, premium, if any, and interest on such Debt Security on or after the applicable 
due date of such payment.
The Corporation will be required to furnish to the U.S. Trustee annually an officers’ certificate as to the
performance of certain of its obligations under the Indenture and as to any default in such performance.
Merger, Consolidation and Sale of Assets
For so long as any Debt Securities remain outstanding, and unless otherwise set forth in the Indenture, the 
Corporation will not consolidate with or merge into any other entity, or sell or lease, all or substantially all of its assets 
to another entity, and no entity may consolidate with or merge into the Corporation, unless:
•
•
•
the Corporation will be the continuing entity in any merger or consolidation or the successor, transferee 
or lessee entity (if other than the Corporation) is a corporation organized and validly existing under the 
laws of any U.S. or Canadian jurisdiction and expressly assumes the Corporation’s obligations relating 
to the Debt Securities;
immediately after such consolidation, merger, sale or lease, there exists no Event of Default, and no 
event which, after notice or lapse of time or both, would become an Event of Default; and
other conditions described in the Indenture are met.
Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance
The Indenture provides that the Corporation may discharge all of its obligations with respect to any series of 
the Debt Securities at any time, and that it may also be released from its obligations under certain covenants and from 
certain other obligations, including obligations imposed by a company order or supplemental indenture with respect 
to that series, if any, and elect not to comply with those sections and obligations without creating an Event of Default. 
Discharge  under  the  first  procedure  is  called  “defeasance”  and  under  the  second  procedure  is  called  “covenant 
defeasance.”
12
Defeasance or covenant defeasance may be effected only if:
•
•
•
•
the  Corporation  irrevocably  deposits  with  the  U.S.  Trustee  money  or  government  obligations  or  a 
combination thereof, as trust funds in an amount sufficient to pay and discharge each installment of 
principal of, premium, if any, and interest on, all outstanding Debt Securities of that series;
no Event of Default under the Indenture has occurred and is continuing on the date of such deposit, other 
than an Event of Default resulting from the borrowing of funds and the grant of any related liens to be 
applied to such deposit;
the Corporation delivers to the U.S. Trustee an opinion of counsel to the effect that (i) the holders of the 
Debt Securities of that series will not recognize income, gain or loss for U.S. federal income tax purposes 
as a result of the deposit, defeasance and discharge or as a result of the deposit and covenant defeasance 
and (ii) the deposit, defeasance and discharge or the deposit and covenant defeasance will not otherwise 
alter those holders’ U.S. federal income tax treatment of principal and interest payments on the Debt 
Securities of that series and, in the case of a defeasance, this opinion is accompanied by a ruling to that 
effect received from or published by the Internal Revenue Service; and
the Corporation delivers to the Trustees a certificate of an officer of the Corporation and an opinion of 
counsel  to  the  effect  that  all  conditions  precedent  in  the  Indenture  relating  to  the  discharge  of  the 
Corporation’s  obligations  with  respect  to  all  outstanding  Debt  Securities  of  that  series  have  been 
complied with.
Modifications and Waivers
The Corporation and the Trustees may modify or amend the Indenture with the consent of the holders of a 
majority in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Debt Securities of all series affected by such modification 
or  amendment;  provided,  however,  that  unless  otherwise  stated  in  the  applicable  Prospectus  Supplement,  the 
Corporation will be required to receive consent from the holder of each outstanding Debt Security of such affected 
series to:
•
•
•
•
•
extend the stated maturity of the principal of, or any installment of interest on, any such outstanding 
Debt Security;
reduce the principal amount of or the interest on or any premium payable upon the redemption of any 
such outstanding Debt Security;
change the currency in which the principal amount of and premium, if any, or interest on any such 
outstanding Debt Security is denominated or payable;
reduce the principal amount of an original issue discount security that would be due and payable upon a 
declaration of acceleration of the maturity thereof;
impair the right of a holder to institute suit for the enforcement of any payment on any outstanding Debt 
Security after the stated maturity or redemption date;
•  materially adversely affect the economic terms of any right to convert or exchange any such outstanding
Debt Security;
•
reduce the percentage of the holders of outstanding Debt Securities necessary to modify or amend the 
indenture  or  to  waive  compliance  with  certain  provisions  of  the  indenture  or  certain  defaults  and 
consequences of such defaults; or
•  modify any of these provisions or any of the provisions relating to the waiver of certain past defaults or 
certain covenants, except to increase the required percentage to effect such action or to provide that 
certain other provisions may not be modified or waived without the consent of all of the holders of the 
Debt Securities affected.
13
The holders of a majority in principal amount of Debt Securities of any series or of the affected series may, 
on behalf of all holders of such series, generally waive the Corporation’s compliance with certain restrictive provisions 
of  the  Indenture  with  respect  to  such  series.  The  holders  of  a  majority  in  principal  amount  of  outstanding  Debt 
Securities of all series with respect to which an Event of Default has occurred may, on behalf of all holders, generally 
waive any past default under the Indenture, except with respect to a default in the payment of the principal of or 
premium or interest on any Debt Security of that series or in respect of any covenant or provision that cannot be 
modified, amended or waived without the consent of each holder, including those set forth in the list above.
The Indenture or the Debt Securities may be amended or supplemented, without the consent of any holder of 
such Debt Securities, in order to, among other things, cure any ambiguity or inconsistency, or to make any change, in 
any case, that does not adversely affect the interests of any holder of such Debt Securities.
Consent to Jurisdiction and Service
Under the Indenture, the Corporation will irrevocably appoint CT Corporation upon which process may be 
served in any suit, action or proceeding arising out of or relating to the Offered Debt Securities or the Indenture that 
may be instituted in any United States federal or New York state court located in the City of New York, and will 
submit to such nonexclusive jurisdiction.
Governing Law
The Indenture and the Debt Securities will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the
State of New York.
Enforceability of Judgments
Since many of the assets of the Corporation, as well as many of the assets of some of the Corporation’s 
officers and directors, are outside the United States, any judgment obtained in the United States against the Corporation 
or  certain  of  its  officers  or  directors,  including  judgments  with  respect  to  the  payment  of  principal  on  any  Debt 
Securities, may not be collectible within the United States.
The Trustees
The U.S. Trustee and Canadian Trustee under the Indenture or each of their affiliates may provide banking 
and other services to the Corporation in the ordinary course of their business. The Trustees and each of their affiliates 
will be permitted to engage in other transactions with the Corporation. If the Trustees or any affiliates acquire any 
conflicting interest and a default occurs with respect to the Debt Securities, the Trustees, as applicable, must eliminate 
the conflict or resign. The Trustees will have all the duties and responsibilities of an indenture trustee specified in the 
Indenture Act. The Trustees are not required to expend or risk their own funds or incur any financial liability in the 
performance of any of their duties under the Indenture, and will be under no obligation to exercise any of their rights 
and powers under the Indenture at the request of any holder, unless such holder has offered to the Trustees security 
and/or indemnity satisfactory to the Trustees against any loss, liability or expense.
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
The following sets forth the general terms and conditions of the Warrants.  The particular terms and provisions of 
Warrants offered pursuant to any Prospectus Supplement, and the extent to which the general terms and provisions 
described below may apply to them, will be described in the Prospectus Supplement filed in respect of such offering 
of Warrants. The Warrants either will be issued under a warrant indenture or agreement that will be entered into by 
the Corporation and a trustee or warrant agent at the time of issuance of the Warrants or will be represented by warrant 
certificates issued by the Corporation.
Warrants will entitle the holder thereof to receive other Securities (typically Common Shares or Preferred Shares) 
upon the exercise thereof and payment of the applicable exercise price. A Warrant is typically exercisable for a specific 
period  of  time  at  the  end  of  which  time  it  will  expire  and  cease  to  be  exercisable.    Warrants  may  be  offered 
independently or together with other Securities and may be attached to, or separate from, any such offered Securities.
14
Holders of Warrants are not shareholders of the Corporation. The particular terms and provisions of Warrants offered 
by this Prospectus will be described in the Prospectus Supplement filed in respect of the offering of such Warrants. 
This description may include, without limitation and as applicable: (i) the title or designation of the Warrants; (ii) the 
number of Warrants offered and the offering price thereof; (iii) the number of other Securities purchasable upon 
exercise of the Warrants and the procedures for exercise; (iv) the exercise price of the Warrants; (v) the dates or 
periods during which the Warrants are exercisable and when they expire; (vi) the designation and terms of any other 
Securities with which the Warrants will be offered, if any, and the number of Warrants that will be offered with each 
such Security; (vii) the material income tax consequences of owning, holding and disposing of the Warrants; and (viii) 
any other material terms and conditions of the Warrants including, without limitation, transferability and adjustment 
terms and whether the Warrants will be listed on a securities exchange.
DESCRIPTION OF SUBSCRIPTION RECEIPTS
The  following  sets  forth  the  general  terms  of  the  Subscription  Receipts.    The  particular  terms  and  provisions  of 
Subscription Receipts offered pursuant to any Prospectus Supplement, and the extent to which the general terms and 
provisions described below may apply to them, will be described in the Prospectus Supplement filed in respect of such 
offering of Subscription Receipts.  Subscription Receipts may be offered separately or together with other Securities. 
The Subscription Receipts will be issued under one or more subscription receipt agreements that will be entered into 
by the Corporation and an escrow or other agent at the time of issuance of the Subscription Receipts.
Subscription Receipts will entitle the holder thereof to receive other Securities (typically Common Shares), for no 
additional consideration, upon the completion of a particular transaction or event, typically an acquisition of the assets 
or securities of another entity by the Corporation. The subscription proceeds from an offering of Subscription Receipts 
will be held in escrow by an escrow or other agent pending the completion of the transaction or the termination time 
(the time at which the escrow terminates regardless of whether the transaction or event has occurred). Holders of 
Subscription Receipts will receive other Securities upon the completion of the particular transaction or event or, if the 
transaction or event does not occur by the termination time, a return of the subscription funds for their Subscription 
Receipts  together  with  any  interest  or  other  income  earned  thereon.    Subscription  Receipts  may  be  offered 
independently or together with other Securities.
Holders of Subscription Receipts are not shareholders of the Corporation. The particular terms and provisions of 
Subscription Receipts offered by this Prospectus will be described in the Prospectus Supplement filed in respect of 
the offering of such Subscription Receipts. This description may include, without limitation and as applicable: (i) the 
number of Subscription Receipts offered; (ii) the price at which the Subscription Receipts will be offered; (iii) the 
terms, conditions  and procedures pursuant to which the holders of Subscription Receipts will become entitled to 
receive  other  Securities;  (iv)  the  number  of  other  Securities  that  may  be  obtained  pursuant  to  each  Subscription 
Receipt; (v) the designation and terms of any other Securities with which the Subscription Receipts will be offered, if 
any, and the number of Subscription Receipts that will be offered with each such Security; (vi) the terms relating to 
the holding and release of the gross proceeds from the sale of the Subscription Receipts plus any interest and income 
earned thereon; (vii) the material income tax consequences of owning, holding and disposing of the Subscription 
Receipts; and (viii) any other material terms and conditions of the Subscription Receipts including, without limitation, 
transferability and adjustment terms and whether the Subscription Receipts will be listed on a securities exchange.
DESCRIPTION OF UNITS
Units are a security comprised of one or more of the other Securities described in this Prospectus offered together as 
a “unit”. Units are typically issued so that the holder thereof is also the holder of each Security included in the Unit. 
Thus, the holder of a Unit will have the rights and obligations of a holder of each Security comprising the Unit. The 
Unit agreement under which a Unit is issued may provide that the Securities comprising the unit may not be held or 
transferred separately at any time or at any time before a specified date.
The  particular  terms  and  provisions  of  Units  offered  by  any  Prospectus  Supplement,  and  the  extent  to  which  the 
general terms and provisions described below may apply to them, will be described in  the Prospectus Supplement 
filed in respect of such Units. This description will include, where applicable: (i) the designation and terms of the 
Units and of the Securities comprising the Units, including whether and under what circumstances those Securities 
may be held or transferred separately; (ii) any provisions for the issuance, payment, settlement, transfer or exchange
15
of the  Units or of the  Securities  comprising the  Units; (iii) whether  the  Units will be issued  in  fully registered or 
global form; and (iv) any other material terms and conditions of the Units.
CERTAIN INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS
The applicable Prospectus Supplement may describe certain Canadian federal income tax consequences to an investor 
acquiring any Securities offered thereunder.
The applicable Prospectus Supplement may describe certain United States federal income tax consequences to an 
investor acquiring any Securities offered thereunder.
CREDIT RATINGS
The  following  information  relates  to  the  credit  ratings  Precision  has  received  from  Moody’s  Investors 
Services Inc. (“Moody’s”) and Standard and Poor’s Rating Services (“Standard and Poor’s”) on its corporate credit 
and its senior unsecured credit.
Corporate credit 
Senior unsecured credit
Moody’s: 
 
 
Standard and Poor’s: 
 
Corporate credit   
Senior unsecured credit
Outlook
negative 
negative
negative 
negative
Rating 
 
B2 
B3 
 
BB+ 
BB
Credit ratings assigned by the rating agencies are not recommendations to buy, hold or sell the debt, and the 
ratings are not a comment on market price or suitability for a particular investor. There is no assurance that a rating 
will remain in effect for a given period or that any rating will not be revised or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency 
in the future if it believes circumstances warrant it. Credit ratings by different agencies are independent of one another 
and  should  be  evaluated  separately.  The  Corporation  pays  an  annual  fee  to  Moody’s  and  Standard  and  Poor’s.  
Additionally, Precision may pay a fee to credit rating agencies in order to receive a rating for Debt Securities or 
Preferred Shares upon issuance.
Moody’s
Moody’s long-term credit ratings are on a rating scale that ranges from Aaa (highest) to C (lowest).  A rating 
of  B  by  Moody’s  is  within  the  sixth  highest  of  nine  categories  and  denotes  obligations  which  are  considered 
speculative and are subject to high credit risk. The addition of a 1, 2 or 3 modifier after a rating indicates the relative 
standing within a particular rating category.  The modifier 1 indicates that the issue ranks in the higher end of its 
generic rating category, the modifier 2 indicates a mid-range ranking and the modifier 3 indicates a ranking in the 
lower end of that generic rating category.
Standard and Poor’s
Standard and Poor’s long-term credit ratings are on a rating scale that ranges from AAA (highest) to D 
(lowest).  A rating of BB by Standard and Poor’s is within the fifth highest of ten categories and indicates that an 
obligor with such obligations is less vulnerable in the near-term than other lower-rated obligors, but faces major 
ongoing  uncertainties  and  exposure  to  adverse  business,  financial  or  economic  conditions  that  could  lead  to  the 
obligor’s inadequate capacity to meet its financial commitments. The addition of a plus (+) or minus (-) designation 
after a rating indicates the relative standing within the major rating categories.
RISK FACTORS
An investment in the Securities is subject to certain risks.  Investors should carefully review and consider the risks 
described  below  and  all  other  information  contained  in  this Prospectus  and  any  Prospectus  Supplement  before 
making  an  investment  decision  and  consult  their  own  experts  where  necessary.  In  addition  to  the  risk  factors 
outlined below, investors are directed to the risk factors set forth under the heading “Risks in Our Business” in the AIF 
which are applicable to the business being carried on by the Corporation.
16
There is no market through which the Securities (other than the Common Shares) may be sold.
There is currently no market through which any of the Securities, other than the Common Shares, may be sold and 
the purchasers of such Securities may not be able to resell such securities purchased under this Prospectus and any 
Prospectus Supplement.  There can be no assurance that a secondary market will develop  for any of the  Preferred 
Shares, Debt Securities, Warrants, Subscription Receipts or Units that may be issued under this Prospectus or  that 
any  secondary  market  which  does  develop  will  continue. This  may  affect  the  pricing  of  such  Securities  in  the 
secondary market, if any,  the transparency and availability of trading prices, the liquidity  of the  Securities and the 
extent of regulation of such Securities.
The  public  offering prices  of  the Securities may  be  determined by  negotiation between  the Corporation and 
underwriters based on several factors and may bear no relationship to the prices at which Securities will trade in the 
public market subsequent to such offering.  See “Plan of Distribution”.
Credit ratings may not reflect all risks of an investment in Debt Securities and may change.
Credit ratings may not reflect all risks associated with an investment in Debt Securities. Any credit ratings applied  to 
Debt  Securities  are  an  assessment  of  the  Corporation’s  ability  to  pay  its  obligations.  Consequently,  real  or 
anticipated changes in the credit ratings will generally affect the market value of Debt Securities.  The credit ratings, 
however,  may  not  reflect  the  potential  impact  of  risks  related  to  market  or  other  factors  on  the  value  of  Debt 
Securities.  There  is no  assurance  that  any credit  rating  assigned  to  Debt  Securities  will  remain  in  effect  for  any 
given period of time or that any rating will not be lowered or withdrawn entirely by the relevant rating agency.
Changes in interest rates may cause the market price or value of Debt Securities or the Preferred Shares to decline.
Prevailing interest rates will affect the market price or value of the Debt Securities and the Preferred Shares.  The market 
price or value of the Debt Securities or the Preferred Shares may decline as prevailing interest rates for comparable debt 
instruments rise, and increase as prevailing interest rates for comparable debt instruments decline.
Debt  Securities  will be  effectively  subordinated  to creditors  of  the  Corporation’s  subsidiaries,  partnerships  and 
other entities.
The  Corporation  conducts  its  business  through  a  number  of  corporate  and  partnership  subsidiaries.  The  Debt 
Securities  will  be  effectively  subordinated  to  claims  of  creditors  of  the  Corporation’s  subsidiaries,  in  that  the 
Corporation’s right  to  participate  as  a  securityholder  or  partner  in  the  distribution  of  the  assets  of  any subsidiary 
upon any such distribution would be subject to the prior claims of the creditors of such subsidiary.
The Debt Securities may be subject to foreign currencies risk.
Debt Securities denominated or payable in foreign currencies may entail significant risk.  These risks include, without 
limitation, the possibility of significant fluctuations in the foreign currency markets, the imposition or modification of 
foreign exchange controls and potential liquidity in the secondary market.  These risks will vary depending upon the 
currency or currencies involved and will be more fully described in the applicable Prospectus Supplement.
ENFORCEABILITY OF JUDGMENTS
The Corporation exists under the laws of the Province of Alberta, Canada. Some of the Corporation’s directors and 
officers and experts named in this Prospectus are residents of Canada or otherwise reside outside the United States, 
and a  substantial portion of their assets, and a substantial portion of the Corporation’s assets, are located outside the 
United  States.  As a result, it may be difficult for United States investors to effect service of process within the United 
States upon those directors, officers or experts who are not residents of the United States, or to realize in the United 
States upon judgments of courts of the United States predicated upon civil liability of such directors, officers or experts 
under United States federal securities laws. The Corporation has been advised by Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, our 
Canadian counsel, that a judgment of a United States court predicated solely upon civil liability under such laws would 
probably be enforceable in Canada if the United States court in which the judgment was obtained had a basis for 
jurisdiction in the matter that was recognized by a Canadian court for such purposes. The Corporation has also been
17
advised by such counsel, however, that there is substantial doubt whether an action could be brought in Canada in the 
first instance on the basis of liability predicated solely upon such laws.
The Corporation filed with the SEC, concurrently with the Registration Statement of which this Prospectus forms a 
part, an appointment of agent for service of process on Form F-X.  Under the Form F-X, the Corporation appointed 
Precision Drilling (US) Corporation as its agent for service of process in the United States in connection with any 
investigation or administrative proceeding conducted by the SEC and any civil suit or action brought against the 
Corporation in a United States court arising out of or related to or concerning an offering of Securities under this 
Prospectus. Certain of our directors and officers reside outside of Canada. Each of Kevin A. Neveu, William T. 
Donovan, Steven W. Krablin and Kevin O. Meyers has appointed the following agent for service in Canada:
Name and Address of Agent 
Senior Corporate Counsel 
Precision Drilling Corporation 
Suite 800, 525 – 8th Avenue S.W. 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2P 1G1
Purchasers are advised that it may not be possible for investors to enforce judgments obtained in Canada against any 
person or company that is incorporated, continued or otherwise organized under the laws of a foreign jurisdiction or 
resides outside of Canada, even if the party has appointed an agent for service of process.
STATUTORY AND CONTRACTUAL RIGHTS OF WITHDRAWAL AND RESCISSION
Securities legislation in certain of  the provinces of Canada provides purchasers with the right to withdraw from an 
agreement to purchase securities.  This right may be exercised within two business days after the receipt or deemed 
receipt of a prospectus, the accompanying prospectus supplement relating to securities purchased by a purchaser and any 
amendment.  In several of the provinces the securities legislation further provides purchasers with remedies for rescission 
or, in some jurisdictions, revisions of the price or damages if the prospectus, the accompanying prospectus supplement 
relating to securities purchased by a purchaser and any amendment contains a misrepresentation or is not delivered to the 
purchaser, provided that the remedies for rescission, revisions of the price or damages are exercised by the purchaser 
within the time limit prescribed by the securities legislation of the purchaser’s province.  The purchaser should refer to 
any applicable provisions of the securities legislation of the purchaser’s province for the particulars of these rights or 
consult with a legal adviser.
Original purchasers of convertible, exchangeable or exercisable Securities will have a contractual right of rescission 
against  Precision  in  respect  of  the  conversion,  exchange  or  exercise  of  such  Securities,  as  the  case  may  be.    The 
contractual right of rescission will entitle such original purchasers to receive the amount paid upon conversion, exchange 
or exercise, upon surrender of the underlying Securities gained thereby, in the event that this Prospectus (as supplemented 
or amended) contains a misrepresentation, provided that: (i) the conversion, exchange or exercise takes place within 180 
days of the date of the purchase of the convertible, exchangeable or exercisable Security under this Prospectus; and (ii) 
the right of rescission is exercised within 180 days of the date of the purchase of the convertible, exchangeable or 
exercisable Security under this Prospectus.  This contractual right of rescission will be consistent with the statutory right 
of rescission described under section 203 of the Securities Act (Alberta), and is in addition to any other right or remedy 
available to original purchasers under section 203 of the Securities Act (Alberta) or otherwise at law.
In an offering of convertible, exchangeable or exercisable Securities, purchasers are cautioned that the statutory right of 
action for damages for a misrepresentation contained in this Prospectus or any Prospectus Supplement is limited, in 
certain provincial securities legislation, to the price at which the convertible, exchangeable or exercisable securities are 
offered to the public under this Prospectus or any Prospectus Supplement.  This means that, under the securities legislation 
of certain provinces, if the purchaser pays additional amounts upon the conversion, exchange or exercise of the security, 
those amounts may not be recoverable under the statutory right of action for damages that applies in those provinces or 
territories.  The purchaser should refer to any applicable provisions of the securities legislation of the purchaser's province 
for the particulars of these rights or consult with a legal advisor.
18
INTEREST OF EXPERTS
Unless otherwise specified in the applicable Prospectus Supplement relating to an offering of Securities, certain legal 
matters  relating to the offering of such Securities will be passed upon on behalf of the Corporation by Osler, Hoskin 
&  Harcourt  LLP. As at the date hereof, the partners and associates of Osler,  Hoskin  &  Harcourt  LLP, as a group, 
each  own, directly or indirectly, less than 1% of the outstanding Common Shares.
KPMG LLP are the auditors of Precision and have confirmed that they are independent with respect to Precision 
within the meaning of the relevant rules and related interpretations prescribed by the relevant professional bodies in 
Canada and any applicable legislation or regulations and also that they are independent accountants with respect to 
Precision under all relevant U.S. professional and regulatory standards.
19
Dated: August 5, 2016
CERTIFICATE OF THE CORPORATION
This short form prospectus, together with the documents incorporated in this prospectus by reference, will, as of the 
date of the last supplement to this prospectus relating to the securities offered by this prospectus and the supplement(s), 
constitute  full,  true  and  plain  disclosure  of  all  material  facts  relating  to  the  securities  offered  by  this  short  form 
prospectus and the supplement(s) as required by the securities legislation of each of the provinces of Canada.
PRECISION DRILLING CORPORATION
(signed) “Kevin A. Neveu”
(signed) “Carey T. Ford”
President and Chief Executive Officer
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(signed) “Catherine J. Hughes”
Director
(signed) “Steven W. Krablin”
Director