
EX-99.3 4 exh99_3.htm EXHIBIT 99.3
Exhibit 99.3
FORM 52-109F2
CERTIFICATION OF INTERIM FILINGS
FULL CERTIFICATE
I, Scott Saxberg, President and Chief Executive Officer of Crescent Point Energy Corp., certify
the following:
1.
2.
Review:  I have reviewed the interim financial report and interim MD&A (together, the "interim
filings") of Crescent Point Energy Corp. (the "issuer") for the interim period ended June 30,
2016.
No misrepresentations:  Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the
interim filings do not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material
fact required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading in light of the
circumstances under which it was made, with respect to the period covered by the interim
filings.
Fair presentation:  Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the interim
financial report together with the other financial information included in the interim filings fairly
present in all material respects the financial condition, financial performance and cash flows of
the issuer, as of the date of and for the periods presented in the interim filings.
Responsibility:  The issuer's other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and
maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (DC&P) and internal control over financial
reporting (ICFR), as those terms are defined in National Instrument 52-109 Certification of
Disclosure in Issuers' Annual and Interim Filings, for the issuer.
Design:  Subject to the limitations, if any, described in paragraphs 5.2 and 5.3, the issuer's
other certifying officer and I have, as at the end of the period covered by the interim filings:
designed DC&P, or caused it to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable
assurance that:
material information relating to the issuer is made known to us by others, particularly during the
period in which the interim filings are being prepared; and
information required to be disclosed by the issuer in its annual filings, interim filings or other
reports filed or submitted by it under securities legislation is recorded, processed, summarized
and reported within the time periods specified in securities legislation; and
designed ICFR, or caused it to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable
assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with the issuer's GAAP.
Control framework:  The control framework the issuer's other certifying officer and I used to
design the issuer's ICFR is the Internal Control – Integrated Framework ("COSO Framework")
published by The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
("COSO").
3.
4.
5.
(a)
(i)
(ii)
(b)
5.1
5.2ICFR – material weakness relating to design:  N/A.
5.3Limitation on scope of design:  N/A.
Reporting changes in ICFR:  The issuer has disclosed in its interim MD&A any change in the
issuer's ICFR that occurred during the period beginning on April 1, 2016 and ended on June
30, 2016 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the issuer's
6.
ICFR.
Date:  August 11, 2016
 
(signed) Scott Saxberg
Scott Saxberg
 
President and Chief Executive Officer