
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>EX-31.2
<SEQUENCE>3
<FILENAME>thai-ex31cfo.txt
<DESCRIPTION>SEC. 302 CERTIFICATION OF CFO
<TEXT>
                               EXHIBIT 31.2
         CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT
         ---------------------------------------------------------------
I, Au E-Mun hereby certify that:
1. I have reviewed this quarterly report on Form 10-QSB of Thai One On,
Inc. and its wholly-owned Subsidiary, Thai Pasta Enterprise Sdn. Bhd.
2. Based on my knowledge, the quarterly report does not contain any
untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
necessary to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances
under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect
to the period covered by the quarterly report.
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial
information included in the quarterly report, fairly present in all
material respects our financial condition, results of operations and
cash flows as of, and for, the periods presented in the quarterly report.
4. The other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing
and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and we have:
(a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such
disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision,
to ensure that material information relating to Thai One On, Inc.,
including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others
within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report
is being prepared;
(b) Evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures
and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period
covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
(c) Disclosed in this report any change in our internal control over
financial reporting that occurred during our most recent fiscal quarter
(fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially
affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control
over financial reporting; and
(5) Thai One On, Inc.'s other certifying officer(s) and I have
disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over
financial reporting, to our auditors and the audit committee of our
board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or
operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect our ability to record, process, summarize and
report financial information; and
(b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other
employees who have a significant role in our internal control over
financial reporting.
                                   THAI ONE ON, INC., Registrant
Dated: November 1, 2005            /s/ Au E-Mun
-------------------------------------
                                   By: Au E-Mun, Chief Financial Officer,
                                   Treasurer, Principal Accounting
                                   Officer and Director
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>