
​ Update on Big Sofa and AGM - RNS - London Stock Exchange​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
Regulatory Story
Go to market news section
New World Oil & Gas  -  NEW
​ ​ ​
Update on Big Sofa and AGM
Released 07:00 01-Sep-2016
RNS Number : 6245I
New World Oil & Gas
01 September 2016
1 September 2016
New World Oil and Gas plc
("New World" or the "Company")
Update on Big Sofa and AGM
Further to the announcement on 9 May 2016, regarding the possible acquisition of Big Sofa
Limited ("Big Sofa"), a company operating primarily in the high growth area of video analytics, the
Company is pleased to provide an update on progress to date and other matters.
Progress with the reverse takeover of Big Sofa
The Company is continuing to make good progress with the possible reverse takeover of Big
Sofa and the Board remains of the view that this acquisition is an attractive proposition for New
World shareholders.  Big Sofa is continuing to win new mandates from a number of leading
companies and is expanding internationally, particularly in the United States where a number of
its important clients are based.  Big Sofa is now becoming increasingly well-established within
the fast growing global video insight and analytics sector. The company has also recently made
a number of key appointments and is therefore now well-resourced to capitalise on its recent
contract wins and convert a number of new business opportunities. Further details on the
company's progress and operations can be found on the Big Sofa website at www.bigsofa.co.uk.
New World expects to provide a further update on the transaction in due course.
Further loan to Big Sofa
Given the progress that Big Sofa has made to date, the Board has decided to provide Big Sofa
with a further loan of £100,000, in addition to the £500,000 already advanced as announced on
19 July 2016, and on the same terms, in order to provide additional working capital to support this
rapid growth.
Oil and gas licences
As previously reported, the Company's only remaining oil and gas asset is the Blue Creek
Production Sharing Agreement in Belize, which is due to expire on 31 October 2016. The Board
confirms that the Company is currently seeking to dispose or relinquish this asset.  The Company
has also commenced the process of dissolving the subsidiaries associated with its Danish
licences which were relinquished in September 2015.
As announced on 9 May 2016, trading in the Company's shares were suspended given that the
possible acquisition of Big Sofa (the "Acquisition") would amount to a reverse takeover under the
AIM Rules, pending the publication of the required AIM admission document or confirmation that
the Acquisition is not proceeding.
Upon completion of any disposal or expiry of the Company's existing oil and gas assets prior to
the Acquisition, the Company will become an AIM Rule 15 cash shell.
Annual General Meeting
A notice convening an Annual General Meeting ("AGM") of the Company will be sent to
shareholders shortly and a copy of this notice will be made available on the Company's website
at www.nwoilgas.com. The principal purpose of the AGM will be for shareholders to approve the
Report and Accounts for the year to 31 December 2015 (which are also available on the
Company's website), and approve the adoption of a new set of articles which are more
appropriate for the Company going forward.
-Ends-
Enquiries:
Adam Reynolds
New World Oil and Gas plc
Tel. +44 (0) 7785 908158
or
Nicholas Lee
New World Oil and Gas plc
Tel. +44 (0) 20 7580 7576
Roland Cornish or Felicity Geidt
Beaumont Cornish Limited (Nominated Adviser)
Tel: +44 (0)20 7628 3396
Jeremy Garcia, Ben Simons or Fiona Henson
Vigo Communications (Financial Public Relations)
Tel: +44 (0)20 7830 9700
This information is provided by RNS
The company news service from the London Stock Exchange
 
END
 
 
UPDDFLFXQVFZBBF ​ ​ ​ 
Close
London Stock Exchange plc is not responsible for and does not check content on this
Website. Website users are responsible for checking content. Any news item (including
any prospectus) which is addressed solely to the persons and countries specified therein
should not be relied upon other than by such persons and/or outside the specified
countries. Terms and conditions, including restrictions on use and distribution apply.
©2014 London Stock Exchange plc. All rights reserved
Update on Big Sofa and AGM - RNS
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​