
DEFM14A 1 d205901ddefm14a.htm DEFM14A DEFM14A
Table of Contents
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
SCHEDULE 14A
Proxy Statement Pursuant to Section 14(a) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
(Amendment No.    )
Filed by the Registrant  x                              Filed by a Party other than the Registrant  ¨
Check the appropriate box:
¨
¨
Preliminary Proxy Statement
Confidential, for Use of the Commission Only (as permitted by Rule 14a-6(e)(2))
x
Definitive Proxy Statement
¨
¨
Definitive Additional Materials
Soliciting Material under §240.14a-12
RANGE RESOURCES CORPORATION
(Name of Registrant as Specified In Its Charter)
(Name of Person(s) Filing Proxy Statement if other than the Registrant)
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
No fee required.
Fee computed on table below per Exchange Act Rules 14a-6(i)(1) and 0-11.
(1)
Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
(2)
(3)
Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange Act Rule 0-11 (set
forth the amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it was determined):
Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
(4)
Total fee paid:
(5)
Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and identify the filing for
which the offsetting fee was paid previously. Identify the previous filing by registration statement number, or the
Form or Schedule and the date of its filing.
(1)
Amount Previously Paid:
Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
(2)
Filing Party:
(3)
Date Filed:
(4)
x
¨
¨
¨
Table of Contents
JOINT PROXY STATEMENT/ PROSPECTUS
MERGER PROPOSED—YOUR VOTE IS VERY IMPORTANT
The board of directors of Range Resources Corporation (“Range”) and the board of directors of Memorial Resource
Development Corp. (“Memorial”) have each approved an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “merger agreement”)
which provides for the combination of Memorial and Range. Pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement, a
wholly owned subsidiary of Range will merge with and into Memorial, with Memorial surviving as a wholly owned
subsidiary of Range (the “merger”).
If the merger is completed, each share of Memorial common stock outstanding immediately before that time
(including outstanding shares of restricted Memorial common stock, all of which will become fully vested and
unrestricted under the terms of the merger agreement) will automatically be converted into the right to receive 0.375
of a share of Range common stock. This exchange ratio is fixed and will not be adjusted to reflect stock price
changes prior to the closing of the merger. Based on the closing price of Range common stock on the NYSE on
May 13, 2016, the last trading day before public announcement of the merger, the aggregate value of the merger
consideration payable to Memorial stockholders was approximately $3.2 billion.
Shares of Range common stock outstanding before the merger is completed will remain outstanding and
will not be exchanged, converted or otherwise changed in the merger. Range common stock and Memorial
common stock are currently traded on the NYSE and the NASDAQ, respectively, under the symbols “RRC”
and “MRD,” respectively. We urge you to obtain current market quotations of Range and Memorial common
stock.
We intend for the merger to qualify as a “reorganization” under United States federal tax law. Accordingly,
Memorial stockholders are not expected to recognize any gain or loss for U.S. federal income tax purposes
upon the exchange of shares of Memorial common stock for shares of Range common stock pursuant to
the merger, except with respect to cash received in lieu of fractional shares of Range common stock.
Based on the estimated number of shares of Range and Memorial common stock that will be outstanding
immediately prior to the closing of the merger, we estimate that, upon such closing, existing Range
stockholders will own approximately 69% of Range following the merger and former Memorial stockholders
will own approximately 31% of Range following the merger.
At a special meeting of Range stockholders, Range stockholders will be asked to vote on the proposal to
approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in connection with the
merger. Approval of this proposal requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Range
common stock, present in person or represented by proxy at the Range special meeting and entitled to
vote thereon, assuming a quorum is present.
At a special meeting of Memorial stockholders, Memorial stockholders will be asked to vote on a proposal
to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement,
including the merger. Approval of this proposal requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the outstanding
shares of Memorial common stock entitled to vote thereon. At the special meeting, Memorial stockholders
will also be asked to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or
become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger.
In connection with the execution of the merger agreement, MRD Holdco LLC, Jay Graham (Memorial’s chief
executive officer), Anthony Bahr and WHR Incentive LLC (a limited liability company controlled by
Table of Contents
Mr. Graham and Mr. Bahr) entered into a voting and support agreement with Range. The Memorial
stockholders that executed that voting and support agreement have agreed to vote all of the Memorial
shares held by them in favor of the approval and adoption of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger. As of the date of this joint proxy
statement/prospectus, those stockholders hold and are entitled to vote in the aggregate approximately
47.7% of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled to vote at the Memorial special
meeting. In addition, certain other stockholders of Memorial who are not party to the voting and support
agreement are party to a voting agreement (the “existing voting agreement”), dated as of June 18, 2014,
with Memorial, MRD Holdco LLC and the other Memorial stockholder parties to the voting and support
agreement, pursuant to which those stockholders are required to vote all of the shares of Memorial
common stock that they own as directed by MRD Holdco LLC. As of the date of this joint proxy
statement/prospectus, those additional stockholders hold and are entitled to vote in the aggregate
approximately 2.7% of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled to vote at the Memorial
special meeting. Accordingly, as long as the Memorial board of directors does not change its
recommendation with respect to such proposal (in which case the voting and support obligations of such
stockholders would terminate), and as long as those additional stockholders retain ownership of their
shares of Memorial common stock through the record date for the Memorial special meeting, approval of
that proposal at the Memorial special meeting is nearly assured. See “The Merger Agreement—Voting and
Support Agreement” beginning on page 143 for more information.
The Range board of directors unanimously recommends that the Range stockholders vote “FOR” the
proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in
connection with the merger and “FOR” the proposal to approve the adjournment of the Range special
meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
The Memorial board of directors unanimously recommends that the Memorial stockholders vote “FOR” the
proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement, including the merger, “FOR” the approval, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, of the
compensation that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection
with the merger and “FOR” the proposal to approve the adjournment of the Memorial special meeting, if
necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
The obligations of Range and Memorial to complete the merger are subject to the satisfaction or waiver of
several conditions. The accompanying joint proxy statement/prospectus contains detailed information
about Range, Memorial, the special meetings, the merger agreement and the merger. Range and Memorial
encourage you to read the joint proxy statement/prospectus carefully and in its entirety before voting,
including the section titled “Risk Factors” beginning on page 33.
We look forward to the successful combination of Range and Memorial.
Sincerely,
Jeffrey L. Ventura
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
Range Resources Corporation
Jay C. Graham
Chief Executive Officer
Memorial Resource Development Corp.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of the securities to be issued under the joint proxy statement/prospectus or determined if the
joint proxy statement/prospectus is truthful or complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal
offense.
The joint proxy statement/prospectus is dated August 10, 2016 and is first being mailed to Range
stockholders and Memorial stockholders on or about August 12, 2016.
Table of Contents
Range Resources Corporation
100 Throckmorton Street, Suite 1200
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
(817) 870-2601
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
To Be Held On September 15, 2016
To the Stockholders of Range Resources Corporation:
We are pleased to invite you to attend the special meeting of stockholders of Range Resources
Corporation, a Delaware corporation (“Range”), which will be held at The Worthington Renaissance Hotel,
Live Oak Room V, 200 Main Street, Fort Worth, Texas 76102, on September 15, 2016 at 10:00 a.m., local time,
for the following purposes:
•   to vote on a proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock, par value $0.01 per
share, to Memorial Resource Development Corp. (“Memorial”) stockholders in connection with the merger
contemplated by the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 15, 2016, by and among Range,
Memorial and Medina Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Range (“Merger Sub”), as that
agreement may be amended from time to time (the “merger agreement”), a copy of which is included as
Annex A to the joint proxy statement/prospectus of which this notice is a part; and
•   to vote on a proposal to approve the adjournment of the Range special meeting to a later date or dates, if
necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in the event there are not sufficient votes at the time
of the special meeting to approve the first proposal listed above.
Range will transact no other business at the special meeting except such business as may properly be
brought before the Range special meeting by or at the direction of the Range board of directors.
References to the Range special meeting in this joint proxy statement/prospectus are to such special
meeting as adjourned or postponed. Please refer to the joint proxy statement/prospectus of which this
notice is a part for further information with respect to the business to be transacted at the Range special
meeting.
The Range board of directors has fixed the close of business on August 10, 2016 as the record date for the
Range special meeting. Only Range stockholders of record at that time are entitled to receive notice of, and
to vote at, the Range special meeting. A complete list of such stockholders will be available for inspection
by any Range stockholder for any purpose germane to the special meeting during ordinary business hours
for the ten days preceding the Range special meeting at Range’s offices at the address on this notice. The
eligible Range stockholder list will also be available at the Range special meeting for examination by any
stockholder present at such meeting.
Completion of the merger is conditioned on approval of the issuance of shares of Range common stock to
Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger. Approval of the issuance of shares of Range
common stock to Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger requires the affirmative vote of the
holders of a majority in voting power of Range’s stock issued and outstanding and entitled to vote thereon,
present in person or represented by proxy, assuming a quorum is present.
The Range board of directors has approved the merger and the merger agreement and recommends that
Range stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock
to Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger and “FOR” the proposal to approve the
adjournment of the Range special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of
proxies.
Table of Contents
Your vote is very important, regardless of the number of shares that you own. Regardless of whether you
expect to attend the Range special meeting in person, to ensure your representation at the Range special
meeting, we urge you to submit a proxy to vote your shares as promptly as possible by (i) accessing the
internet site listed on the Range proxy card, (ii) calling the toll-free number listed on the Range proxy card
or (iii) submitting your Range proxy card by mail by using the provided self-addressed, stamped envelope.
Submitting a proxy will not prevent you from voting in person, but it will help to secure a quorum and avoid
added solicitation costs. Any eligible holder of Range stock who is present at the Range special meeting
may vote in person, thereby canceling any previous proxy. In any event, a proxy may be revoked at any
time before the Range special meeting in the manner described in the accompanying joint proxy
statement/prospectus. If your shares are held in the name of a bank, broker or other nominee, please follow
the instructions on the voting instruction card furnished by such bank, broker or other nominee.
The enclosed joint proxy statement/prospectus provides a detailed description of the merger and the
merger agreement and the other matters to be considered at the Range special meeting. We urge you to
read carefully the joint proxy statement/prospectus—including any documents incorporated by reference—
and the Annexes in their entirety. If you have any questions concerning the merger or the joint proxy
statement/prospectus—or if you would like additional copies or need help voting your shares of Range
common stock—please contact Range’s proxy solicitor:
Innisfree M&A Incorporated
501 Madison Avenue, 20th floor
New York, New York 10022
Stockholders may call toll free: (888) 750-5834
Banks and Brokers may call collect: (212) 750-5833
Fort Worth, Texas
August 10, 2016
Table of Contents
By Order of the Range Board of Directors,
David P. Poole
Senior Vice President—General Counsel and
Corporate
Secretary
Memorial Resource Development Corp.
500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 588-8300
NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS
To Be Held On September 15, 2016
To the Stockholders of Memorial Resource Development Corp.:
We are pleased to invite you to attend the special meeting of stockholders of Memorial Resource
Development Corp., a Delaware corporation (“Memorial”), which will be held at Memorial’s offices at 500
Dallas Street, Suite 1800, Houston, Texas 77002, on September 15, 2016, at 10:00 a.m., local time, for the
following purposes:
•   to vote on a proposal to approve and adopt the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 15, 2016,
by and among Range Resources Corporation (“Range”), Memorial and Medina Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly
owned subsidiary of Range (“Merger Sub”), as that agreement may be amended from time to time (the
“merger agreement”), a copy of which is included as Annex A to the joint proxy statement/prospectus of
which this notice is a part, and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the
merger;
•   to vote on a proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid
or become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger; and
•   to vote on a proposal to approve the adjournment of the Memorial special meeting to a later date or dates,
if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in the event there are not sufficient votes at the time
of the special meeting to approve the first proposal listed above.
Memorial will transact no other business at the special meeting except such business as may properly be
brought before the Memorial special meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof by or at the
direction of the Memorial board of directors. References to the Memorial special meeting in this joint proxy
statement/prospectus are to such special meeting as adjourned or postponed. Please refer to the joint
proxy statement/prospectus of which this notice is a part for further information with respect to the
business to be transacted at the Memorial special meeting.
The Memorial board of directors has fixed the close of business on August 10, 2016 as the record date for
the Memorial special meeting. Only Memorial stockholders of record at that time are entitled to receive
notice of, and to vote at, the Memorial special meeting. A complete list of such stockholders will be available
for inspection by any Memorial stockholder for any purpose germane to the special meeting during
ordinary business hours for the ten days preceding the Memorial special meeting at Memorial’s offices at
500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800, Houston, Texas 77002. The eligible Memorial stockholder list will also be
available at the Memorial special meeting for examination by any stockholder present at such meeting.
In connection with the execution of the merger agreement, MRD Holdco LLC, Jay Graham (Memorial’s chief
executive officer), Anthony Bahr and WHR Incentive LLC (a limited liability company controlled by
Mr. Graham and Mr. Bahr) entered into a voting and support agreement with Range. The Memorial
stockholders that executed that voting and support agreement have agreed to vote all of the Memorial
shares held by them in favor of the approval and adoption of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by the merger
Table of Contents
agreement, including the merger. As of the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus, those
stockholders hold and are entitled to vote in the aggregate approximately 47.7% of the outstanding shares
of Memorial common stock entitled to vote at the Memorial special meeting. In addition, certain other
stockholders of Memorial who are not party to the voting and support agreement are party to a voting
agreement (the “existing voting agreement”), dated as of June 18, 2014, with Memorial, MRD Holdco LLC
and the other Memorial stockholder parties to the voting and support agreement, pursuant to which those
stockholders are required to vote all of the shares of Memorial common stock that they own as directed by
MRD Holdco LLC. As of the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus, those additional stockholders
hold and are entitled to vote in the aggregate approximately 2.7% of the outstanding shares of Memorial
common stock entitled to vote at the Memorial special meeting. Accordingly, as long as the Memorial board
of directors does not change its recommendation with respect to such proposal (in which case the voting
and support obligations of such stockholders would terminate), and as long as those additional
stockholders retain ownership of their shares of Memorial common stock through the record date for the
Memorial special meeting, approval of that proposal at the Memorial special meeting is nearly assured. See
“The Merger Agreement—Voting and Support Agreement” beginning on page 143 for more information.
Completion of the merger is conditioned on approval and adoption of the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, by the Memorial stockholders,
which requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock
entitled to vote thereon. The proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation
that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger
is a vote separate and apart from the vote on the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and
the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger. Accordingly, a Memorial
stockholder may vote to approve one proposal and not the other. Because the vote on the proposal to
approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or become payable to
Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger is advisory in nature only, it will not be
binding on Memorial or Range, and the approval of that proposal is not a condition to the completion of the
merger.
The Memorial board of directors unanimously determined that the merger and the other transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement are fair to, and in the best interests of Memorial stockholders, and
approved, adopted and declared advisable the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by
the merger agreement, including the merger. The Memorial board of directors unanimously recommends
that Memorial stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, “FOR” the approval, on an
advisory (non-binding) basis, of the compensation that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s
named executive officers in connection with the merger and “FOR” the proposal to approve the
adjournment of the Memorial special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of
proxies.
Your vote is very important, regardless of the number of shares that you own. Regardless of whether you
expect to attend the Memorial special meeting in person, to ensure your representation at the Memorial
special meeting, we urge you to submit a proxy to vote your shares as promptly as possible by
(i) accessing the internet site listed on the Memorial proxy card, (ii) calling the toll-free number listed on the
Memorial proxy card or (iii) submitting your Memorial proxy card by mail by using the provided self-
addressed, stamped envelope. Submitting a proxy will not prevent you from voting in person, but it will help
to secure a quorum and avoid added solicitation costs. Any eligible holder of Memorial stock who is
present at the Memorial special meeting may vote in person, thereby canceling any previous proxy. In any
event, a proxy may be revoked at any time before the Memorial special meeting in the manner described in
the accompanying joint proxy statement/prospectus. If your shares are held in the name of a bank, broker
or other nominee, please follow the instructions on the voting instruction card furnished by such bank,
broker or other nominee.
The enclosed joint proxy statement/prospectus provides a detailed description of the merger and the
merger agreement and the other matters to be considered at the Memorial special meeting. We urge you to
read carefully the joint proxy statement/prospectus—including any documents incorporated by reference—
and the Annexes in
Table of Contents
their entirety. If you have any questions concerning the merger or the joint proxy statement/prospectus—or
if you would like additional copies or need help voting your shares of Memorial common stock—please
contact Memorial’s proxy solicitor:
Innisfree M&A Incorporated
501 Madison Avenue, 20th floor
New York, New York 10022
Stockholders may call toll free: (888) 750-5834
Banks and Brokers may call collect: (212) 750-5833
Houston, Texas
August 10, 2016
Table of Contents
By Order of the Memorial Board of Directors,
Kyle N. Roane
Senior Vice President, General Counsel and
Corporate Secretary
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
This joint proxy statement/prospectus incorporates important business and financial information about
Range and Memorial from other documents that are not included in or delivered with this joint proxy
statement/prospectus. This information is available to you without charge upon your request. You can
obtain the documents incorporated by reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus free of charge
by requesting them in writing or by telephone from the appropriate company at the following addresses and
telephone numbers:
Innisfree M&A Incorporated
501 Madison Avenue, 20th floor
New York, New York 10022
Stockholders may call toll free: (888) 750-5834
Banks and Brokers may call collect: (212) 750-5833
Investors may also consult Range’s or Memorial’s website for more information about Range or Memorial,
respectively. Range’s website is www.rangeresources.com. Memorial’s website is www.memorialrd.com.
Information included on these websites is not incorporated by reference into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus.
If you would like to request any documents, please do so by September 9, 2016 in order to receive them
before the special meetings. If you request any documents, Range or Memorial will mail them to you by first
class mail, or another equally prompt means, after receipt of your request.
For a more detailed description of the information incorporated by reference in this joint proxy
statement/prospectus and how you may obtain it, see “Where You Can Find More Information” beginning
on page 189.
Table of Contents
ABOUT THIS JOINT PROXY STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS
This joint proxy statement/prospectus, which forms part of a registration statement on Form S-4 filed with
the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) by Range (File No. 333-211994), constitutes a
prospectus of Range under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), with respect to
the shares of Range common stock to be issued to Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger.
This joint proxy statement/prospectus also constitutes a joint proxy statement for both Range and
Memorial under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). It also constitutes
a notice of meeting with respect to the special meeting of Range stockholders and a notice of meeting with
respect to the special meeting of Memorial stockholders.
You should rely only on the information contained in or incorporated by reference into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus. Neither Range nor Memorial has authorized anyone to give any information or make
any representation about the merger, Range or Memorial that is different from, or in addition to, that
contained in this joint proxy statement/prospectus or in any of the materials that have been incorporated by
reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus. Therefore, if anyone distributes this type of
information, you should not rely on it. This joint proxy statement/prospectus is dated August 10, 2016. You
should not assume that the information contained in this joint proxy statement/prospectus is accurate as of
any date other than that date. You should not assume that the information incorporated by reference into
this joint proxy statement/prospectus is accurate as of any date other than the date of the incorporated
document. Neither our mailing of this joint proxy statement/prospectus to Range stockholders or Memorial
stockholders nor the issuance by Range of shares of common stock pursuant to the merger agreement will
create any implication to the contrary.
This joint proxy statement/prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy,
any securities, or the solicitation of a proxy, in any jurisdiction to or from any person to whom it is unlawful
to make any such offer or solicitation. Information contained in this joint proxy statement/prospectus
regarding Range has been provided by Range and information contained in this joint proxy
statement/prospectus regarding Memorial has been provided by Memorial.
All references in this joint proxy statement/prospectus to “Range” refer to Range Resources Corporation, a
Delaware corporation; all references in this joint proxy statement/prospectus to “Merger Sub” refer to
Medina Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly owned subsidiary of Range formed for the sole
purpose of effecting the merger; all references in this joint proxy statement/prospectus to “Memorial” refer
to Memorial Resource Development Corp., a Delaware corporation; unless otherwise indicated or as the
context requires, all references in this joint proxy statement/prospectus to “we,” “our” and “us” refer to
Range and Memorial collectively; and, unless otherwise indicated or as the context requires, all references
to the “merger agreement” refer to the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 15, 2016, by and
among Range Resources Corporation, Medina Merger Sub, Inc. and Memorial Resource Development
Corp., which is incorporated by reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus and a copy of which is
included as Annex A to this joint proxy statement/prospectus. Range and Memorial, subject to and
following completion of the merger, are sometimes referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as
the “combined company.”
Please refer to the section titled “Glossary of Certain Oil and Gas Terms” for definitions of certain oil and
gas terms used in this joint proxy statement/prospectus.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
SUMMARY
The Companies
The Merger
Summary Selected Consolidated Financial Data
Summary Selected Consolidated Historical Financial Data of Range
Summary Selected Consolidated Historical Financial Data of Memorial
Summary Selected Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information
Summary Pro Forma Combined Oil and Natural Gas Reserve and Production Data
Unaudited Comparative Per Share Data
Comparative Market Prices
Litigation Relating to the Merger
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
RISK FACTORS
Risk Factors Relating to Range and Memorial
Risk Factors Relating to the Merger
Risk Factors Relating to the Combined Company Following the Merger
THE COMPANIES
Range Resources Corporation
Memorial Resource Development Corp.
Medina Merger Sub, Inc.
THE RANGE SPECIAL MEETING
Date, Time and Place
Purpose of the Range Special Meeting
Recommendation of the Range Board of Directors
Range Record Date; Stockholders Entitled to Vote
Voting by Range’s Directors and Executive Officers
Quorum
Required Vote
Voting of Proxies by Holders of Record
Shares Held in Street Name
Voting in Person
Revocation of Proxies
Solicitation of Proxies
Adjournments
SailingStone Voting Support and Nomination Agreement
THE MEMORIAL SPECIAL MEETING
Date, Time and Place
Purpose of the Memorial Special Meeting
Recommendation of the Memorial Board of Directors
Memorial Record Date; Stockholders Entitled to Vote
Voting by Memorial’s Directors and Executive Officers
Quorum
Required Vote
Voting of Proxies by Holders of Record
Shares Held in Street Name
Voting in Person
Revocation of Proxies
Solicitation of Proxies
Adjournments
Table of Contents
THE MERGER
Page 
    
1  
9  
    
    
9  
     14  
     22  
     22  
     23  
     26  
     27  
     28  
     29  
     30  
     31  
     33  
     33  
     33  
     37  
     41  
     41  
     41  
     41  
     42  
     42  
     42  
     42  
     42  
     43  
     43  
     43  
     44  
     44  
     44  
     45  
     45  
     45  
     46  
     47  
     47  
     47  
     47  
     48  
     48  
     48  
     49  
     49  
     50  
     50  
     51  
     51  
     51
Page
THE MERGER
Effects of the Merger
Background of the Merger
Range’s Reasons for the Merger; Recommendation of the Range Board of Directors
Opinion of Range’s Financial Advisor
Memorial’s Reasons for the Merger; Recommendation of the Memorial Board of Directors
Opinions of Memorial’s Financial Advisors
Certain Prospective Unaudited Financial and Operating Information of Range and Memorial
Amended and Restated By-laws of Range
Interests of Memorial Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger
Board of Directors and Executive Management Following the Merger
Regulatory Clearances Required for the Merger
Treatment of Memorial LTIP Restricted Stock Awards
Treatment of Range and Memorial Credit Agreements
Memorial Senior Notes
Exchange Offers, Cash Tender Offers and Consent Solicitations Relating to Memorial Senior Notes and
Range Subordinated Notes
Dividend Policies
Listing of Range Common Stock
De-Listing and Deregistration of Memorial Stock
No Appraisal Rights
Litigation Relating to the Merger
THE MERGER AGREEMENT
Terms of the Merger; Merger Consideration
Completion of the Merger
Exchange of Shares in the Merger
Representations and Warranties
Conduct of Business
No Solicitation of Competing Proposals
Changes in Board Recommendations
Efforts to Obtain Required Stockholder Votes
Efforts to Complete the Merger
Employee Benefits Matters
Treatment of Memorial LTIP Restricted Stock Awards
Indemnification and Insurance
Other Covenants and Agreements
Conditions to Completion of the Merger
Termination of the Merger Agreement
Effect of Termination
Termination Fees and Expenses
Amendments, Extensions and Waivers
Third Party Beneficiaries
Specific Performance
Voting and Support Agreement
MEMP GP Purchase and Sale Agreement
PROPOSALS FOR THE RANGE SPECIAL MEETING
Range Proposal 1—Issuance of Shares of Range Common Stock
Range Proposal 2—Possible Adjournment of the Range Special Meeting
PROPOSALS FOR THE MEMORIAL SPECIAL MEETING
Memorial Proposal 1—Merger Agreement
Memorial Proposal 2—Advisory (Non-Binding) Vote on Compensation
Memorial Proposal 3—Possible Adjournment of the Memorial Special Meeting
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
53  
    
53  
    
53  
    
66  
    
69  
    
78  
    
    
83  
     108  
     114  
     114  
     119  
     120  
     120  
     120  
     121
122  
     123  
     123  
     123  
     123  
     123  
     125  
     125  
     126  
     126  
     127  
     128  
     132  
     134  
     136  
     136  
     136  
     137  
     137  
     137  
     138  
     139  
     140  
     141  
     142  
     142  
     143  
     143  
     144  
     145  
     145  
     145  
     146  
     146  
     146  
     147  
     148
Table of Contents
Tax Consequences of the Merger Generally
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to Range, Memorial and Merger Sub
ACCOUNTING TREATMENT
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
COMPARATIVE STOCK PRICE DATA AND DIVIDENDS
Stock Prices
Dividends
COMPARISON OF RIGHTS OF RANGE STOCKHOLDERS AND MEMORIAL STOCKHOLDERS
NO APPRAISAL RIGHTS
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
Range
Memorial
FUTURE STOCKHOLDER PROPOSALS
Range
Memorial
OTHER MATTERS PRESENTED AT THE MEETINGS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
GLOSSARY OF CERTAIN OIL AND GAS TERMS
Annex A—Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 15, 2016
Annex B—Opinion of Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC
Annex C—Opinion of Barclays Capital Inc.
Annex D—Opinion of Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
Table of Contents
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Page 
    149  
    150  
    151  
    152  
    156  
    165  
    165  
    165  
    167  
    184  
    185  
    185  
    185  
    185  
    186  
    186  
    187  
    188  
    189  
    191
A-1  
    B-1  
    C-1  
    D-1
The following are some questions that you, as a Range stockholder or a Memorial stockholder, may have
regarding the merger and the other matters being considered at the special meetings, as well as the
answers to those questions. Range and Memorial urge you to read carefully the remainder of this joint
proxy statement/prospectus—including any documents incorporated by reference—and the Annexes in
their entirety because the information in this section does not provide all of the information that might be
important to you with respect to the merger agreement, the merger and the other matters being considered
at the special meetings. See “Where You Can Find More Information” beginning on page 189.
Q: Why am I receiving this joint proxy statement/prospectus?
A: Range and Memorial have agreed to a business combination pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement
that is described in this joint proxy statement/prospectus. A copy of the merger agreement is included in this
joint proxy statement/prospectus as Annex A.
In order to complete the merger, among other conditions:
•   Range stockholders must approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial
stockholders in connection with the merger; and
•   Memorial stockholders must approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated
by the merger agreement, including the merger.
Range and Memorial will hold separate special meetings of their stockholders to obtain these approvals.
This joint proxy statement/prospectus, including its Annexes, contains and incorporates by reference
important information about Range and Memorial, the merger and the stockholder meetings of Range and
Memorial. You should read all of the available information carefully and in its entirety. See “Where You Can
Find More Information” beginning on page 189.
Q: What effect will the merger have?
A: Range and Memorial have entered into the merger agreement pursuant to which Memorial will become a
wholly owned subsidiary of Range and Memorial stockholders will become stockholders of Range.
Following the merger, the stockholders of Range and Memorial will be the stockholders of the combined
company.
Q: What will I receive in the merger?
A: Range Stockholders: Regardless of whether the merger is completed, Range stockholders will retain the
Range common stock that they currently own. They will not receive any merger consideration, and they will not
receive any additional shares of Range common stock in the merger.
Memorial Stockholders: If the merger is completed, Memorial stockholders will receive 0.375 of a share of
Range common stock for each share of Memorial common stock that they hold immediately prior to the
effective time of the merger. Memorial stockholders will not receive any fractional shares of Range common
stock in the merger. Instead, Range will pay cash (without interest) in lieu of any fractional shares of Range
common stock that a Memorial stockholder would otherwise have been entitled to receive. Memorial
stockholders will also be entitled to any dividends declared and paid by Range with a record date at or after
the effective time of the merger.
Q: What is the value of the merger consideration?
A: Because Range will issue 0.375 of a share of Range common stock in exchange for each share of Memorial
common stock outstanding immediately prior to such exchange, the value of the merger consideration that
Memorial stockholders receive will depend on the price per share of Range common stock at the effective
Table of Contents
1
time of the merger. That price will not be known at the time of the special meetings and may be greater or less
than the current price or the price at the time of the special meetings. We urge you to obtain current market
quotations of Range common stock and Memorial common stock. See “Risk Factors” beginning on page 33.
Q: When and where will the special stockholders meetings be held?
A: Range Stockholders: The special meeting of Range stockholders will be held at The Worthington
Renaissance Hotel, Live Oak Room V, 200 Main Street, Fort Worth, Texas 76102, on September 15, 2016, at
10:00 a.m., local time.
Memorial Stockholders: The special meeting of Memorial stockholders will be held at Memorial’s offices at
500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800, Houston, Texas 77002, on September 15, 2016, at 10:00 a.m., local time.
Q: Who is entitled to vote at the special stockholders meetings?
A: Range Stockholders: The record date for the Range special meeting is August 10, 2016. Only record holders of
shares of Range common stock at the close of business on such date are entitled to notice of, and to vote at,
the Range special meeting.
Memorial Stockholders: The record date for the Memorial special meeting is August 10, 2016. Only record
holders of shares of Memorial common stock at the close of business on such date are entitled to notice of,
and to vote at, the Memorial special meeting.
Q: What constitutes a quorum at the special stockholders meetings?
A: Range Stockholders: Stockholders who hold shares representing at least a majority of the voting power of all
outstanding shares of capital stock entitled to vote at the Range special meeting must be present in person or
represented by proxy to constitute a quorum. All shares of Range common stock represented at the Range
special meeting, including shares that are represented but that abstain from voting on one or more proposals,
will be treated as present for purposes of determining the presence or absence of a quorum. Broker non-votes
(if any) will not be treated as present for purposes of determining the presence or absence of a quorum.
Memorial Stockholders: Stockholders who hold shares representing at least a majority of the voting power
of all outstanding shares of capital stock entitled to vote at the Memorial special meeting must be present in
person or represented by proxy to constitute a quorum. All shares of Memorial common stock represented
at the Memorial special meeting, including shares that are represented but that abstain from voting on one
or more proposals, will be treated as present for purposes of determining the presence or absence of a
quorum. Broker non-votes (if any) will not be treated as present for purposes of determining the presence
or absence of a quorum.
Additional information on the quorum requirements can be found under the heading “Quorum” on page 43
with respect to Range and on page 48 with respect to Memorial.
Q: How do I vote if I am a stockholder of record?
A: Range Stockholders: If you were a record holder of Range common stock at the close of business on the
record date for the Range special meeting, you may vote in person by attending the Range special meeting or,
to ensure that your shares are represented at the Range special meeting, you may authorize a proxy to vote by:
•   accessing the internet site listed on the Range proxy card and following the instructions provided on that
site anytime up to 11:59 p.m., eastern time, on September 14, 2016;
Table of Contents
2
•   calling the toll-free number listed on the Range proxy card and following the instructions provided in the
recorded message anytime up to 11:59 p.m., eastern time, on September 14, 2016; or
•   submitting your Range proxy card by mail by using the provided self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If you hold shares of Range common stock in “street name” through a bank, broker or other nominee,
please follow the voting instructions provided by your bank, broker or other nominee to ensure that your
shares are represented at the Range special meeting.
Memorial Stockholders: If you were a record holder of Memorial common stock at the close of business on
the record date for the Memorial special meeting, you may vote in person by attending the Memorial special
meeting or, to ensure that your shares are represented at the Memorial special meeting, you may authorize
a proxy to vote by:
•   accessing the internet site listed on the Memorial proxy card and following the instructions provided on
that site at any time up to 11:59 p.m., eastern time, on September 14, 2016;
•   calling the toll-free number listed on the Memorial proxy card and following the instructions provided in the
recorded message at any time up to 11:59 p.m., eastern time, on September 14, 2016; or
•   submitting your Memorial proxy card by mail by using the provided self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If you hold Memorial shares in “street name” through a bank, broker or other nominee, please follow the
voting instructions provided by your bank, broker or other nominee to ensure that your shares are
represented at the Memorial special meeting.
Q: How many votes do I have?
A: Range Stockholders: With respect to each proposal to be presented at the Range special meeting, holders of
Range common stock as of the Range record date are entitled to one vote for each share of Range common
stock owned at the close of business on the Range record date. At the close of business on the Range record
date, there were 170,090,361 shares of Range common stock outstanding and entitled to vote at the Range
special meeting.
Memorial Stockholders: With respect to each proposal to be presented at the Memorial special meeting,
holders of Memorial common stock as of the Memorial record date are entitled to one vote for each share of
Memorial common stock owned at the close of business on the Memorial record date. At the close of
business on the Memorial record date, there were 206,034,330 shares of Memorial common stock
outstanding and entitled to vote at the Memorial special meeting.
Q: Who will serve on the Range board of directors following the completion of the merger?
A: The merger agreement provides that, upon completion of the merger, Range will increase the size of the
Range board of directors by one member and fill the position created by that increase with one member of the
Memorial board of directors who has been designated by the Memorial board of directors. However, that
designation is subject to the review by, and approval and recommendation of, the Governance and Nominating
Committee of the Range board of directors.
It is anticipated that, following the completion of the merger, the Range board of directors will have ten
members, consisting of the nine individuals serving on the Range board of directors as of the date of this
joint proxy statement/prospectus and Robert A. Innamorati, an independent member of the Memorial board
of directors who was designated by the Memorial board of directors and whose appointment was
subsequently unanimously approved—subject to completion of the merger—by the Range board of
directors following receipt of the unanimous recommendation of such appointment from the Governance
and Nominating Committee. Mr. Innamorati would serve as an independent director. In addition, Range has
recently entered into a voting support and nomination agreement with Range’s largest stockholder,
SailingStone Capital Partners LLC, and certain of that stockholder’s affiliates (collectively, “SailingStone”),
Table of Contents
3
in which Range and SailingStone have agreed to cooperate with each other in good faith to identify one
new independent director to be appointed to the Range board of directors who is mutually agreeable to the
Range board of directors and SailingStone.
Q: Who will serve as executive management of Range following the completion of the merger?
A: Following the completion of the merger, it is anticipated that each of the Range executive officers will continue
to serve in their current positions and under the same compensation plans and arrangements that were in
place prior to the merger:
•    Jeffery L. Ventura
•    Roger S. Manny
•    Ray N. Walker, Jr.
•    John K. Applegath
•    Alan W. Farquharson
•    Dori A. Ginn
•    David P. Poole
•    Chad L. Stephens
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
   Executive Vice President—Chief Financial Officer
   Executive Vice President—Chief Operating Officer
   Senior Vice President—Northern Marcellus Shale and Midcontinent Divisions
   Senior Vice President—Reservoir Engineering & Economics
   Senior Vice President—Controller and Principal Accounting Officer
   Senior Vice President—General Counsel and Corporate Secretary
   Senior Vice President—Corporate Development
Q: What vote is required to approve each proposal?
A: Range Stockholders: The approval of the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial
stockholders in connection with the merger requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Range
common stock, present in person or represented by proxy at the Range special meeting and entitled to vote
thereon, assuming a quorum is present. Assuming a quorum is present, shares that are not present in person
or by proxy and broker non-votes (if any) will have no effect on the vote for this proposal; however, abstentions
will have the same effect as a vote “AGAINST” the approval of such proposal.
The adjournment of the Range special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies
requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Range common stock, present in person or
represented by proxy at the Range special meeting and entitled to vote thereon, regardless of whether
there is a quorum. Assuming a quorum is present, shares that are not present in person or by proxy and
broker non-votes (if any) will have no effect on the vote for this proposal; however, abstentions will have the
same effect as a vote “AGAINST” the approval of such proposal.
Memorial Stockholders: The approval and adoption of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, requires the affirmative vote of a majority of
the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled to vote thereon. Assuming a quorum is present,
failures to vote, broker non-votes (if any) and abstentions will have the same effect as a vote “AGAINST”
the approval of such proposal.
The approval, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, of the compensation that may be paid or become
payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger requires the affirmative vote
of a majority of the voting power of the outstanding shares present in person or represented by proxy at the
meeting and entitled to vote thereon, assuming a quorum is present. Assuming a quorum is present,
shares that are not present in person or by proxy and broker non-votes (if any) will have no effect on the
vote for this proposal; however, abstentions will have the same effect as a vote “AGAINST” the approval of
such proposal.
The adjournment of the Memorial special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies
requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the voting power of the outstanding shares present in person
or represented by proxy at the meeting and entitled to vote thereon, regardless of whether there is a
quorum. Assuming a quorum is present, shares that are not present in person or by proxy and broker non-
votes (if any) will have no effect on the vote for this proposal; however, abstentions will have the same
effect as a vote “AGAINST” the approval of such proposal.
Table of Contents
4
Q: How does the Range board of directors recommend that Range stockholders vote?
A: The Range board of directors has determined that the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the
merger agreement (including the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in
connection with the merger) are in the best interests of Range and its stockholders. Accordingly, the Range
board of directors unanimously recommends that Range stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the
issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger and “FOR”
the proposal to approve the adjournment of the Range special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit
further solicitation of proxies.
Q: How does the Memorial board of directors recommend that Memorial stockholders vote?
A: The Memorial board of directors unanimously determined that the merger and the other transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement are fair to, and in the best interests of Memorial stockholders, and
approved, adopted and declared advisable the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the
merger agreement, including the merger. Accordingly, the Memorial board of directors unanimously
recommends that Memorial stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement
and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, “FOR” the proposal to
approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or become payable to
Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger and “FOR” the proposal to approve the
adjournment of the Memorial special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of
proxies.
Q: My shares are held in “street name” by my bank, broker or other nominee. Will my bank, broker or other
nominee automatically vote my shares for me?
A: No. If your shares are held through a bank, broker or other nominee, you are considered the “beneficial holder”
of the shares held for you in what is known as “street name.” The “record holder” of such shares is your bank,
broker or other nominee, and not you. If this is the case, this joint proxy statement/prospectus has been
forwarded to you by your bank, broker or other nominee. You must provide the record holder of your shares
with instructions on how to vote your shares. Otherwise, your bank, broker or other nominee may not vote your
shares on any of the proposals to be considered at the Range special meeting or the Memorial special
meeting, as applicable, and a broker non-vote will result.
Under the current rules of the NYSE, banks, brokers or other nominees do not have discretionary authority
to vote on any of the proposals at the Range special meeting. Because the only proposals for
consideration at the Range special meeting are non-discretionary proposals, it is not expected that there
will be any broker non-votes at such meeting. However, if there are any broker non-votes, they will have no
effect on (i) the proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial
stockholders in connection with the merger (assuming a quorum is present) or (ii) the proposal to approve
the adjournment of the Range special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of
proxies.
Under the current rules of the NASDAQ, banks, brokers or other nominees do not have discretionary
authority to vote on any of the proposals at the Memorial special meeting. Because the only proposals for
consideration at the Memorial special meeting are non-discretionary proposals, it is not expected that there
will be any broker non-votes at such meeting. However, if there are any broker non-votes, they will have
(i) the same effect as a vote “AGAINST” the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, (ii) no effect on the proposal to
approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or become payable to
Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger and (iii) no effect on the proposal to
approve the adjournment of the Memorial special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit further
solicitation of proxies.
Please follow the voting instructions provided by your bank, broker or other nominee so that it may vote
your shares on your behalf. Please note that you may not vote shares held in street name by returning a
proxy card directly to Range or Memorial or by voting in person at the special meeting unless you first
obtain a “legal proxy” from your bank, broker or other nominee.
Table of Contents
5
Q: What will happen if I fail to vote or I abstain from voting?
A: Range Stockholders: Assuming a quorum is present, if you fail to attend the Range special meeting in person
and do not vote by proxy, it will not have any effect on the vote for the proposals; however, if you attend the
Range special meeting and abstain or mark your proxy or voting instructions to abstain, it will have the same
effect as a vote “AGAINST” (i) the proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to
Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger, and (ii) the proposal to approve the adjournment of the
Range special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
Memorial Stockholders: Assuming a quorum is present, if you fail to attend the Memorial special meeting in
person and do not vote by proxy, it will have (i) the same effect as a vote “AGAINST” the proposal to
approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement,
including the merger, (ii) no effect on the proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the
compensation that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection
with the merger and (iii) no effect on the proposal to approve the adjournment of the Memorial special
meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
If you attend the Memorial special meeting and abstain or mark your proxy or voting instructions to abstain,
it will have the same effect as a vote “AGAINST” (i) the proposal to approve and adopt the merger
agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, (ii) the
proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or become
payable to Memorial’s named executive officers based on or otherwise related to the proposed transactions
and (iii) the proposal to approve the adjournment of the Memorial special meeting, if necessary or
appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
Q: What will happen if I return my proxy card without indicating how to vote?
A: Range Stockholders: If you properly complete and sign your proxy card but do not indicate how your shares of
Range common stock should be voted on a proposal, the shares of Range common stock represented by your
proxy will be voted as the Range board of directors recommends and, therefore, “FOR” (i) the proposal to
approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in connection with the
merger and (ii) the proposal to approve the adjournment of the Range special meeting, if necessary or
appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
Memorial Stockholders: If you properly complete and sign your proxy card but do not indicate how your
shares of Memorial common stock should be voted on a proposal, the shares of Memorial common stock
represented by your proxy will be voted as the Memorial board of directors recommends and, therefore,
“FOR” (i) the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by
the merger agreement, including the merger, (ii) the proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding)
basis, the compensation that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in
connection with the merger and (iii) the proposal to approve the adjournment of the Memorial special
meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
Q: Can I change my vote or revoke my proxy after I have returned a proxy or voting instruction card?
A: Yes.
If you are the record holder of either Range or Memorial stock, you can change your vote or revoke your
proxy at any time before your proxy is voted at the applicable special meeting. You can do this by:
•   timely delivering a signed written notice of revocation;
•   timely delivering a new, valid proxy bearing a later date (including by telephone or through the internet); or
Table of Contents
6
•   attending the special meeting and voting in person, which will automatically cancel any proxy previously
given, or revoking your proxy in person.
Simply attending the Range special meeting or the Memorial special meeting without voting will not revoke
any proxy that you have previously given or change your vote.
If you choose either of the first two methods, your notice of revocation or your new proxy must be received
by the Secretary of Range or Memorial, as applicable, no later than the beginning of the applicable special
meeting.
Regardless of the method used to deliver your previous proxy, you may revoke your proxy by any of the
above methods.
If you hold shares of either Range or Memorial in “street name”: If your shares are held in street name, you
must contact your bank, broker or other nominee to change your vote.
Q: What are the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger to U.S. holders of Memorial
common stock?
A: The merger is intended to be treated for U.S. federal income tax purposes as a “reorganization” within the
meaning of Section 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). Assuming the
merger qualifies as a reorganization, a U.S. holder of Memorial common stock will not recognize any gain or
loss for U.S. federal income tax purposes upon the exchange of the holder’s shares of Memorial common stock
for shares of Range common stock pursuant to the merger, except with respect to cash received in lieu of
fractional shares of Range common stock. For further information, see “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax
Consequences” beginning on page 148.
The U.S. federal income tax consequences described above may not apply to all holders of Memorial
common stock. Your tax consequences will depend on your individual situation. Accordingly, we strongly
urge you to consult your independent tax advisor for a full understanding of the particular tax
consequences of the merger to you.
Q: When do you expect the merger to be completed?
A: Range and Memorial hope to complete the merger as soon as reasonably possible and expect the closing of
the merger to occur late in the third quarter of 2016. However, the merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver
of other conditions, and it is possible that factors outside the control of Range and Memorial could result in the
merger being completed at an earlier time, a later time or not at all.
Q: What happens if the merger is not completed?
A:
If the issuance of Range common stock in the merger is not approved by Range stockholders or if the merger is
not completed for any other reason, Memorial stockholders will not receive any form of consideration for the
Memorial common stock they own in connection with the merger. In the event the merger agreement is
terminated by either Range or Memorial because of the failure to obtain Range stockholder approval, then
Range will pay to Memorial a no vote expense payment equal to $25,000,000. In the event the merger
agreement is terminated by either Range or Memorial because of the failure to obtain Memorial stockholder
approval, then Memorial will pay Range a no vote expense payment equal to $25,000,000. In certain
circumstances, Memorial may be required to pay Range a termination fee of $75,000,000, or Range may be
required to pay Memorial a termination fee of either $125,000,000 or $300,000,000. See the section titled “The
Merger Agreement—Termination Fees and Expenses” of this joint proxy statement/prospectus for a discussion
of these and other rights of each of Range and Memorial to terminate the merger agreement.
Table of Contents
7
Q: Do I need to do anything with my shares of common stock other than vote for the proposals at the
special meeting?
A: Range Stockholders: If you are a Range stockholder, after the merger is completed, you are not required to
take any action with respect to your shares of Range common stock.
Memorial Stockholders: If you are a Memorial stockholder, after the merger is completed, each share of
Memorial common stock that you hold will be converted automatically into the right to receive 0.375 of a
share of Range common stock together with cash (without interest) in lieu of any fractional shares, as
applicable. You do not need to take any action at this time.
Q: Are stockholders entitled to appraisal rights?
A: No. Neither the stockholders of Range nor the stockholders of Memorial are entitled to appraisal rights in
connection with the merger under Delaware law, under the certificate of incorporation or bylaws of either
company or otherwise.
Q: What happens if I sell my shares of Memorial common stock before the Memorial special meeting?
A: The record date for the Memorial special meeting is earlier than the date of the Memorial special meeting and
the date that the merger is expected to be completed. If you transfer your Memorial shares after the Memorial
record date but before the Memorial special meeting, you will retain your right to vote at the Memorial special
meeting, but will have transferred the right to receive the merger consideration in the merger. In order to receive
the merger consideration, you must hold your shares through the effective date of the merger.
Q: What does it mean if I receive more than one set of materials?
A: This means you own shares of both Range and Memorial common stock or you own shares of Range or
Memorial common stock that are registered under different names. For example, you may own some shares
directly as a stockholder of record and other shares through a bank, broker or other nominee or you may own
shares through more than one bank, broker or other nominee. In these situations, you will receive multiple sets
of proxy materials. You must complete, sign and return all of the proxy cards or follow the instructions for any
alternative voting procedure on each of the voting instruction forms you receive in order to vote all of the shares
of Range and/or Memorial common stock that you own. Each proxy card you receive will come with its own
self-addressed, stamped envelope; if you submit your proxy by mail, make sure you return each proxy card in
the return envelope that accompanied that proxy card.
Q: How can I find out more information?
A: For more information about Range and Memorial, see the section titled “Where You Can Find More
Information” beginning on page 189.
Q: Who can help answer my questions?
A: Range stockholders who have questions about the merger, the other matters to be voted on at the special
meetings or how to submit a proxy, or desire additional copies of this joint proxy statement/prospectus or
additional proxy cards should contact: Innisfree M&A Incorporated, 501 Madison Avenue, 20th floor, New York,
New York 10022.
Memorial stockholders who have questions about the merger, the other matters to be voted on at the
special meetings or how to submit a proxy, or desire additional copies of this joint proxy
statement/prospectus or additional proxy cards should contact: Innisfree M&A Incorporated, 501 Madison
Avenue, 20th floor, New York, New York 10022.
Table of Contents
8
SUMMARY
This summary highlights information contained elsewhere in this joint proxy statement/prospectus and
may not contain all the information that is important to you with respect to the merger and the other matters
being considered at the Range and Memorial special meetings. Range and Memorial urge you to read the
remainder of this joint proxy statement/prospectus carefully, including the attached Annexes, and the other
documents to which we have referred you. See also the section titled “Where You Can Find More
Information” beginning on page 189. We have included page references in this summary to direct you to a
more complete description of the topics presented below.
The Companies
Range Resources Corporation
Range Resources Corporation, a Delaware corporation, is a Fort Worth, Texas-based independent natural
gas, NGLs and oil company, engaged in the exploration, development and acquisition of natural gas and oil
properties. Range’s activity is mostly focused in the Appalachian region of the United States. As of
December 31, 2015, Range had estimated proved reserves of approximately 9,900 Bcfe, including 6,278 Bcf
of natural gas, 549,135 Mbbls of NGLs and 53,193 Mbbls of oil. Range’s strategy is to commit to
environmental protection and workplace and community safety, concentrate in core operating areas,
maintain a multi-year drilling inventory, focus on cost efficiency, maintain a long-life reserve base and
market its products to a large number of customers in different markets under a variety of commercial
terms. As of June 30, 2016, Range had approximately $2.6 billion of debt. For the six months ended June
30, 2016, Range’s average production was approximately 1,401 Mmcfed.
Range’s common stock is traded on the NYSE under the symbol “RRC.”
The principal executive offices of Range are located at 100 Throckmorton Street, Suite 1200, Fort Worth,
Texas 76102, and Range’s telephone number is (817) 870-2601. Additional information about Range and its
subsidiaries is included in documents incorporated by reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus.
See “Where You Can Find More Information” on page 189.
Memorial Resource Development Corp.
Memorial Resource Development Corp., a Delaware corporation, is a Houston, Texas-based independent
natural gas and oil company engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of natural gas and oil
properties in North Louisiana. Substantially all of Memorial’s activity is in the Terryville Complex of North
Louisiana, where it targets over-pressured, liquids-rich natural gas opportunities in multiple zones in the
Cotton Valley Formation. Memorial’s primary objective is to build shareholder value through growth in
reserves, production and cash flows by developing and expanding its significant portfolio of drilling
locations. To achieve its objective, Memorial’s strategy is to maintain a disciplined, growth oriented financial
strategy, grow production, reserves and cash flows through the development of its extensive drilling
inventory, enhance returns through prudent capital allocation and continued improvements in operational
and capital efficiencies, exploit additional development opportunities on current acreage, and make
opportunistic acquisitions that meet its strategic and financial objectives.
As of December 31, 2015, Memorial had estimated proved reserves of approximately 1,378 Bcfe of natural
gas equivalents. As of June 30, 2016, Memorial had approximately $1.1 billion of debt. For the six months
ended June 30, 2016, Memorial’s average production was approximately 435 Mmcfed. These estimated
proved reserves, debt and average production for Memorial exclude amounts attributable to discontinued
operations.
Memorial’s common stock is traded on the NASDAQ under the symbol “MRD.”
Table of Contents
9
The principal executive offices of Memorial are located at 500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800, Houston, Texas
77002, and Memorial’s telephone number is (713) 588-8300. Additional information about Memorial and its
subsidiaries is included in documents incorporated by reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus.
See “Where You Can Find More Information” on page 189.
Medina Merger Sub, Inc.
Medina Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Range, is a Delaware corporation that was formed
on May 13, 2016 for the sole purpose of effecting the merger. In the merger, Merger Sub will be merged with
and into Memorial, with Memorial surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of Range.
The Range Special Meeting (see page 42)
The Meetings
The special meeting of Range stockholders will be held at The Worthington Renaissance Hotel, Live Oak
Room V, 200 Main Street, Fort Worth, Texas 76102, on September 15, 2016, at 10:00 a.m., local time. The
special meeting of Range stockholders is being held to consider and vote on:
•   a proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in
connection with the merger;
•   a proposal to approve the adjournment of the Range special meeting to a later date or dates, if necessary
or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in the event there are not sufficient votes at the time of the
special meeting to approve the first proposal listed above.
Completion of the merger is conditioned on approval by Range stockholders of the issuance of Range
common stock pursuant to the merger agreement.
Only record holders of shares of Range common stock at the close of business on August 10, 2016, the
record date for the Range special meeting, are entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the Range special
meeting. At the close of business on the record date, the only outstanding voting securities of Range were
common stock, and 170,090,361 shares of Range common stock were issued and outstanding,
approximately 2,387,295 of which were owned and entitled to be voted by Range directors and executive
officers. The Range directors and executive officers are currently expected to vote their shares in favor of
each Range proposal listed above.
With respect to each Range proposal listed above, Range stockholders may cast one vote for each share of
Range common stock that they own as of the Range record date. The proposal to approve the issuance of
Range common stock requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Range common stock,
present in person or represented by proxy at the Range special meeting and entitled to vote thereon. The
proposal to approve the adjournment of the Range special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit
additional proxies requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Range common stock, present
in person or represented by proxy at the Range special meeting and entitled to vote on the proposal,
regardless of whether there is a quorum.
No business may be transacted at the Range special meeting unless a quorum is present. If a quorum is
not present at the special meeting, or if a quorum is present at the special meeting but there are not
sufficient votes at the time of the special meeting to approve the proposal to issue shares of Range
common stock in connection with the merger, then the chairman of the meeting has the power to adjourn
the meeting, or, alternatively, Range stockholders may be asked to vote on a proposal to adjourn the Range
special meeting in order to permit the
Table of Contents
10
further solicitation of proxies. No notice of an adjourned meeting need be given unless the date, time and
place of the resumption of the meeting are not announced at the adjourned meeting, the adjournment is for
more than 30 days or, if after the adjournment, a new record date is fixed for the adjourned meeting, in
which case a notice of the adjourned meeting shall be given to each stockholder of record entitled to vote
at the meeting. Unless otherwise agreed to by Range and Memorial, the special meeting may not be
adjourned or postponed to a date more than 20 business days after the date for which the meeting was
previously scheduled and the special meeting may not be adjourned or postponed to a date on or after two
business days before December 15, 2016.
Reasons for the Merger; Recommendation of the Range Board of Directors (see page 66)
After careful consideration, the Range board of directors determined that the merger and the other
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement are advisable and in the best interests of Range and
its stockholders, approved the merger and the merger agreement and recommended to the holders of
Range common stock the approval of the issuance of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in
connection with the merger. For more information regarding the factors considered by the Range board of
directors in reaching its decisions relating to its recommendations, see the section titled “The Merger—
Range’s Reasons for the Merger; Recommendation of the Range board of directors.” The Range board of
directors unanimously recommends that Range stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the
issuance of Range common stock pursuant to the merger agreement and “FOR” the proposal to approve
the adjournment of the Range special meeting to a later date or dates, if necessary or appropriate to solicit
additional proxies in the event there are not sufficient votes at the time of the special meeting to approve
the issuance of shares of Range common stock.
Opinion of Range’s Financial Advisor (see page 69)
On May 15, 2016, Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC (“Credit Suisse”) rendered its oral opinion to the
Range board of directors (which was subsequently confirmed in writing by delivery of Credit Suisse’s
written opinion addressed to the Range board of directors dated the same date) as to, as of May 15, 2016,
the fairness, from a financial point of view, to Range of the exchange ratio in the merger pursuant to the
merger agreement.
Credit Suisse’s opinion was directed to the Range board of directors (in its capacity as such), and only
addressed the fairness, from a financial point of view, to Range of the exchange ratio in the merger
pursuant to the merger agreement and did not address any other aspect or implication (financial or
otherwise) of the merger. The summary of Credit Suisse’s opinion in this joint proxy statement/prospectus
is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of its written opinion, which is included as Annex B to
this joint proxy statement/prospectus and sets forth the procedures followed, assumptions made,
qualifications and limitations on the review undertaken and other matters considered by Credit Suisse in
preparing its opinion. However, neither Credit Suisse’s written opinion nor the summary of its opinion and
the related analyses set forth in this joint proxy statement/prospectus are intended to be, and they do not
constitute, advice or a recommendation to any holder of Range common stock as to how such holder
should vote or act on any matter relating to the merger.
The Memorial Special Meeting (see page 47)
The special meeting of Memorial stockholders will be held at Memorial’s offices at 500 Dallas Street, Suite
1800, Houston, Texas 77002, on September 15, 2016, at 10:00 a.m., local time. The special meeting of
Memorial stockholders is being held in order to consider and vote on:
•   a proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement, including the merger, which is further described in the sections titled “The Merger” and “The
Merger Agreement,” beginning on pages 53 and 125, respectively;
Table of Contents
11
•   a proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or become
payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger; and
•   a proposal to approve the adjournment of the Memorial special meeting to a later date or dates, if
necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in the event there are not sufficient votes at the time
of the special meeting to approve the foregoing proposal.
Completion of the merger is conditioned on approval and adoption of the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, by the Memorial stockholders.
The proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or
become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger is a vote separate
and apart from the vote on the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger. Accordingly, a Memorial stockholder may
vote to approve one proposal and not the other. Because the vote on the proposal to approve, on an
advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s named
executive officers in connection with the merger is advisory in nature only, it will not be binding on
Memorial or Range, and the approval of that proposal is not a condition to the completion of the merger.
Only record holders of shares of Memorial common stock at the close of business on August 10, 2016, the
record date for the Memorial special meeting, are entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the Memorial special
meeting. At the close of business on the record date, the only outstanding voting securities of Memorial
were common stock, and 206,034,330 shares of Memorial common stock were issued and outstanding and
entitled to vote at the Memorial special meeting, approximately 1,361,432 of which were owned and entitled
to be voted by Memorial directors and executive officers (exclusive of shares beneficially owned by
Kenneth A. Hersh and Jay C. Graham as those shares are subject to the voting and support agreement with
Range discussed in the paragraph below). The Memorial directors and executive officers are currently
expected to vote their shares in favor of each of the Memorial proposals listed above.
In connection with the execution of the merger agreement, MRD Holdco LLC, Jay Graham (Memorial’s chief
executive officer), Anthony Bahr and WHR Incentive LLC (a limited liability company controlled by
Mr. Graham and Mr. Bahr) entered into a voting and support agreement with Range (referred to in this joint
proxy statement/prospectus as the “voting and support agreement”). The Memorial stockholders that
executed the voting and support agreement have agreed to vote all of the Memorial shares held by them in
favor of the approval and adoption of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the
merger agreement, including the merger. As of the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus, those
stockholders hold and are entitled to vote in the aggregate approximately 47.7% of the issued and
outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled to vote at the Memorial special meeting. In addition,
certain other stockholders of Memorial who are not party to the voting and support agreement are party to
the existing voting agreement, pursuant to which those stockholders are required to vote all of the shares
of Memorial common stock that they own as directed by MRD Holdco LLC. As of the date of this joint proxy
statement/prospectus, those additional stockholders hold and are entitled to vote in the aggregate
approximately 2.7% of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled to vote at the Memorial
special meeting. Accordingly, as long as the Memorial board of directors does not change its
recommendation with respect to such proposal (in which case the voting and support obligations of such
stockholders would terminate), and as long as those additional stockholders retain ownership of their
shares of Memorial common stock through the record date for the Memorial special meeting, approval of
that proposal at the Memorial special meeting is nearly assured. See “The Merger Agreement—Voting and
Support Agreement” beginning on page 143 for more information.
With respect to each Memorial proposal listed above, Memorial stockholders may cast one vote for each
share of Memorial common stock that they own as of the Memorial record date. The proposal to approve
and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including
the merger,
Table of Contents
12
requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled to
vote thereon. The proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be
paid or become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger requires the
affirmative vote of a majority of the voting power of the outstanding shares present in person or
represented by proxy at the special meeting and entitled to vote thereon, assuming a quorum is present.
The proposal to approve adjournment of the Memorial special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to
solicit additional proxies requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the voting power of the outstanding
shares present in person or represented by proxy at the special meeting and entitled to vote thereon,
regardless of whether there is a quorum.
No business may be transacted at the Memorial special meeting unless a quorum is present. If a quorum is
not present, or if fewer shares are voted in favor of the proposal to approve and adopt the merger
agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, than is
required, then the chairman of the meeting has the power to adjourn the meeting, or, alternatively, Memorial
stockholders may be asked to vote on a proposal to adjourn the Memorial special meeting in order to
permit the further solicitation of proxies. No notice of an adjourned meeting need be given unless the date,
time and place of the resumption of the meeting are not announced at the adjourned meeting, the
adjournment is for more than 30 days, or, if after the adjournment, a new record date is fixed for the
adjourned meeting, in which cases a notice of the adjourned meeting shall be given to each stockholder of
record entitled to vote at the meeting. Unless otherwise agreed to by Range and Memorial, the special
meeting may not be adjourned or postponed to a date more than 20 business days after the date for which
the meeting was previously scheduled and the special meeting may not be adjourned or postponed to a
date on or after two business days before December 15, 2016.
Reasons for the Merger; Recommendation of the Memorial Board of Directors (see page 78)
The Memorial board of directors unanimously determined that the merger and the other transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement are fair to, and in the best interests of Memorial stockholders, and
approved, adopted and declared advisable the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by
the merger agreement, including the merger. For more information regarding the factors considered by the
Memorial board of directors in reaching its decision to recommend the approval of the merger agreement,
see the section titled “The Merger—Memorial’s Reasons for the Merger; Recommendation of the Memorial
board of directors.” The Memorial board of directors unanimously recommends that Memorial stockholders
vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated
by the merger agreement, including the merger, “FOR” the proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-
binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s named executive
officers in connection with the merger and “FOR” the proposal to approve the adjournment of the Memorial
special meeting to a later date or dates, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in the event
there are not sufficient votes at the time of the special meeting to approve and adopt the merger agreement.
Opinions of Memorial’s Financial Advisors (see page 83)
Opinion of Barclays Capital Inc.
Memorial engaged Barclays Capital Inc., or Barclays, to act as its financial advisor with respect to the
merger. On May 15, 2016, Barclays rendered its oral opinion (which was subsequently confirmed in writing)
to the Memorial board of directors that, as of such date and based upon and subject to the qualifications,
limitations and assumptions stated in its opinion, the exchange ratio provided for in the merger is fair, from
a financial point of view, to the holders of Memorial common stock (other than shares held by Memorial as
treasury shares or shares held by Range or Merger Sub or by any wholly owned subsidiary of Range,
Merger Sub or Memorial, which we collectively refer to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as
“excluded shares”). The full text of Barclays’ written opinion, dated as of May 15, 2016, is attached as
Annex C to this joint proxy statement/prospectus and sets forth, among other things, the assumptions
made, procedures followed, factors considered
Table of Contents
13
and limitations upon the review undertaken by Barclays in rendering its opinion. The summary of Barclays’
opinion is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the opinion.
Barclays’ opinion is addressed to the Memorial board of directors, addresses only the fairness, from a
financial point of view, of the exchange ratio to the holders of Memorial common stock (other than excluded
shares) as of the date of the opinion and does not constitute a recommendation to any stockholder of
Memorial as to how such stockholder should vote with respect to the merger or any other matter. Barclays
was not requested to address, and its opinion does not in any manner address, Memorial’s underlying
business decision to proceed with or effect the merger.
For a more complete discussion of Barclays’ opinion, see “The Merger-Opinions of Memorial’s Financial
Advisors-Opinion of Barclays Capital Inc.” beginning on page 83.
Opinion of Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
Memorial retained Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, which we refer to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as
“Morgan Stanley,” in connection with the merger. On May 15, 2016, Morgan Stanley rendered to the
Memorial board of directors its oral opinion, subsequently confirmed in writing on May 15, 2016, that, as of
such date and based upon and subject to the various assumptions made, procedures followed, matters
considered and qualifications and limitations on the scope of the review undertaken by Morgan Stanley as
set forth in its written opinion, the exchange ratio pursuant to the merger agreement was fair, from a
financial point of view, to the holders of Memorial common stock (other than excluded shares). The full text
of Morgan Stanley’s written opinion, dated as of May 15, 2016, to the Memorial board of directors, which
sets forth, among other things, the assumptions made, procedures followed, matters considered and
qualifications and limitations on the scope of review undertaken by Morgan Stanley in rendering its opinion,
is attached as Annex D to, and is incorporated by reference into, this joint proxy statement/prospectus. The
summary of the opinion of Morgan Stanley in this joint proxy statement/prospectus is qualified in its
entirety by reference to the full text of the opinion. We encourage you to read Morgan Stanley’s opinion and
the summary of Morgan Stanley’s opinion below carefully and in their entirety.
Morgan Stanley’s opinion was rendered for the benefit of the Memorial board of directors, in its capacity as
such, and addressed only the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the exchange ratio pursuant to the
merger agreement to the holders of Memorial common stock (other than excluded shares) as of the date of
the opinion. Morgan Stanley’s opinion does not address any of the relative merits of the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement as compared to other business or financial strategies that might be
available to Memorial, nor does it address the underlying business decision of Memorial to enter into the
merger agreement or proceed with any other transaction contemplated by the merger agreement. In
addition, Morgan Stanley’s opinion does not in any manner address the prices at which Range common
stock will trade following the consummation of the merger or at any time. The opinion was addressed to,
and rendered for the benefit of, the Memorial board of directors and was not intended to, and does not,
constitute advice or a recommendation to any holder of Memorial common stock as to how to vote or act on
any matter with respect to the merger.
For a more complete discussion of Morgan Stanley’s opinion, see “The Merger—Opinions of Memorial’s
Financial Advisors—Opinion of Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC.” beginning on page 94.
A copy of the merger agreement is attached as Annex A to this joint proxy statement/prospectus. Range
and Memorial encourage you to read the entire merger agreement carefully because it is the principal
document
The Merger
Table of Contents
14
governing the merger. For more information on the merger agreement, see the section titled “The Merger
Agreement” beginning on page 125.
Form of the Merger (see page 125)
Subject to the terms and conditions of the merger agreement, at the effective time of the merger, Merger
Sub, a wholly owned subsidiary of Range that was formed for the sole purpose of effecting the merger, will
merge with and into Memorial. Memorial will survive the merger and become a wholly owned subsidiary of
Range.
Merger Consideration (see page 125)
Memorial stockholders will have the right to receive 0.375 of a share of Range common stock for each share
of Memorial common stock they hold immediately prior to the effective time of the merger (the “exchange
ratio”) and, in lieu of any fractional shares, cash (without interest) in an amount equal to the product of
(i) such fractional part of a share of Range common stock multiplied by (ii) the volume weighted average
price of Range common stock for the five consecutive trading days immediately prior to the closing date of
the merger as reported by Bloomberg, L.P. The exchange ratio is fixed and will not be adjusted for changes
in the market value of the common stock of Memorial or Range. As a result, the implied value of the
consideration to Memorial stockholders will fluctuate between the date of this joint proxy
statement/prospectus and the effective time of the merger. Based on the closing price of Range common
stock on the NYSE on May 13, 2016, the last trading day before public announcement of the merger, the
aggregate value of the merger consideration payable to Memorial stockholders was approximately $3.2
billion.
Treatment of Memorial LTIP Restricted Stock Awards (see page 137)
Effective immediately prior to the effective time of the merger, each outstanding share of unvested
restricted Memorial common stock will fully vest and any applicable restrictions will lapse and, at the
effective time of the merger, each such share will be treated as a share of Memorial common stock,
including with respect to the right to receive 0.375 of a fully vested share of Range common stock.
Expected Timing of the Merger
Range and Memorial currently expect the closing of the merger to occur late in the third quarter of 2016.
However, the merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of conditions as described in the merger
agreement, and it is possible that factors outside the control of Range and Memorial could result in the
merger being completed at an earlier time, a later time or not at all.
Conditions to Completion of the Merger (see page 138)
The obligations of Range, Memorial and Merger Sub to complete the merger are subject to the satisfaction
or waiver of the following conditions to completion of the merger on or prior to the closing date:
•   adoption of the merger agreement by the affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the outstanding shares
of Memorial common stock entitled to vote thereon;
•   approval of the issuance of Range common stock pursuant to the merger agreement by the affirmative vote
of holders of a majority of the shares present in person or represented by proxy and entitled to vote at the
Range special meeting on that proposal;
•   expiration or termination of any waiting periods or the receipt of any consent required to be obtained for the
consummation of the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement under the
Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended (referred to in this joint
Table of Contents
15
proxy statement/prospectus as the “HSR Act”) (on June 17, 2016, Range and Memorial were notified by
U.S. antitrust authorities that the waiting period under the HSR Act had expired);
•   absence of any laws, temporary restraining orders, preliminary or permanent injunctions or other orders
that have the effect of making the merger illegal or otherwise prohibiting completion of the merger;
•   effectiveness of the registration statement on Form S-4 of which this joint proxy statement/prospectus
forms a part and the absence of a stop order or proceedings pending before the SEC for that purpose; and
•   authorization for the listing on the NYSE of the shares of Range common stock to be issued in connection
with the merger, subject to official notice of issuance.
In addition, Range’s and Merger Sub’s obligations to effect the merger are subject to the satisfaction or
waiver of the following additional conditions:
•   each of the representations and warranties of Memorial set forth in the merger agreement being true and
correct as of the date of the merger agreement and as of the closing date as though made on and as of the
closing date, unless otherwise specified and subject to certain materiality thresholds;
•   performance of, or compliance with, in all material respects, all obligations required to be performed or
complied with by Memorial under the merger agreement on or prior to the effective time;
•   receipt of a certificate executed by an executive officer of Memorial, dated the closing date, confirming the
satisfaction of the conditions described in the preceding two bullets;
•   receipt by Range of a tax opinion from counsel, including an opinion that (i) the merger will be treated as a
“reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code and (ii) Memorial, Range and Merger
Sub will each be a “party to the reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368 of the Code; and
•   the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Purchase and Sale Agreement (the “MEMP GP
PSA”) dated as of April 27, 2016 by and between MEMP and Memorial, as a result of which Memorial
would cease to own any interest in the general partner of MEMP, a publicly-traded oil and gas exploration
and production master limited partnership (the transactions contemplated by the MEMP GP PSA were
consummated on June 1, 2016).
In addition, Memorial’s obligations to effect the merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the
following additional conditions:
•   each of the representations and warranties of Range set forth in the merger agreement being true and
correct as of the date of the merger agreement and as of the closing date as though made on and as of the
closing date, unless otherwise specified and subject to certain materiality thresholds;
•   performance of, or compliance with, in all material respects all agreements and covenants required to be
performed or complied with by Range and Merger Sub under the merger agreement on or prior to the
effective time;
•   receipt by Memorial of a certificate executed by an executive officer of Range, dated the closing date,
confirming the satisfaction of the conditions described in the preceding two bullets; and
•   receipt by Memorial of a tax opinion from counsel, including an opinion that (i) the merger will be treated
as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code and (ii) Memorial, Range and
Merger Sub will each be a “party to the reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368 of the Code.
16
Table of Contents
No Solicitation of Competing Proposals (see page 132)
The merger agreement generally precludes Memorial from soliciting or engaging in discussions or
negotiations with respect to a proposal competing with the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement. However, if Memorial receives a proposal meeting certain requirements from a third party, and
the Memorial board of directors determines in good faith (after consultation with its financial advisors and
outside legal counsel) that such proposal is, or would or would reasonably be expected to lead to, a
superior proposal that meets certain requirements as set forth in the merger agreement, Memorial may
furnish non-public information to and enter into discussions with, and only with, that third party regarding
such competing proposal. See the section titled “The Merger Agreement—No Solicitation of Competing
Proposals.”
Changes in Board Recommendations (see page 134)
The merger agreement generally provides that, subject to the exceptions described below, Memorial may
not change its recommendation that Memorial stockholders adopt the merger agreement, and Range may
not change its recommendation that Range stockholders approve the issuance of Range common stock in
the merger.
However, notwithstanding the foregoing, the merger agreement provides that, prior to obtaining Memorial
stockholder approval of the merger, Memorial—in response to a bona fide competing proposal that did not
result from a material breach of the no-shop covenants and certain related covenants—may effect a change
of recommendation, or terminate the merger agreement (subject to Memorial’s obligation to pay the
termination fee as described below in “The Merger Agreement—Effect of Termination”), after satisfaction of
certain conditions set forth under “The Merger Agreement—Changes in Board Recommendations.” In
addition, the merger agreement provides that, prior to obtaining Memorial stockholder approval of the
merger and in response to an intervening event with respect to Memorial, Memorial may effect a change of
recommendation after satisfaction of certain conditions set forth under “The Merger Agreement—Changes
in Board Recommendations.
The merger agreement also provides that, prior to obtaining Range stockholder approval of the proposed
issuance of Range common stock in the merger and in response to an intervening event with respect to
Range, the Range board of directors or any committee thereof may effect a change of recommendation
after satisfaction of certain conditions set forth under “The Merger Agreement—Changes in Board
Recommendations.
Termination of the Merger Agreement (see page 139)
The merger agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the effective time of the merger, whether
(except as described below) before or after the receipt of the required stockholder approvals, under the
following circumstances:
•   by mutual written consent of Range and Memorial;
•   by either Range or Memorial:
•
•
•
if any governmental entity denies a required approval and such denial has become final and
nonappealable, or issues a final and nonappealable order permanently enjoining or otherwise
prohibiting the completion of the merger, unless the terminating party’s failure to comply with any
material covenant or agreement under the merger agreement has been the cause of or resulted in
such denial;
if the merger is not consummated by on or before 5:00 p.m. Houston time on December 15, 2016,
unless the failure to close by that date is due to the failure of the terminating party to perform any of
its material covenants or agreements under the merger agreement;
upon a terminable breach of the other party (as described under “The Merger Agreement—
Termination of the Merger Agreement”);
Table of Contents
17
•
•
if the Range stockholders fail to approve the issuance of Range common stock in the merger at the
Range special meeting; or
if the Memorial stockholders fail to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, at the Memorial special meeting;
•   by Range:
•
•
•
prior to obtaining approval of the Memorial stockholders, if the Memorial board of directors makes a
change of recommendation;
prior to obtaining approval of the Memorial stockholders, if Memorial is in violation in any material
respect of the covenants in the merger agreement relating to the filing of this joint proxy
statement/prospectus or the obligation to hold the Memorial stockholder meeting;
prior to obtaining approval of the proposed issuance of Range common stock, in order to enter into a
definitive agreement with respect to a Range alternative proposal, if the Range board of directors
determines in good faith in accordance with the merger agreement that such proposal is a Range
superior proposal, and that the failure to terminate the merger agreement would be inconsistent with
its duties under applicable law (provided that Range contemporaneously pays the applicable
termination fee described below) (in each as described under “The Merger Agreement—Termination
of the Merger Agreement”);
•   by Memorial:
•
•
prior to obtaining the approval of the Memorial stockholders, in order to enter into a definitive
agreement with respect to a Memorial superior proposal in a manner allowed by certain exceptions
to the no-shop covenants (provided that Memorial contemporaneously pays the applicable
termination fee described below);
prior to obtaining approval of the proposed issuance of Range common stock in the merger, if Range
or Merger Sub is in violation in any material respect of the covenants in the merger agreement
relating to the filing of this joint proxy statement/prospectus or the obligation to hold the Range
stockholder meeting; or
•
if the Range board of directors or any committee thereof has made a change of recommendation.
Termination Fees and Expenses (see page 141)
Generally, all fees and expenses incurred in connection with the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement will be paid by the party incurring those expenses, subject to the
specific exceptions discussed in this joint proxy statement/prospectus. In the event the merger agreement
is terminated by either Range or Memorial because of the failure to obtain Range stockholder approval,
then Range will pay to Memorial a no vote expense payment equal to $25,000,000. In the event the merger
agreement is terminated by either Range or Memorial because of the failure to obtain Memorial stockholder
approval, then Memorial will pay Range a no vote expense payment equal to $25,000,000. In certain
circumstances, Memorial may be required to pay Range a termination fee of $75,000,000, or Range may be
required to pay Memorial a termination fee of $125,000,000 or an alternative proposal fee of $300,000,000.
See the section titled “The Merger Agreement—Termination Fees and Expenses” beginning on page 141
for a discussion of the circumstances under which such termination fee or no vote expense payment will be
required to be paid.
Comparison of Stockholder Rights and Corporate Governance Matters (see page 167)
The governing corporate documents of Memorial differ from the governing corporate documents of Range,
in some cases materially. As a result, Memorial stockholders that receive Range common stock as merger
consideration will have different rights once they become stockholders of Range. These differences are
described in detail under the section titled “Comparison of Rights of Range Stockholders and Memorial
Stockholders.”
Table of Contents
18
Listing of Shares of Range Common Stock; De-Listing and Deregistration of Shares of Memorial Common
Stock (see page 123)
It is a condition to the completion of the merger that the shares of Range common stock to be issued to
Memorial stockholders be authorized for listing on the NYSE at the effective time of the merger, subject to
official notice of issuance. Upon completion of the merger, shares of Memorial common stock currently
listed on the NASDAQ will cease to be listed for trading on the NASDAQ and will be subsequently
deregistered under the Exchange Act.
Interests of Memorial Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger (see page 114)
Memorial’s directors and executive officers have interests in the merger that may be different from, or in
addition to, the interests of the Memorial stockholders generally. The members of the Memorial board of
directors were aware of and considered these interests, among other matters, in evaluating and negotiating
the merger agreement and the merger, and in recommending that Memorial stockholders approve and
adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the
merger.
These interests include:
•   Each Memorial executive officer (other than Mr. Graham) is a party to a change in control agreement with
Memorial that could provide that executive with potential compensation and benefits in the event that the
executive is involuntarily terminated in connection with the merger.
•   Memorial’s directors and executive officers hold equity compensation plan awards under the Memorial
Resource Development Corp. 2014 Long Term Incentive Plan (the “Memorial LTIP”), the vesting of which
will be accelerated as a result of the merger, in accordance with the terms of those awards and the merger
agreement.
•   Upon adoption of the merger agreement by Memorial stockholders, MRD Holdco LLC is permitted to
distribute its shares of Memorial common stock to, among others, MRD Holdco LLC’s members, including
certain Memorial officers and employees. The shares of Memorial common stock received by those
Memorial officers and employees will be entitled to receive the merger consideration.
•   Memorial’s directors and executive officers are entitled to continued indemnification and insurance
coverage under the merger agreement, as more fully described in “The Merger Agreement—
Indemnification and Insurance” beginning on page 137.
Regulatory Clearances Required to Complete the Transactions (see page 120)
Consummation of the merger is subject to the expiration or termination of any applicable waiting period
under the HSR Act. On June 6, 2016, Range and Memorial filed Notification and Report Forms with the
Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice, which is referred to as the Antitrust Division, and the
Federal Trade Commission, which is referred to as the FTC. On June 17, 2016, Range and Memorial were
notified by U.S. antitrust authorities that the waiting period under the HSR Act had expired. See “The
Merger—Regulatory Clearances Required for the Merger.”
Board of Directors and Executive Management Following the Merger (see page 119)
The merger agreement provides that, upon completion of the merger, Range will increase the size of the
Range board of directors by one member and fill the position created by that increase with one member of
the Memorial board of directors who has been designated by the Memorial board of directors. However, that
designation is subject to the review by, and approval and recommendation of, the Governance and
Nominating Committee of the Range board of directors.
Table of Contents
19
It is anticipated that, following the completion of the merger, the Range board of directors will have ten
members, consisting of the nine individuals serving on the Range board of directors as of the date of this
joint proxy statement/prospectus and Robert A. Innamorati, an independent member of the Memorial board
of directors who was designated by the Memorial board of directors and whose appointment was
subsequently unanimously approved—subject to completion of the merger—by the Range board of
directors following receipt of the unanimous recommendation of such appointment from the Governance
and Nominating Committee. Mr. Innamorati would serve as an independent director. In addition, Range and
SailingStone have recently agreed, among other things, to cooperate with each other in good faith to
identify one new independent director to be appointed to the Range board of directors who is mutually
agreeable to the Range board of directors and SailingStone. See “The Range Special Meeting—
SailingStone Voting Support and Nomination Agreement” beginning on page 46 for more information.
Following the completion of the merger, it is anticipated that each of the Range executive officers will
continue to serve in their current positions and under the same compensation plans and arrangements that
were in place prior to the merger.
No Appraisal Rights (see page 123)
Neither the holders of shares of Range common stock nor the holders of shares of Memorial common
stock are entitled to appraisal rights in connection with the merger in accordance with Delaware law, nor do
the certificates of incorporation or bylaws of either company provide any stockholder with any such
appraisal rights.
Exchange of Shares in the Merger (see page 126)
Prior to the effective time of the merger, Range will enter into an agreement with Memorial’s transfer agent
or another entity reasonably acceptable to Memorial to act as agent for the holders of Memorial common
stock in connection with the merger and to receive the merger consideration and cash sufficient to pay
cash (without interest) in lieu of fractional shares to which holders of fractional shares may become entitled.
At the effective time of the merger, each share of Memorial common stock outstanding immediately prior to
the effective time will be converted into the right to receive 0.375 of a share of Range common stock.
Promptly after the effective time of the merger, but in no event later than three business days after the
closing date of the merger, Range will cause the exchange agent to mail to each holder of Memorial
common stock a stock certificate or a letter of transmittal specifying, among other things, that delivery will
be effected, and risk of loss and title to any certificates shall pass, only upon proper delivery of such
certificates to the exchange agent, or in the case of book entry shares, upon adherence to the procedures
set forth in the letter of transmittal. Such letter of transmittal will also include instructions explaining the
procedure for surrendering Memorial stock certificates in exchange for shares of Range common stock or,
in the case of book entry shares, the surrender of such shares for payment of the merger consideration.
After the effective time of the merger, shares of Memorial common stock will no longer be outstanding, will
be automatically canceled and will cease to exist and each certificate or book entry share, if any, that
previously represented shares of Memorial common stock will represent only the right to receive the
merger consideration as described above, any cash in lieu of fractional shares of Range common stock
and any dividends or other distributions to which the holders of the certificates become entitled upon
surrender of such certificates. With respect to such shares of Range common stock deliverable upon the
surrender of Memorial stock certificates or book entry shares, until holders of such Memorial stock
certificates or book entry shares have surrendered such stock certificates or book entry shares to the
exchange agent, those holders will not receive dividends or distributions declared or made with respect to
such shares of Range common stock with a record date after the effective time of the merger.
Table of Contents
20
Memorial stockholders will not receive any fractional shares of Range common stock pursuant to the
merger. Instead of any fractional shares, Memorial stockholders will be paid an amount in cash (without
interest) for such fraction of a share calculated by multiplying the fractional share interest to which such
holder would otherwise be entitled by the volume weighted average price of Range common stock for the
five consecutive trading days immediately ending on the closing date of the merger as reported by
Bloomberg, L.P.
Range stockholders need not take any action with respect to their stock certificates.
Anticipated Accounting Treatment (see page 151)
Range prepares its financial statements in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
(“GAAP”). The merger will be accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting with Range being
considered the acquirer of Memorial for accounting purposes. This means that Range will allocate the
purchase price to the fair value of Memorial’s tangible and intangible assets and liabilities at the acquisition
date, with the excess purchase price being recorded as goodwill. Under the acquisition method of
accounting, goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least annually.
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences (see page 148)
The merger is intended to be treated for U.S. federal income tax purposes as a “reorganization” within the
meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. Assuming the merger qualifies as a reorganization, a U.S. holder of
Memorial common stock will not recognize any gain or loss for U.S. federal income tax purposes upon the
exchange of the holder’s shares of Memorial common stock for shares of Range common stock pursuant
to the merger, except with respect to cash received in lieu of fractional shares of Range common stock.
As a condition to the completion of the merger, Memorial and Range will each have received an opinion,
dated as of the closing date of the merger, that the merger will be treated for U.S. federal income tax
purposes as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. An opinion of counsel
represents such counsel’s best legal judgment but is not binding on the Internal Revenue Service (the
“IRS”) or any court, so there can be no certainty that the IRS will not challenge the conclusions reflected in
the opinion or that a court would not sustain such a challenge.
The tax opinions regarding the merger will not address any U.S. federal tax consequences other than U.S.
federal income tax consequences, or any U.S. state, local or non-U.S. tax consequences, of the merger. The
opinions will be based on certain assumptions and representations as to factual matters from Range and
Memorial, as well as certain covenants and undertakings by Range and Memorial. If any of the
assumptions, representations, covenants or undertakings is incorrect, incomplete, inaccurate or violated in
any material respect, the validity of the conclusions reached by counsel in their opinions would be
jeopardized and the tax consequences of the merger could differ from those described in this joint proxy
statement/prospectus. Neither Range nor Memorial is currently aware of any facts or circumstances that
would cause the assumptions, representations, covenants and undertakings to be incorrect, incomplete,
inaccurate or violated in any material respect.
You are urged to consult your own tax advisor regarding the particular consequences to you of the merger.
Risk Factors (see page 33)
In evaluating the merger, in addition to the other information contained in this joint proxy
statement/prospectus, you should carefully consider the risk factors relating to the merger and each of
Range and Memorial beginning on page 33.
Table of Contents
21
Summary Selected Consolidated Financial Data
Summary Selected Consolidated Historical Financial Data of Range
The following table sets forth Range’s selected consolidated historical financial information that has been
derived from (1) Range’s consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2015, 2014, 2013, 2012 and
2011 and (2) Range’s consolidated financial statements for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015.
This disclosure does not include the effects of the merger. You should read this financial information in
conjunction with “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of
Operations” and its consolidated financial statements and notes thereto in Range’s Annual Report on Form
10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 and Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended
June 30, 2016, each of which is incorporated into this joint proxy statement/prospectus by reference. The
selected statement of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011 and selected
balance sheet data as of December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 have been derived from Range’s audited
consolidated financial statements for such years, which have not been incorporated into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus by reference. See “Where You Can Find More Information” beginning on page 189.
Six Months
Ended June 30,
2016
2015
Year Ended
December 31,
   
   
(In thousands, except per share data)
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
$ 434,093   $ 583,536   $ 1,089,644   $1,911,989   $1,715,676   $1,351,694   $1,173,266
(75,890)
88,048
416,364     383,520
(61,825)
41,437
40,087
75,007
35,824
92,060     130,548     116,577
15,441
15,030
433,210     707,408     1,598,068     2,426,057     1,770,428     1,408,572     1,228,383
44,725
71,917
Consolidated
statements of
operations data:
Revenues and other
income:
Natural gas, NGLs and
oil sales
Derivative fair value
income (loss)
Brokered natural gas,
marketing and other
Total revenues and
other income:
Costs and expenses:  
Direct operating
  
Transportation,
gathering and
compression
Production and ad
valorem taxes
Brokered natural gas
and marketing
Exploration
Abandonment and
impairment of
unproved properties
General and
administrative
Memorial merger
expenses
Termination costs
Deferred compensation
plan
Interest
Loss on early
262,107     184,624
136,363     150,483     128,091     115,905     112,972
396,739     325,289     256,242     192,445     120,755
11,936
19,170
33,860
44,555
45,240
67,120
27,666
77,483
48,593
115,866     129,980     131,786
20,434
11,986
11,698
12,911
21,406
63,548
64,409
69,807
81,367
17,687
23,821
47,619
47,079
51,918     125,278
79,703
86,721     104,293
194,015     213,426     291,171     173,813     151,191
2,621    
167
—      
6,367
—      
15,070
—      
8,371
—      
—
—      
—
—    
—
41,802    
75,497
(12,906)   
82,686
(77,627)   
43,209  
166,439     168,977     176,557     168,798     125,052
(74,550)
55,296
7,203
—
—
22,495
24,596
12,280
11,063
18,576
242,951     299,185
581,155     551,032     492,397     445,228     341,221
Loss on early
extinguishment of debt   
Depletion, depreciation
and amortization
Impairment of proved
properties and other
assets
Loss (gain) on the sale
of assets
43,040
—
590,174
28,024
7,753
35,554
38,681
4,947
(2,734)
406,856
(285,638)
(92,291)
(49,132)
(2,259)
923,382     837,927     2,650,430     1,395,172     1,620,849     1,383,516     1,150,120
(490,172)    (130,519)    (1,052,362)    1,030,885     149,579
25,056
78,263
—      
   (173,526)   
    
      
   (173,526)
—      
(39,609)   
      
(39,609)
29
1    
(338,706)    396,502    
      
(338,677)    396,503
(143)   
34,000    
      
33,857
(1,778)   
13,832    
      
12,054
637  
34,920  
 
35,557
Total costs and
expenses
(Loss) income from
continuing
operations before
income taxes
Income tax (benefit)
expense:
Current
Deferred
Table of Contents
Net (loss) income from
continuing operations
Discontinued operations
Net (loss) income
22
Six Months
Ended June 30,
2016
2015
2015
Year Ended
December 31,
2014     2013     2012     2011
(In thousands, except per share data)
—
(316,646)    (90,910)    (713,685)    634,382     115,722     13,002     42,706  
—       15,320  
  
    
 
 $(316,646)  $ (90,910)  $(713,685)  $634,382   $115,722   $ 13,002   $ 58,026
—
—
—
—
Net (loss) income per common
share:
Basic—(loss) income from
continuing operations
—discontinued operations
—net (loss) income
Diluted—(loss) income from
continuing operations
—discontinued operations
—net (loss) income
$
  
    
 $
$
(1.90)  $
—      
      
(1.90)  $
(0.55)  $
—      
      
(0.55)  $
(1.90)  $
—
(0.55)  $
—
(4.29)  $
—      
      
(4.29)  $
(4.29)  $
—
3.81   $
—      
      
3.81   $
3.79   $
—
0.71   $
—      
      
0.71   $
0.70   $
—
0.08   $
—      
      
0.08   $
0.08   $
—
0.26  
0.10  
 
0.36
0.26  
0.10
—net (loss) income
Weighted average common
shares outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
$
(1.90)  $
(0.55)  $
(4.29)  $
3.79   $
0.70   $
0.08   $
0.36
166,964     166,230     166,389     163,625     160,438     159,131     158,030  
   166,964     166,230     166,389     164,403     161,407     160,307     159,441
Six Months
2015
Ended June 30,
2016
2015
Consolidated
statements of cash
flow data:
Cash provided by
(used in):
 
Operating activities  $ 169,604   $ 370,142   $ 683,700   $
Investing activities   
Financing activities
(74,282)   
(704,869)   
(95,411)    334,800
Year Ended
December 31,
   
   
   
(In thousands)
2013
2014
954,135   $ 743,538   $
2012
2011
(218,772)    (1,245,456)   
(464,905)
291,421     239,994
(983,436)    (1,528,558)   
881,619
647,099   $ 631,637  
(547,981) 
(86,412)
2015
2015
2016
As of June 30,
As of December 31,
Consolidated
balance sheets
data:
 
Total assets
 $6,380,179   $8,753,003   $6,900,031   $ 8,704,604   $7,203,127   $ 6,685,604   $5,806,080  
Total long-term debt    2,566,961     3,411,072     2,651,303     3,030,824     3,095,971     2,835,054     1,935,577  
Stockholders’ equity   2,464,927     3,381,414     2,759,658     3,457,429     2,414,452     2,357,392     2,392,420
(In thousands)
2013
2014
2012
2011
Summary Selected Consolidated Historical Financial Data of Memorial
The following table sets forth Memorial’s selected consolidated historical financial information that has
been derived from (1) Memorial’s consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended
December 31, 2015, 2014, 2013 and 2012 and (2) Memorial’s consolidated financial statements as of and for
the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015. This disclosure does not include the effects of the merger.
You should read this financial information in conjunction with “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and its consolidated financial statements and notes thereto
in Memorial’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on July 28, 2016, and Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the
quarter ended June 30, 2016, each of which is incorporated into this joint proxy statement/prospectus by
reference. The selected statement of operations data and cash flow data for the year ended December 31,
2012 and selected balance sheet data as of December 31, 2013 and 2012 have been derived from
Memorial’s audited consolidated financial statements for such years, which have not been incorporated
into this joint proxy statement/prospectus by reference. The selected balance sheet data as of June 30,
2015 has been derived from Memorial’s unaudited consolidated financial statements as of June 30, 2015,
which have not been incorporated into this joint proxy statement/prospectus by reference. See “Where You
Can Find More Information” beginning on page 189.
23
Table of Contents
Six Months Ended
For the Year Ended
2015
2016
June 30
2013
12
—
—
—
—
2012
December 31,
2014
2015
(In thousands, except per share data)
Statement of Operations Data:
Revenues:
Oil & natural gas sales
Other revenues
$ 180,064    $ 165,628    $ 374,042    $ 409,070    $219,552    $110,590  
—    
   
     
 
    180,064      165,628      374,042      409,082      219,552      110,590  
Total revenues
 
Costs and expenses:
Lease operating
   
Gathering, processing, and transportation    
Gathering, processing, and transportation
27,643     
—affiliate
7,058     
Exploration
5,855     
Taxes other than income
Depreciation, depletion, and amortization     125,357     
Impairment of proved oil and natural gas
   
properties
   
Incentive unit compensation expense
General and administrative
   
Accretion of asset retirement obligations    
(Gain) loss on commodity derivative
instruments
(Gain) loss on sale of properties
Other, net
—    
3,813     
460  
2,956     
8,270  
5,915     
76,359      188,742      128,238      70,903      37,048
2,528     
35,142      943,949      34,997     
46,288     
417
5,877  
9,510  
38,549      35,414      24,565  
551
17,570      17,207      15,782  
45,956      17,666     
6,887
—       
52,569     
35,154     
295
—       
26,340     
23,299     
216
24,903     
72,554
25,403     
8,969     
14,896
14,903     
45,294
9,076     
29,052
—       
13,853     
12,610
—       
1,034     
8,699
—
24,576
533
593
Total costs and expenses
Operating income (loss)
Other income (expense):
Interest expense, net
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Other, net
Total other income (expense)
Income (loss) from continuing operations
before income taxes
Income tax benefit (expense)
Net income (loss) from continuing
operations
Net income (loss) from discontinued
operations
Net income (loss)
Net income (loss) attributable to
noncontrolling interest
54,175     
   
50     
   
—       
   
       
     
    368,353     
     
       
    (188,289)    
 
 
(24,124)    
   
—       
   
   
(108)    
     
       
(24,232)
50     
—
(47)    
—
(77,727)     (281,249)     (257,734)
(3,161)     (10,500) 
(2) 
464  
 
99,349      136,018      971,156      103,109      98,912  
 
66,279      238,024      (562,074)     116,443      11,678
3,057      (82,773)    
2
(1)
(19,369)    
—       
(101)    
       
(19,470)
(39,396)    
—       
(1,022)    
       
(40,418)
(50,283)     (24,948)    
—       
(37,248)    
320     
143     
       
       
(87,211)     (24,805)
(8,283) 
—    
534  
 
(7,749)
(212,521)
46,809      197,606      (649,285)     91,638
3,929
22,405
(22,914)     (100,005)     (102,392)
(1,311)
1
(190,116)
23,895
97,601      (751,677)     90,327
3,930
(160,522)     (276,517)     (395,491)     115,614      61,005      23,067  
     
 
    (350,638)     (252,622)     (297,890)     (636,063)     151,332      26,997
(160,354)     (274,666)     (393,538)     126,788      49,830
(2,701)
Net income (loss) attributable to Memorial
Resource Development Corp.
Net (income) loss allocated to members    
Net (income) loss allocated to previous
(190,284)    
—
22,044     
—
95,648      (762,851)     101,502      29,698  
7,620
(20,305)     (90,712)
—
—
—
—
(1,425)     (10,790)     (37,318)
—
(150)
(734)
—
—
Net (income) loss allocated to previous
owners
Net (income) allocated to participating
restricted stockholders
Net (income) loss from discontinued
operations
Net income (loss) available to common
stockholders
Earnings per common share from
continuing operations:
Basic
Diluted
168
227
327
(314)
$(190,116)   $ 22,121    $ 95,241    $(784,895)   $
$
     
  $
(0.93)   $
       
(0.93)   $
0.12    $
       
0.12    $
0.49    $
       
0.49    $
(4.08)   $
       
(4.08)   $
—
—
—
—    
 
—
—
—      $
—      $
       
—      $
24
Six Months Ended
June 30
2016
2015
For the Year Ended
December 31,
2015
2014
2013
2012
(In thousands, except per share data)
$ 151,947    $ 183,699    $ 412,742    $ 225,690    $
88,472    $
56,421
(245,507)
(196,800)
(922,784)
(430,732)
(152,759)
(188,907)
85,964
51,472    $ 132,098    $ 450,950    $ 266,685    $
(69,197)     425,412
$
63,189  
    2,100,696      4,448,704      5,082,849      4,559,826      2,796,817      2,459,304  
    1,103,902      753,234      1,012,064      770,545      853,859      229,200  
    693,637      1,326,459      1,467,921      1,702,964      858,132      1,276,709
99,487
(801)     101,807
44,909    $
Table of Contents
Cash Flow Data:
Net cash flow provided by
operating activities—continuing
operations
Net cash used in investing
activities—continuing
operations
Net cash provided by (used in)
financing activities—continuing
operations
Balance Sheet Data:
Working capital
Total assets
Total debt
Total equity
25
Table of Contents
Summary Selected Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information
The following selected unaudited pro forma condensed combined consolidated statements of operations
data for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and year ended December 31, 2015 have been prepared to
give effect to the merger as if the merger had been completed on January 1, 2015. The unaudited pro forma
condensed combined consolidated balance sheet data at June 30, 2016 have been prepared to give effect
to the merger as if the merger was completed on June 30, 2016. The following selected unaudited pro forma
condensed combined consolidated financial information should be read in conjunction with the section
titled “Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Statements” and related notes included in
this joint proxy statement/prospectus beginning on page 152.
The pro forma financial statements have been prepared using the acquisition method of accounting for
business combinations under GAAP, with Range treated as the acquirer. Under the acquisition method of
accounting, Range will record all assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their respective acquisition date
fair values at the effective time of closing. The acquisition method of accounting is dependent upon certain
valuations and other studies that have yet to commence or progress to a stage where there is sufficient
information for a definitive measure. The sources and amounts of merger transaction expenses may also
differ from that assumed in the following pro forma adjustments. Accordingly, the pro forma adjustments
are preliminary, have been made solely for the purpose of providing pro forma financial statements, and are
subject to revision based on a final determination of fair value as of the date of acquisition. Differences
between these preliminary estimates and the final acquisition accounting may have a material impact on the
accompanying pro forma financial statements and the combined company’s future results of operations
and financial position.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements are provided for illustrative purposes
only and are not intended to represent or be indicative of the results of operations or financial position of
the combined company that would have been recorded had the merger been completed as of the dates
presented and should not be taken as representative of future results of operations or financial position of
the combined company. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements do not reflect
the impacts of any potential operational efficiencies, asset dispositions, cost savings or economies of scale
that the combined company may achieve with respect to the combined operations.
Pro forma statement of operations
data:
Natural gas, NGL and oil sales
Net loss
Loss per share, basic
Loss per share, diluted
$
Pro forma balance sheet data:
Cash and cash equivalents
Total assets
Long-term debt
Stockholder’s equity
Six Months
Ended June 30,
2016
Year Ended
December 31,
2015
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
614,157     
(425,419)   
(1.74)   
(1.74)
$
1,347,917  
(298,837) 
(1.23) 
(1.23)
As of 
June 30,
2016
(In
thousands)
$
392  
  11,368,934  
  3,686,811
Stockholder’s equity
5,419,809
Table of Contents
26
Summary Pro Forma Combined Oil and Natural Gas Reserve and Production Data
The following table presents selected unaudited pro forma information regarding Range’s proved reserves
as of December 31, 2015 after giving effect to the acquisition of Memorial’s proved reserves as if they were
acquired on December 31, 2015.
The following estimates of the net proved oil and natural gas reserves of Range’s oil and gas properties as
of December 31, 2015 are based on evaluations prepared by Range’s internal reservoir engineers. Wright &
Company, Inc., an independent petroleum engineering firm conducted an audit of 94% of Range’s proved
reserves. The following estimates of the net proved oil and natural gas reserves of Memorial’s oil and gas
properties as of December 31, 2015 (which exclude net proved oil and natural gas reserves attributable to
discontinued operations) are based on evaluations prepared by Memorial’s internal reservoir engineers
and were audited by independent petroleum engineers Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc.
There are numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities and values of proved reserves and in
projecting future rates of production and the amount and timing of development expenditures, including
many factors beyond the property owner’s control. The following reserve data represents estimates only
and should not be construed as being precise. The assumptions used in preparing these estimates may
not be realized, causing the quantities of oil and gas that are ultimately recovered, the timing of the recovery
of oil and gas reserves, the production and operating costs incurred and the amount and timing of future
development expenditures to vary from the estimates presented herein. Actual production, revenues and
expenditures with respect to reserves will vary from estimates and the variances may be material.
These estimates were calculated using the 12-month average of the first day of the month reference prices
as adjusted for location and quality differentials. Any significant price changes will have a material effect on
the quantity and present value of the reserves. These estimates depend on a number of variable factors
and assumptions, including historical production from the area compared with production from other
comparable producing areas, the assumed effects of regulations by governmental agencies, assumptions
concerning future oil and gas prices, and assumptions concerning future operating costs, transportation
costs, severance and excise taxes, development costs and workover and remedial costs.
Estimated Quantities of Oil and Natural Gas Reserves as of
December 31, 2015
Estimated proved reserves:
Natural gas (Mmcf)
NGLs (Mbbls)
Crude oil (Mbbls)
Natural gas equivalents (Mmcfe)(a)
Estimated proved developed reserves:
Natural gas (Mmcf)
Range
Historical    
  
 6,277,697    
  549,135    
 
53,193    
 9,891,663    
  
 3,376,165
Memorial
Historical    
  
  973,814    
54,160    
 
 
13,154    
 1,377,694    
  
  443,983
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
7,251,511  
603,295  
 
 
66,347  
 11,269,357
3,820,148
NGLs (Mbbls)
Crude oil (Mbbl)
Natural gas equivalents (Mmcfe)(a)
309,306    
 
31,679    
 5,422,075
24,583    
 
 
6,101    
  628,081
333,889  
 
 
37,780  
  6,050,156
(a) Oil and NGLs are converted to mcfe at the rate of one barrel equals six mcf based upon the approximate
relative energy content of oil to natural gas, which is not indicative of the relationship of oil and natural gas
prices.
Table of Contents
27
As of June 30, 2016, significant changes in the pro forma estimates of total proved natural gas, NGLs and
oil reserve quantities since December 31, 2015 were (1) Range’s sale of certain Oklahoma reserves of
approximately 26,681 mmcfe in the second quarter 2016 and (2) the sale of an approximately 139,207 mmcfe
non-operated working interest reserves in Northeast Pennsylvania in first quarter 2016.
The following table sets forth summary pro forma information with respect to Range’s and Memorial’s
combined oil and natural gas production for the year ended December 31, 2015 and six months ended
June 30, 2016. This pro forma information gives effect to the merger as if each had occurred on January 1,
2015.
The Range and Memorial production data presented below was derived from Range’s Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, Memorial’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on July 28,
2016 and their respective Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the six months ended June 30, 2016.
Production:
Natural gas (Mmcf)
NGLs (Mbbls)
Crude oil (Mbbls)
Total Mmcfe(a)
Production:
Natural gas (Mmcf)
NGLs (Mbbls)
Crude oil (Mbbls)
Six Months Ended
June 30, 2016
Range
Historical    
  
  167,865    
12,841    
 
 
1,694    
  255,072
Memorial
Historical    
  
59,227    
2,612    
715    
79,189
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
227,092  
15,453  
 
 
2,409  
  334,261
Year Ended
December 31, 2015
Range
Historical    
  
  362,687
Memorial
Historical    
  
98,269
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
460,956
20,356
3,249
23,605
Crude oil (Mbbls)
Total Mmcfe(a)
4,084    
  509,328
1,331    
  125,749
5,415  
  635,077
(a) Oil and NGLs are converted to mcfe at the rate of one barrel equals six mcf based upon the approximate relative
energy content of oil to natural gas, which is not indicative of the relationship of oil and natural gas prices.
Unaudited Comparative Per Share Data
The following table sets forth certain historical net income (loss) per share of Range and Memorial and per
share book value information on an unaudited pro forma combined basis after giving effect to the merger.
Historical per share data of Range for the year ended December 31, 2015 and the six months ended
June 30, 2016 was derived from Range’s historical financial statements for the respective periods. Historical
per share data of Memorial for the year ended December 31, 2015 and the six months ended June 30, 2016
was derived from Memorial’s historical financial statements for the respective periods. This information
should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes of Range and
Memorial that are incorporated into this joint proxy statement/prospectus by reference. See “Where You
Can Find More Information” beginning on page 189.
Table of Contents
28
Unaudited pro forma combined per share data for the year ended December 31, 2015 and the six months
ended June 30, 2016 was derived and should be read in conjunction with the unaudited pro forma
condensed combined financial data included under “Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined
Financial Information” beginning on page 152. The pro forma information is presented for illustrative
purposes only and is not necessarily indicative of the operating results or financial position that would
have occurred if the merger had been completed as of the beginning of the period.
Historical-Range:
Net loss per share:
Basic
Diluted
Cash dividends(1)(3)
Net book value per share
Historical-Memorial:
Net income (loss) per share from continuing
operations:
Basic
Diluted
Cash dividends(2)(3)
Net book value per share
Pro forma combined:
Six Months
Ended
June 30,
2016
(1.90)   
(1.90)   
0.04    
14.49
(0.93)   
(0.93)   
—      
3.37
$
$
Year Ended
December 31,
2015
$
$
(4.29) 
(4.29) 
0.16  
16.29
0.49  
0.49  
—    
4.01
Net loss per share:
Basic
Diluted
Net book value per share-diluted
(1.74)   
(1.74)   
21.91
$
$
(1.23) 
(1.23) 
n/a
(1) On June 1, 2016, Range announced the declaration of a dividend of $0.02 per share of outstanding Range
common stock, payable on June 30, 2016 and with a record date of the close of business on June 15, 2016.
Future decisions to pay dividends on Range common stock will be at the discretion of the Range board of
directors and will depend on the financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements, and other
factors that the Range board of directors may deem relevant.
(2) Since its initial public offering, Memorial has not declared any dividends and does not anticipate declaring or
providing any cash dividends to holders of Memorial common stock in the foreseeable future.
(3) The merger agreement prohibits Range and Memorial (unless consented to in advance by the other, which
consent may not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned) from paying dividends to their respective
stockholders stock until the earlier of the effective time of the merger and the termination of the merger
agreement in accordance with its terms. Memorial has consented to the dividend that Range announced on
June 1, 2016.
Comparative Market Prices
The following table shows the closing sale prices of Range common stock as reported on the NYSE and
Memorial common stock as reported on the NASDAQ as of May 13, 2016, the last full trading day before
public announcement of the merger, and as of August 9, 2016, the last trading day for which this
information could be calculated prior to the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus.
Memorial
May 13, 2016
August 9, 2016
Range Common
Memorial Common
$
$
Stock
42.01    
38.84
$
$
Stock
13.45    
14.51
Share
Equivalent Per
 
15.75  
14.57
$
$
The market price of Range common stock and Memorial common stock will fluctuate prior to the merger.
Range stockholders and Memorial stockholders are urged to obtain current market quotations for the
shares prior to making any decision with respect to the merger.
29
Table of Contents
Litigation Relating to the Merger
In July 2016, three separate class action lawsuits relating to the merger were filed by alleged stockholders
(“Plaintiffs”) against Memorial and the members of the Memorial board of directors. These lawsuits are
styled (i) Roger Mariani v. Memorial Resource Development Corp., et al., Case No. 4:16-cv-2042, in the
United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas, Houston Division; (ii) Joel Morris v. Memorial
Resource Development Corp., et al., Case No. 4:16-cv-2183, in the United States District Court for the
Southern District of Texas, Houston Division and (iii) Robert Hawkins v. Memorial Resource Development
Corp., et. al., Case No. 4:16-cv-2201, in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas,
Houston Division. The Morris action also names Range and Medina Merger Sub, Inc. as additional
defendants.
Plaintiffs allege that this joint proxy statement/prospectus omits allegedly material information concerning,
in general and among other things, (i) the valuation analyses prepared by Barclays and Morgan Stanley in
connection with their respective fairness opinions, (ii) the financial projections utilized by Barclays and
Morgan Stanley and (iii) the background of the merger. Based on these allegations, Plaintiffs allege that (i)
the defendants have violated Section 14(a) of the Exchange Act and Rule 14a-9 promulgated thereunder
and (ii) members of the Memorial board of directors have violated Section 20(a) of the Exchange Act.
Plaintiffs also allege, in general and among other things, that the terms of the merger are (i) unfair to our
stockholders and (ii) the result of an inadequate process.
Based on these allegations, Plaintiffs seek to enjoin the defendants from proceeding with or consummating
the merger. To the extent that the merger is consummated before injunctive relief is granted, Plaintiffs seek
to have the merger rescinded. Plaintiffs also seek attorneys’ fees.
Plaintiffs have not yet served the defendants, and the defendants’ date to answer, move to dismiss, or
otherwise respond to the lawsuits has not yet been set. The defendants cannot predict the outcome of the
lawsuits or any others that might be filed, nor can the defendants predict the amount of time and expense
that will be required to resolve the lawsuits. The defendants intend to vigorously defend the lawsuits.
Table of Contents
30
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This joint proxy statement/prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws
that are not limited to historical facts, but reflect Range’s and/or Memorial’s current beliefs, expectations or
intentions regarding future events. Words such as “may,” “will,” “could,” “should,” “expect,” “plan,”
“project,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” “pursue,” “target,” “continue,”
and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These forward-looking
statements include, without limitation, Range’s and Memorial’s expectations with respect to the synergies,
costs and other anticipated financial impacts of the proposed transaction; future financial and operating
results of the combined company; the combined company’s plans, objectives, expectations and intentions
with respect to future operations and services; approval of the proposed transaction by stockholders; the
satisfaction of the closing conditions to the proposed transaction; and the timing of the completion of the
proposed transaction.
Although Range and Memorial believe the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are
reasonable, such expectations may not occur. These forward-looking statements involve known and
unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results, performance or
achievements of the combined company to be materially different from actual future results expressed or
implied by the forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties also include those set forth under
“Risk Factors,” beginning on page 33, as well as, among others, risks and uncertainties relating to:
•   Failure to obtain the required votes of Range’s or Memorial’s stockholders;
•   The time required to complete the merger;
•   Uncertainty as to whether the conditions to closing the merger will be satisfied or whether the merger will
be completed;
•   The diversion of management time on merger-related issues;
•   The ultimate timing, outcome and results of integrating the operations of Range and Memorial;
•   The effects of the business combination of Range and Memorial, including the combined company’s future
financial condition, results of operations, strategy and plans;
•   Potential adverse reactions or changes to business relationships resulting from the announcement or
completion of the merger; expected benefits from the merger and the ability of Range to realize those
benefits;
•   Expectations regarding regulatory approval of the merger;
•   The results of any merger-related litigation, settlements and investigations;
•   Variations in market demand for, and prices of, natural gas, NGLs and oil;
•   Ability to hedge future commodity price risk;
•   The timing and successful drilling and completion of natural gas and oil wells;
•   Availability of capital and the ability to repay indebtedness when due;
•   Availability of rigs and other operating equipment;
•   Amounts, timing and types of capital expenditures and operating expenses;
•   Ability to raise capital to fund capital expenditures;
•   Timely and full receipt of sale proceeds from the sale of production;
•   The ability to find, acquire, market, develop and produce new natural gas and oil properties;
•   Interest rate volatility;
Table of Contents
31
•   Results of borrowing base redeterminations under the revolving credit facility;
•   Compliance with covenants under the revolving credit facility;
•   Uncertainties in the estimation of proved reserves and the net present values of these reserves, and in the
projection of future rates of production and timing of development expenditures;
•   Operating hazards attendant to the natural gas and oil business;
•   Operational hazards that are generally not recoverable from third parties or insurance;
•   Expansion and development trends of the oil and gas industry;
•   Potential mechanical failure or under-performance of significant wells, production facilities, processing
plants or pipeline mishaps;
•   Weather conditions;
•   Availability and cost of material and equipment;
•   Actions or inactions of third-party operators of the combined company’s properties;
•   Actions or inactions of third-party operators of pipelines or processing facilities;
•   The ability to find and retain skilled personnel;
•   Strength and financial resources of competitors;
•   Federal and state regulatory developments and approvals;
•   Environmental risks and ability to satisfy future environmental costs;
•   Worldwide economic conditions;
•   Drilling and operating costs, production rates and ultimate reserve recoveries;
•   Restrictions on permitting activities;
•   Expanded rigorous monitoring and testing requirements imposed by law, regulatory authorities or
otherwise;
•   Legislation that may regulate drilling activities and increase or remove liability caps for claims of damages
from oil spills;
•   Ability to obtain insurance coverage on commercially reasonable terms;
•   Accidental spills, blowouts and pipeline ruptures;
•   Impact of new and potential legislative and regulatory changes on operating and safety standards for the
domestic oil and gas exploration and production industry;
•   Financial flexibility;
•   Potential triggering of change of control provisions in certain agreements to which Memorial is a party; and
•   Other financial, operational and legal risks and uncertainties detailed from time to time in either Range’s or
Memorial’s SEC filings.
Range and Memorial caution that the foregoing list of factors is not exclusive. Additional information
concerning these and other risk factors is contained in Range’s and Memorial’s most recently filed Annual
Reports on Form 10-K, subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, recent Current Reports on Form 8-K
and other SEC filings. The forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made and, other than as
required by law, neither Range nor Memorial undertake any obligation to update publicly or revise any of
these forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. All
subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements concerning Range, Memorial, the proposed
transaction or other matters and attributable to Range or Memorial or any person acting on their behalf are
expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements above.
Table of Contents
32
RISK FACTORS
In addition to the other information included and incorporated by reference into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus, including the matters addressed in the section titled “Special Note Regarding
Forward-Looking Statements,” you should carefully consider the following risks before deciding whether to
vote for any of the proposals described in this joint proxy statement/prospectus. In addition, you should
read and consider the risks associated with each of the businesses of Range and Memorial because these
risks will also affect the combined company following the merger. These risks can be found in the Annual
Reports on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015 in the case of Range and Memorial
stockholders, as those risks may be updated or supplemented in each company’s subsequently filed
Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q or Current Reports on Form 8-K, to the extent incorporated by reference
into this joint proxy statement/prospectus. You should also read and consider the other information in this
joint proxy statement/prospectus and the other documents incorporated by reference into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus. See the section titled “Where You Can Find More Information” beginning on
page 189.
Risk Factors Relating to Range and Memorial
Range’s and Memorial’s businesses are and will be subject to the risks described in Range’s and
Memorial’s Annual Reports on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015, as such risks may
be updated or supplemented in each company’s subsequently filed Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q or
Current Reports on Form 8-K, to the extent incorporated by reference into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus. See “Where You Can Find More Information” beginning on page 189.
Risk Factors Relating to the Merger
The exchange ratio is fixed and will not be adjusted in the event of any change in either Range’s or
Memorial’s stock price.
At the effective time, each share of Memorial common stock outstanding immediately prior to the effective
time will be converted into the right to receive 0.375 of a share of Range common stock. This exchange ratio
will not be adjusted for changes in the market price of either Range common stock or Memorial common
stock between the date of signing the merger agreement and completion of the merger. Changes in the
price of Range common stock prior to the merger will affect the value of Range common stock that
Memorial common stockholders will receive on the date of the merger. The exchange ratio will be adjusted
proportionally to reflect the effect of any stock split, reverse stock split, stock dividend, subdivision,
reclassification, recapitalization, combination, exchange of shares or the like, with respect to Range
common stock or Memorial common stock between the date of signing the merger agreement and
completion of the merger.
The prices of Range common stock and Memorial common stock at the closing of the merger may vary
from their prices on the date the merger agreement was executed, on the date of this joint proxy
statement/prospectus and on the date of each stockholders meeting. As a result, the value represented by
the exchange ratio will also vary, and you will not know or be able to calculate the market value of the
merger consideration you will receive upon completion of the merger. For example, based on the range of
closing prices of Range common stock during the period from May 13, 2016, the last trading day before
public announcement of the merger, through August 9, 2016, the latest practicable trading date before the
date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus, the exchange ratio represented a value ranging from a high
of $17.30 to a low of $13.37 for each share of Memorial common stock.
In addition, the merger might not be completed until a significant period of time has passed after the
respective special stockholder meetings. Because the exchange ratio will not be adjusted to reflect any
changes in the market value of Range common stock or Memorial common stock, the market value of the
Range common stock issued in connection with the merger and the Memorial common stock surrendered
in connection with the
Table of Contents
33
merger may be higher or lower than the values of those shares on earlier dates. Stock price changes may
result from, among other things, changes in the business, operations or prospects of Range or Memorial
prior to or following the merger, litigation or regulatory considerations, general business, market, industry
or economic conditions and other factors both within and beyond the control of Range and Memorial.
Neither Range nor Memorial is permitted to terminate the merger agreement solely because of changes in
the market price of either company’s common stock.
A large portion of the shares of Range common stock to be issued to Memorial’s largest stockholder in the
merger will not be subject to any lock-up provisions, which could adversely affect the post-effective time
market price of the Range common stock.
Approximately 36% of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock is held by MRD Holdco LLC,
which is owned by three related private equity funds. Those private equity funds intend to distribute—after
the completion of the Memorial stockholder vote and before or after the effective time of the merger—a total
of approximately 26% of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock, or approximately 8% of the
outstanding Range common stock on a pro forma basis for the merger, to approximately 500 different
limited partners. If distributed before the effective time of the merger, under the terms of the merger, those
shares of Memorial common stock to be distributed to the limited partners will be converted in the merger
into a total of approximately 8% of the outstanding Range common stock on a pro forma basis for the
merger.
In either case, those shares will not be subject to lock-up restrictions and will be freely tradable on the open
market. If those limited partners elected to sell a significant portion of those shares of Range common stock
at the same time, or in close proximity with each other, that sales activity could potentially have an adverse
effect on the market price for Range common stock.
Current Range stockholders will have a reduced ownership and voting interest in the combined company
after the merger.
Based on the estimated number of shares of Memorial common stock that will be outstanding immediately
prior to the closing of the merger, we estimate that Range will issue approximately 77.3 million shares of
Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in the merger. As a result of these issuances, current
Range and Memorial stockholders are expected to hold approximately 69% and 31%, respectively, of the
combined company’s outstanding common stock immediately following completion of the merger.
Range stockholders currently have the right to vote for their respective directors and on other matters
affecting the applicable company. Each Range stockholder will remain a stockholder of Range with a
percentage ownership of the combined company that will be smaller than the stockholder’s percentage of
Range prior to the merger. As a result of these reduced ownership percentages, Range stockholders will
have less voting power in the combined company than they now have with respect to Range.
Uncertainties associated with the merger may cause a loss of management personnel and other key
employees, which could adversely affect the future business and operations of the combined company.
Range and Memorial are dependent on the experience and industry knowledge of their officers and other
key employees to execute their business plans. Each company’s success until the merger and the
combined company’s success after the merger will depend in part upon the ability of Range and Memorial
to retain key management personnel and other key employees. Current and prospective employees of
Range and Memorial may experience uncertainty about their roles within the combined company following
the merger, which may have an adverse effect on the ability of each of Range and Memorial to attract or
retain key management and other key personnel. Accordingly, no assurance can be given that the
combined company will be able to attract or retain key management personnel and other key employees of
Range and Memorial to the same extent that Range and Memorial have previously been able to attract or
retain their own employees.
Table of Contents
34
The transactions are subject to conditions, including certain conditions that may not be satisfied, or
completed on a timely basis, if at all.
The merger is subject to a number of other conditions beyond Range’s and Memorial’s control that may
prevent, delay or otherwise materially adversely affect its completion. We cannot predict whether and when
these other conditions will be satisfied. Any delay in completing the merger could cause the combined
company not to realize some or all of the benefits that we expect to achieve if the merger is successfully
completed within its expected time frame. See “The Merger Agreement—Conditions to Completion of the
Merger” beginning on page 138.
Failure to complete the merger could negatively impact the future business and financial results of Range
and Memorial.
Neither Range nor Memorial can make any assurances that it will be able to satisfy all of the conditions to
the merger or succeed in any litigation brought in connection with the merger. If the merger is not
completed, the financial results of Range and/or Memorial may be adversely affected and Range and/or
Memorial will be subject to several risks, including but not limited to:
•   being required to pay a termination fee of either $125,000,000 or $300,000,000, in the case of Range, or
$75,000,000, in the case of Memorial, or a no vote expense payment of $25,000,000, under certain
circumstances provided in the merger agreement;
•   payment of costs relating to the merger, such as legal, accounting, financial advisor and printing fees,
regardless of whether the merger is completed;
•   having had the focus of each company’s management on the merger instead of on pursuing other
opportunities that could have been beneficial to each company; and
•   being subject to litigation related to any failure to complete the merger.
If the merger is not completed, Memorial and Range cannot assure their stockholders that these risks will
not materialize and will not materially and adversely affect the business, financial results and stock prices of
Memorial or Range.
The merger agreement contains provisions that limit each party’s ability to pursue alternatives to the
merger, could discourage a potential competing acquiror of either Range or Memorial from making a
favorable alternative transaction proposal and, in specified circumstances, could require either party to pay
a termination fee to the other party.
The merger agreement contains “no shop” provisions that, subject to limited exceptions, restrict
Memorial’s ability to solicit, initiate, or knowingly encourage or knowingly facilitate, directly or indirectly, any
inquiry or proposal in respect of a competing third-party proposal for the acquisition of Memorial’s stock,
business or assets. In addition, pursuant to the merger agreement, Range has agreed that, unless required
by law, it will not (i) enter into, participate or engage in or continue any discussions or negotiations with
respect certain transactions if such action would or would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially
delay or materially impede Range’s or Merger Sub’s ability to consummate any of the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement or (ii) take any action that would or would reasonably be expected
to prevent, materially delay or materially impede the consummation of any of the transactions contemplated
by the merger agreement. In addition, in certain circumstances, Memorial may be required to pay Range a
termination fee of $75,000,000, or Range may be required to pay Memorial a termination fee of either
$125,000,000 or $300,000,000. See “The Merger Agreement—No Solicitation of Competing Proposals”
beginning on page 132, “The Merger Agreement—Termination of the Merger Agreement” beginning on
page 139 and “The Merger Agreement—Termination Fees and Expenses” beginning on page 141.
These provisions could discourage a potential third-party acquiror that might have an interest in acquiring
all or a significant portion of Memorial or Range from considering or proposing that acquisition, even if it
were
Table of Contents
35
prepared to pay consideration with a higher per share cash or market value than the market value proposed
to be received or realized in the merger or might result in a potential third-party acquiror proposing to pay a
lower price to the stockholders than it might otherwise have proposed to pay because of the added
expense of the termination fee that may become payable in certain circumstances.
If the merger agreement is terminated and either Range or Memorial determines to seek another business
combination, it may not be able to negotiate a transaction with another party on terms comparable to—or
better than—the terms of the merger.
Memorial’s directors and executive officers have interests in the merger that may be different from, or in
addition to, the interests of Memorial stockholders generally.
Memorial’s directors and executive officers have financial interests in the merger that may be different from,
or in addition to, the interests of the Memorial stockholders generally. The members of the Memorial board
of directors were aware of and considered these interests, among other matters, in evaluating and
negotiating the merger agreement and the merger, and in recommending to Memorial’s stockholders that
the merger agreement be approved. These interests include: (i) each Memorial executive officer (other than
Mr. Graham) is a party to a change in control agreement with Memorial that could provide that executive
with potential compensation and benefits in the event the executive is involuntarily terminated in
connection with the merger, (ii) Memorial’s directors and executive officers hold equity compensation plan
awards under the Memorial LTIP , the vesting of which awards will be accelerated as a result of the merger,
in accordance with the terms of those awards and the merger agreement, (iii) upon adoption of the merger
agreement by Memorial stockholders, MRD Holdco is permitted to distribute its shares of Memorial
common stock to, among others, MRD Holdco LLC’s members, including certain Memorial officers and
employees, and the shares of Memorial common stock received by those Memorial officers and employees
will be entitled to receive the merger consideration and (iv) Memorial’s directors and executive officers are
entitled to continued indemnification and insurance coverage under the merger agreement, as more fully
described in “The Merger Agreement—Indemnification and Insurance” beginning on page 137.
MRD Holdco LLC, Jay Graham, Anthony Bahr and WHR Incentive LLC have entered into the voting and
support agreement with Range in connection with the execution of the merger agreement. See “The Merger
Agreement—Voting and Support Agreement” beginning on page 143 for more information.
The Memorial board of directors was aware of these interests at the time it approved the merger agreement
and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger. If you are a Memorial
stockholder, these interests may cause Memorial’s directors and executive officers to view the merger
proposal differently and more favorably than you may view it. See “The Merger—Interests of Memorial
Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger” beginning on page 114 for more information.
If the merger does not qualify as a reorganization under Section 368(a) of the Code, the stockholders of
Memorial may be required to pay substantial U.S. federal income taxes.
As a condition to the completion of the merger, Memorial and Range will each have received a tax opinion
described in the section titled “The Merger Agreement—Conditions to Completion of the Merger,” dated as
of the closing date of the merger, including an opinion that the merger will be treated for U.S. federal income
tax purposes as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. These opinions will be
based on certain assumptions and representations as to factual matters from Range and Memorial, as well
as certain covenants and undertakings by Range and Memorial. If any of the assumptions, representations,
covenants or undertakings is incorrect, incomplete, inaccurate or violated in any material respect, the
validity of the conclusions reached by counsel in their opinions would be jeopardized. In addition, an
opinion of counsel represents counsel’s best legal judgment but is not binding on the IRS or any court, so
there can be no certainty that the IRS will not challenge the conclusions reflected in the opinions or that a
court will not sustain such a
Table of Contents
36
challenge. If the IRS or a court determines that the merger should not be treated as a “reorganization,” a
holder of Memorial common stock would recognize taxable gain or loss upon the exchange of Memorial
common stock for Range common stock pursuant to the merger. See “Material U.S. Federal Income Tax
Consequences” beginning on page 148.
Completion of the merger may trigger change in control or other provisions in certain agreements to which
Memorial is a party.
The completion of the merger may trigger change in control or other provisions in certain agreements to
which Memorial is a party. If Range and Memorial are unable to negotiate waivers of those provisions, the
counterparties may exercise their rights and remedies under the agreements, potentially terminating the
agreements or seeking monetary damages. Even if Range and Memorial are able to negotiate waivers, the
counterparties may require a fee for such waivers or seek to renegotiate the agreements on terms less
favorable to Memorial or the combined company.
Memorial and Range are subject to litigation related to the merger, and it is possible that additional claims
may be brought by the current plaintiffs or others.
Memorial and Range are subject to litigation related to the merger. See “The Merger—Litigation Relating to
the Merger.” It is possible that additional claims beyond those that have already been filed will be brought
by the current plaintiffs or by others in an effort to enjoin the merger or seek monetary relief from Memorial
or Range. Memorial and Range cannot predict the outcome of these lawsuits, or others, nor can they
predict the amount of time and expense that will be required to resolve any such lawsuits. An unfavorable
resolution of any such litigation surrounding the merger could delay or prevent their consummation. In
addition, the costs of defending any such litigation, even if resolved in Memorial’s or Range’s favor, could
be substantial and such litigation could distract Memorial and Range from pursuing the consummation of
the merger and other potentially beneficial business opportunities.
Risk Factors Relating to the Combined Company Following the Merger
The combined company’s debt may limit its financial flexibility.
As of June 30, 2016, Range had $3.0 million outstanding under its credit facility and a total of $2.6 billion in
principal amount of senior notes and senior subordinated notes. In addition, the combined company may
incur additional debt from time to time in connection with the financing of operations, acquisitions,
recapitalizations and refinancings. The level of the combined company’s debt could have several important
effects on future operations, including, among others:
•   a significant portion of the combined company’s income from operations may be applied to the payment of
principal and interest on the debt and will not be available for other purposes;
•   covenants contained in the combined company’s existing and future debt arrangements may require the
combined company to meet financial tests that may affect its flexibility in planning for and reacting to
changes in its business, including possible acquisition opportunities;
•   the combined company’s ability to obtain additional financing for capital expenditures, acquisitions,
general corporate and other purposes may be limited or burdened by increased costs or more restrictive
covenants;
•   the combined company may not be able to refinance or extend the term of the existing debt on favorable
terms or at all which would have a material effect on its ability to continue operations;
•   the combined company may be at a competitive disadvantage to similar companies that have less debt;
•   the combined company’s vulnerability to adverse economic and industry conditions may increase; and
•   the combined company may face limitations on its flexibility to plan for and react to changes in its business
and the industries in which it operates.
Table of Contents
37
The failure to integrate successfully the businesses of Range and Memorial in the expected timeframe
would adversely affect the combined company’s future results following the merger.
The merger involves the integration of two companies that currently operate independently. The success of
the merger will depend—in large part—on the ability of the combined company to realize the anticipated
benefits, including cost savings, innovation and operational efficiencies, from combining the businesses of
Range and Memorial. To realize these anticipated benefits, the businesses of Range and Memorial must be
successfully integrated. This integration will be complex and time-consuming. The failure to integrate
successfully and to manage successfully the challenges presented by the integration process may result in
the combined company not achieving the anticipated benefits of the merger.
Potential difficulties that may be encountered in the integration process include the following:
•   the inability to successfully integrate the businesses of Range and Memorial in a manner that permits the
combined company to achieve the full benefit of synergies, cost savings and operational efficiencies that
are anticipated to result from the merger;
•   complexities associated with managing the larger, more complex combined business;
•   complexities associated with integrating the workforces of the two companies;
•   potential unknown liabilities and unforeseen expenses, delays or regulatory conditions associated with
the merger, including one-time cash costs to integrate the two companies that may exceed the anticipated
range of such one-time cash costs that Range and Memorial estimated as of the date of execution of the
merger agreement;
•   difficulty or inability to refinance the debt of the combined company or comply with the covenants thereof;
•   performance shortfalls at one or both of the companies as a result of the diversion of management’s
attention caused by completing the merger and integrating the companies’ operations; and
•   the disruption of, or the loss of momentum in, each company’s ongoing business or inconsistencies in
standards, controls, procedures and policies.
Any of these difficulties in successfully integrating the businesses of Range and Memorial, or any delays in
the integration process, could adversely affect the combined company’s ability to achieve the anticipated
benefits of the merger and could adversely affect the combined company’s business, financial results,
financial condition and stock price. Even if the combined company is able to integrate the business
operations of Range and Memorial successfully, there can be no assurance that this integration will result
in the realization of the full benefits of synergies, cost savings, innovation and operational efficiencies that
Range and Memorial currently expect from this integration or that these benefits will be achieved within the
anticipated time frame.
The future results of the combined company will suffer if the combined company does not effectively
manage its expanded operations following the merger.
Following the merger, the size of the business of the combined company will increase significantly beyond
the current size of either Range’s or Memorial’s business, and the combined company will have significant
operations in an oil and gas producing region in which Range has not recently operated. The combined
company’s future success depends, in part, upon its ability to manage this expanded business, which will
pose substantial challenges for management, including challenges related to the management and
monitoring of new operations and associated increased costs and complexity. There can be no assurances
that the combined company will be successful or that it will realize the expected operating efficiencies, cost
savings, revenue enhancements and other benefits currently anticipated from the merger.
38
Table of Contents
The combined company is expected to incur substantial expenses related to the merger and the integration
of Range and Memorial.
The combined company is expected to incur substantial expenses in connection with the merger and the
integration of Range and Memorial. There are a large number of processes, policies, procedures,
operations, technologies and systems that must be integrated, including purchasing, accounting and
finance, sales, billing, payroll, pricing, revenue management, maintenance, marketing and benefits. While
Range and Memorial have assumed that a certain level of expenses will be incurred, there are many factors
beyond their control that could affect the total amount or the timing of the integration expenses. Moreover,
many of the expenses that will be incurred are, by their nature, difficult to estimate accurately. These
expenses could, particularly in the near term, exceed the savings that the combined company expects to
achieve from the elimination of duplicative expenses and the realization of economies of scale and cost
savings. These integration expenses could result in the combined company’s taking charges against
earnings following the completion of the merger, and the amount and timing of any such charges are
uncertain at present.
Financial projections by Range and Memorial may not prove to be reflective of actual future results.
In connection with the merger, Range and Memorial prepared and considered, among other things, internal
financial forecasts for Range and Memorial, respectively. These financial projections include assumptions
regarding future operating cash flows, expenditures and growth and of Range and Memorial. They speak
only as of the date made and will not be updated. These financial projections were not provided with a view
to public disclosure, are subject to significant economic, competitive, industry and other uncertainties and
may not be achieved in full, at all or within projected timeframes. In addition, the failure of businesses to
achieve projected results, could have a material adverse effect on the combined company’s share price and
financial position following the merger. For additional information regarding these financial projections, see
“The Merger—Certain Prospective Unaudited Financial and Operating Information of Range and Memorial”
beginning on page 108.
The pro forma financial information included in this document is presented for illustrative purposes only
and may not be an indication of the combined company’s financial condition or results of operations
following the merger.
The pro forma financial information contained in this document is presented for illustrative purposes only,
is based on various adjustments, assumptions and preliminary estimates and may not be an indication of
the combined company’s financial condition or results of operations following the merger for several
reasons. See “Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Financial Information” beginning on page 152.
The actual financial condition and results of operations of the combined company following the merger
may not be consistent with—or evident from—this pro forma financial information. In addition, the
assumptions used in preparing the pro forma financial information may not prove to be accurate, and other
factors may affect the combined company’s financial condition or results of operations following the
merger. Any potential decline in the combined company’s financial condition or results of operations may
cause significant variations in the stock price of the combined company.
Uncertainty about the merger and diversion of management could harm the combined company following
the merger.
The combined company’s success will be dependent upon the experience and industry knowledge of its
officers and other key employees. The merger could result in current and prospective employees’
experiencing uncertainty about their future with the combined company following the merger. These
uncertainties may impair the ability of the combined company to retain, recruit or motivate key personnel. In
addition, completion of the merger and integrating the companies’ operations will require a significant
amount of time and attention from management of the two companies. The diversion of management’s
attention away from ongoing operations could adversely affect business relationships of the combined
company following the merger.
Table of Contents
39
The combined company may not be able to utilize a portion of Memorial’s or Range’s net operating loss
carryforwards to offset future taxable income for U.S. federal tax purposes, which could adversely affect the
combined company’s net income and cash flows.
As of December 31, 2015, Memorial had federal income tax net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) of
approximately $169.7 million, which will expire in 2034 and 2035, and Range had regular NOLs of
approximately $620.6 million and alternative minimum tax NOLs of approximately $539.3 million, which will
expire between 2018 and 2035. Utilization of these NOLs depends on many factors, including the combined
company’s future taxable income, which cannot be predicted with any accuracy. In addition, Section 382 of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (“Section 382”), generally imposes an annual limitation on
the amount of an NOL that may be used to offset taxable income when a corporation has undergone an
“ownership change” (as determined under Section 382). An ownership change generally occurs if one or
more stockholders (or groups of stockholders) change their ownership by more than 50 percentage points
over their lowest ownership percentage within a rolling three-year period, taking into account for this
purpose only those stockholders (or groups of stockholders) who are deemed to own at least 5% of the
corporation’s stock. In the event that an ownership change has occurred—or were to occur—with respect
to a corporation following its recognition of an NOL, utilization of this NOL would be subject to an annual
limitation under Section 382, generally determined by multiplying the value of the corporation’s stock at the
time of the ownership change by the applicable long-term tax-exempt rate as defined in Section 382.
However, this annual limitation would be increased under certain circumstances by recognized built-in
gains of the corporation existing at the time of the ownership change. Any unused annual limitation with
respect to an NOL generally may be carried over to later years, subject to the expiration of the NOL 20 years
after it arose.
We believe Memorial will undergo an ownership change as a result of its acquisition pursuant to the merger,
and the corresponding annual limitation associated with that change in ownership may prevent the
combined company from fully utilizing—prior to their expiration—Memorial’s NOLs as of the effective time
of the merger. While Range’s issuance of stock pursuant to the merger would, standing alone, be
insufficient to result in an ownership change with respect to Range, the determination of whether Range will
undergo an ownership change as a result of the merger will be dependent upon other changes in
ownership of Range stock occurring within the relevant three-year period described above, which cannot
be predicted or determined with accuracy until after they occur. If Range were to undergo an ownership
change, the combined company may be prevented from fully utilizing Range’s NOLs as of the time of the
merger prior to their expiration. Future changes in stock ownership or future regulatory changes could also
limit the combined company’s ability to utilize Memorial’s or Range’s NOLs. To the extent the combined
company is not able to offset future taxable income with Memorial’s or Range’s NOLs, the combined
company’s net income and cash flows may be adversely affected.
Table of Contents
40
THE COMPANIES
Range Resources Corporation
Range Resources Corporation, a Delaware corporation, is a Fort Worth, Texas-based independent natural
gas, NGLs and oil company, engaged in the exploration, development and acquisition of natural gas and oil
properties. Range’s activity is mostly focused in the Appalachian region of the United States. As of
December 31, 2015, Range had estimated proved reserves of approximately 9,900 Bcfe, including 6,278 Bcf
of natural gas, 549,135 Mbbls of NGLs and 53,193 Mbbls of oil. Range’s strategy is to commit to
environmental protection and workplace and community safety, concentrate in core operating areas,
maintain a multi-year drilling inventory, focus on cost efficiency, maintain a long-life reserve base and
market its products to a large number of customers in different markets under a variety of commercial
terms. As of June 30, 2016, Range had approximately $2.6 billion of debt. For the six months ended June
30, 2016, Range’s average production was approximately 1,401 Mmcfed.
Range’s common stock is traded on the NYSE under the symbol “RRC.”
The principal executive offices of Range are located at 100 Throckmorton Street, Suite 1200, Fort Worth,
Texas 76102, and Range’s telephone number is (817) 870-2601. Additional information about Range and its
subsidiaries is included in documents incorporated by reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus.
See “Where You Can Find More Information” on page 189.
Memorial Resource Development Corp.
Memorial Resource Development Corp., a Delaware corporation, is a Houston, Texas-based independent
natural gas and oil company engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of natural gas and oil
properties in North Louisiana. Substantially all of Memorial’s activity is in the Terryville Complex of North
Louisiana, where it targets over-pressured, liquids-rich natural gas opportunities in multiple zones in the
Cotton Valley Formation. Memorial’s primary objective is to build shareholder value through growth in
reserves, production and cash flows by developing and expanding its significant portfolio of drilling
locations. To achieve its objective, Memorial’s strategy is to maintain a disciplined, growth oriented financial
strategy, grow production, reserves and cash flows through the development of its extensive drilling
inventory, enhance returns through prudent capital allocation and continued improvements in operational
and capital efficiencies, exploit additional development opportunities on current acreage, and make
opportunistic acquisitions that meet its strategic and financial objectives.
As of December 31, 2015, Memorial had estimated proved reserves of approximately 1,378 Bcfe of natural
gas equivalents. As of June 30, 2016, Memorial had approximately $1.1 billion of debt. For the six months
ended June 30, 2016, Memorial’s average production was approximately 435 Mmcfed. These estimated
proved reserves, debt and average production for Memorial exclude amounts attributable to discontinued
operations.
Memorial’s common stock is traded on the NASDAQ under the symbol “MRD.”
The principal executive offices of Memorial are located at 500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800, Houston, Texas
77002, and Memorial’s telephone number is (713) 588-8300. Additional information about Memorial and its
subsidiaries is included in documents incorporated by reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus.
See “Where You Can Find More Information” on page 189.
Medina Merger Sub, Inc.
Medina Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Range, is a Delaware corporation that was formed
on May 13, 2016 for the sole purpose of effecting the merger. In the merger, Medina Merger Sub, Inc. will be
merged with and into Memorial, with Memorial surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of Range.
Table of Contents
41
THE RANGE SPECIAL MEETING
This joint proxy statement/prospectus is being provided to the Range stockholders as part of a solicitation
of proxies by the Range board of directors for use at the Range special meeting to be held at the time and
place specified below and at any properly convened meeting following an adjournment or postponement
thereof. This joint proxy statement/prospectus provides Range stockholders with information they need to
know to be able to vote or instruct their vote to be cast at the Range special meeting.
Date, Time and Place
The special meeting of Range stockholders will be held at The Worthington Renaissance Hotel, Live Oak
Room V, 200 Main Street, Fort Worth, Texas 76102, on September 15, 2016, at 10:00 a.m., local time.
Purpose of the Range Special Meeting
At the Range special meeting, Range stockholders will be asked to consider and vote on the following:
•   a proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in
connection with the merger;
•   a proposal to approve the adjournment of the Range special meeting to a later date or dates, if necessary
or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in the event there are not sufficient votes at the time of the
special meeting to approve the first proposal listed above.
Completion of the merger is conditioned on approval of the issuance of shares of Range common stock to
Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger.
Recommendation of the Range Board of Directors
At a special meeting held on May 15, 2016, the Range board of directors determined that the merger and the
other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the issuance of shares of Range
common stock to Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger, are in the best interests of Range
and its stockholders. Accordingly, the Range board of directors unanimously recommends that Range
stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to
Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger and “FOR” the proposal to approve the adjournment
of the Range special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
Range stockholders should read carefully this joint proxy statement/prospectus—including any
documents incorporated by reference—and the Annexes in their entirety for more detailed information
concerning the merger and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
Range Record Date; Stockholders Entitled to Vote
The record date for the Range special meeting is August 10, 2016. Only record holders of shares of Range
common stock at the close of business on such date are entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the Range
special meeting. At the close of business on the record date, Range’s only outstanding class of voting
securities was the Range common stock, and 170,090,361 shares of Range common stock were issued and
outstanding. A list of the Range stockholders of record who are entitled to vote at the Range special
meeting will be available for inspection by any Range stockholder for any purpose germane to the special
meeting during ordinary business hours for the ten days preceding the Range special meeting at Range’s
executive offices at 100 Throckmorton Street, Suite 1200, Fort Worth, Texas 76102 and will also be available
at the Range special meeting for examination by any stockholder present at such meeting.
Table of Contents
42
Each share of Range common stock outstanding on the record date for the Range special meeting is
entitled to one vote on each proposal and any other matter coming before the Range special meeting.
Voting by Range’s Directors and Executive Officers
At the close of business on the record date for the Range special meeting, Range directors and executive
officers were entitled to vote 2,387,295 shares of Range common stock or approximately 1.4% of the shares
of Range common stock outstanding on that date. The Range directors and executive officers are currently
expected to vote their shares in favor of all Range proposals.
Quorum
No business may be transacted at the Range special meeting unless a quorum is present. Stockholders
who hold shares representing at least a majority of the voting power of all outstanding shares of capital
stock entitled to vote at the Range special meeting must be present in person or represented by proxy to
constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not present at the special meeting, or if a quorum is present at the
special meeting but there are not sufficient votes at the time of the special meeting to approve the proposal
to issue shares of Range common stock in connection with the merger, then the chairman of the meeting
has the power to adjourn the meeting, or, alternatively, Range stockholders may be asked to vote on a
proposal to adjourn the Range special meeting in order to permit the further solicitation of proxies. No
notice of an adjourned meeting need be given unless the date, time and place of the resumption of the
meeting are not announced at the adjourned meeting, the adjournment is for more than 30 days, or, if after
the adjournment, a new record date is fixed for the adjourned meeting, in which cases a notice of the
adjourned meeting shall be given to each stockholder of record entitled to vote at the meeting. At any
adjourned meeting, all proxies will be voted in the same manner as they would have been voted at the
original convening of the special meeting, except for any proxies that have been effectively revoked or
withdrawn prior to the adjourned meeting.
All shares of Range common stock represented at the Range special meeting, including shares that are
represented but that vote to abstain from voting on one or more proposals, will be treated as present for
purposes of determining the presence of a quorum. Broker non-votes will not be treated as present for
purposes of determining the presence of a quorum.
Required Vote
The required votes to approve the Range proposals are as follows:
•   The issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger
requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Range common stock, present in person or
represented by proxy at the Range special meeting and entitled to vote on the proposal, assuming a
quorum is present. Each share of Range common stock outstanding on the record date for the Range
special meeting is entitled to one vote on this proposal. Assuming a quorum is present, shares that are not
present in person or by proxy and broker non-votes (if any) will have no effect on the vote for this proposal;
however, abstentions will have the same effect as a vote “AGAINST” the approval of such proposal.
•   The adjournment of the Range special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies
requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Range common stock, present in person or
represented by proxy at the Range special meeting and entitled to vote on the proposal, regardless of
whether there is a quorum. Each share of Range common stock outstanding on the record date for the
Range special meeting is entitled to one vote on this proposal. Assuming a quorum is present, shares that
are not present in person or by proxy and broker non-votes (if any) will have no effect on the vote for this
proposal; however, abstentions will have the same effect as a vote “AGAINST” the approval of such
proposal.
Table of Contents
43
Voting of Proxies by Holders of Record
If you were a record holder of Range stock at the close of business on the record date for the Range special
meeting, a proxy card is enclosed for your use. Range requests that you vote your shares as promptly as
possible by (i) accessing the internet site listed on the Range proxy card, (ii) calling the toll-free number
listed on the Range proxy card or (iii) submitting your Range proxy card by mail by using the provided self-
addressed, stamped envelope. Information and applicable deadlines for voting through the internet or by
telephone are set forth on the enclosed proxy card. When the accompanying proxy is returned properly
executed, the shares of Range common stock represented by it will be voted at the Range special meeting
in accordance with the instructions contained in the proxy card. Your internet or telephone vote authorizes
the named proxies to vote your shares in the same manner as if you had marked, signed and returned a
proxy card.
If a proxy is returned without an indication as to how the shares of Range common stock represented are to
be voted with regard to a particular proposal, the Range common stock represented by the proxy will be
voted in accordance with the recommendation of the Range board of directors and, therefore, “FOR” the
proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in
connection with the merger and “FOR” the proposal to adjourn the Range special meeting, if necessary or
appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
At the date hereof, the Range board of directors has no knowledge of any business that will be presented
for consideration at the Range special meeting and that would be required to be set forth in this joint proxy
statement/prospectus or the related proxy card other than the matters set forth in Range’s Notice of Special
Meeting of Stockholders. If any other matter is properly presented at the Range special meeting for
consideration, it is intended that the persons named in the enclosed form of proxy and acting thereunder
will vote in accordance with their best judgment on such matter.
Your vote is important. Accordingly, if you were a record holder of Range common stock on the record date
for the Range special meeting, please sign and return the enclosed proxy card or vote via the internet or
telephone regardless of whether you plan to attend the Range special meeting in person. Proxies submitted
through the specified internet website or by phone must be received by 11:59 p.m., eastern time, on
September  14, 2016 to ensure that the proxies are voted.
Shares Held in Street Name
If you hold shares of Range common stock through a broker, bank or other nominee, you are considered
the “beneficial holder” of the shares held for you in what is known as “street name.” The “record holder” of
such shares is your broker, bank or other nominee, and not you, and you must provide the record holder of
your shares with instructions on how to vote your shares. Please follow the voting instructions provided by
your broker, bank or other nominee. Please note that you may not vote shares held in street name by
returning a proxy card directly to Range or by voting in person at the Range special meeting unless you
have a “legal proxy,” which you must obtain from your broker, bank or other nominee. Furthermore,
brokers, banks or other nominees who hold shares of Range common stock on behalf of their customers
may not give a proxy to Range to vote those shares without specific instructions from their customers.
If you are a Range stockholder and you do not instruct your broker, bank or other nominee on how to vote
your shares, your broker, bank or other nominee may not vote your shares on any of the Range proposals.
Voting in Person
If you plan to attend the Range special meeting and wish to vote in person, you will be given a ballot at the
special meeting. If you are a registered stockholder, please be prepared to provide proper identification,
such as a driver’s license, at the Range special meeting. If your shares are held in “street name,” you must
bring to the special meeting a proxy executed in your favor from the record holder (your broker, bank or
other nominee) of the shares authorizing you to vote at the special meeting.
44
Table of Contents
Revocation of Proxies
If you are the record holder of Range common stock, you can change your vote or revoke your proxy at
any time before your proxy is voted at the special meeting. You can do this by:
•   Giving written notice to Range’s corporate secretary;
•   Delivering a valid, later-dated proxy or a later-dated vote by telephone or on the internet in a timely
manner; or
•   Voting by ballot at the special meeting.
A registered stockholder may revoke a proxy by any of these methods, regardless of the method used to
deliver the stockholder’s previous proxy. Written notices of revocation and other communications with
respect to the revocation of proxies should be addressed as follows:
Range Resources Corporation
100 Throckmorton Street, Suite 1200
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
(817) 870-2601
Attention: Corporate Secretary
If your shares are held in “street name” through a broker, bank or other nominee and deliver voting
instructions to the record holder of those shares, you may only revoke the voting of those shares in
accordance with your instruction if the record holder revokes the original proxy as directed above and
either resubmits a proxy reflecting your voting instructions or delivers to you a legal proxy giving you the
right to vote the shares.
Solicitation of Proxies
Range is soliciting proxies for the Range special meeting from its stockholders. In accordance with the
merger agreement, Range will pay its own cost of soliciting proxies from its stockholders, including the
cost of mailing this joint proxy statement/prospectus. In addition to solicitation of proxies by mail, proxies
may be solicited by Range’s officers, directors and regular employees, without additional remuneration, by
personal interview, telephone or other means of communication.
Range will make arrangements with brokerage houses, custodians, nominees and fiduciaries to forward
proxy solicitation materials to beneficial owners of Range common stock. Range may reimburse these
brokerage houses, custodians, nominees and fiduciaries for their reasonable expenses incurred in
forwarding the proxy materials.
To help ensure the presence in person or by proxy of the holders of the largest number of shares of Range
common stock possible, Range has engaged Innisfree M&A Incorporated, a proxy solicitation firm
(“Innisfree”), to solicit proxies on Range’s behalf. Range has agreed to pay Innisfree a proxy solicitation fee
not to exceed $25,000 per month. Range will also reimburse Innisfree for its reasonable out-of-pocket costs
and expenses.
Adjournments
The Range special meeting may be adjourned from time to time by the chairman of the meeting or by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Range common stock, present in person or by proxy at the
Range special meeting and entitled to vote thereon, regardless of whether there is a quorum, without
further notice other than by an announcement made at the special meeting. If a quorum is not present at the
special meeting, or if a quorum is present at the special meeting but there are not sufficient votes at the time
of the special meeting to approve the proposal to issue shares of Range common stock in connection with
the merger, then the chairman of the meeting has the power to adjourn the meeting, or, alternatively, Range
stockholders may be asked to vote on a proposal to adjourn the Range special meeting in order to permit
the further solicitation of proxies. Unless
Table of Contents
45
otherwise agreed to by Range and Memorial, the special meeting may not be adjourned or postponed to a
date more than 20 business days after the date for which the meeting was previously scheduled and the
special meeting may not be adjourned or postponed to a date on or after two business days before
December  15, 2016.
SailingStone Voting Support and Nomination Agreement
On August 7, 2016, Range entered into a voting support and nomination agreement with SailingStone (the
“SailingStone Agreement”). Based on beneficial ownership filings made by SailingStone with the SEC,
SailingStone beneficially owns 18,406,655 shares (10.8%) of Range common stock and is Range’s largest
stockholder. Range has filed a Current Report on Form 8-K with the SEC that describes the SailingStone
Agreement in more detail, and that description is incorporated by reference into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus.
Pursuant to the terms of the SailingStone Agreement, Range and SailingStone agreed, among other things,
to cooperate with each other in good faith to identify one new independent director (the “Joint Appointee”)
to be appointed to the Range board of directors who is mutually agreeable to the Range board of directors
and SailingStone. The Joint Appointee must: (i) be “independent” within the meaning of all applicable
securities laws and the rules under the New York Stock Exchange, (ii) not be or have been affiliated with
SailingStone or Range, (iii) have a background in engineering and in the oil and gas sector, (iv) have a track
record of creating shareholder value, and (v) have specific experience with respect to incentive
compensation and other financial issues. Range also agreed to implement a stockholder engagement
policy and to supplement its performance criteria for its short-term and long-term incentive compensation
programs for the compensation award cycle that commences in 2017.
SailingStone has agreed to vote all shares of Range common stock with respect to which SailingStone has
discretionary investment authority and discretionary voting authority as described below. At the Range
special meeting, SailingStone has agreed to vote in favor of the issuance of shares of Range common
stock to Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger. At Range’s 2017 annual meeting of
stockholders, SailingStone has agreed to vote in accordance with the recommendations of the Range
board of directors with respect to the election of directors and Range’s non-binding “say on pay” proposal
to approve its executive compensation philosophy. SailingStone has also agreed that, during the Standstill
Period described below, it will vote in accordance with the recommendations of the Range board of
directors with respect to any other proposals or nominations proposed or supported by any other Range
stockholder that (i) relate specifically to the merger, the election of directors or “say on pay” or otherwise
relate to the makeup or structure of the Range board of directors or (ii) relate to certain extraordinary
transactions described in the SailingStone Agreement.
SailingStone agreed to certain customary standstill provisions, effective as of the date of the SailingStone
Agreement through the date that is 30 calendar days prior to the last date on which individuals may be
nominated for election as directors at the first annual meeting of Range’s 2017 annual meeting of
stockholders, unless SailingStone and Range agree to another date for the termination of the SailingStone
Agreement (the “Standstill Period”).
None of the foregoing agreements is conditioned upon the consummation of the merger.
Table of Contents
46
THE MEMORIAL SPECIAL MEETING
This joint proxy statement/prospectus is being provided to the Memorial stockholders as part of a
solicitation of proxies by the Memorial board of directors for use at the Memorial special meeting to be held
at the time and place specified below and at any properly convened meeting following an adjournment or
postponement thereof. This joint proxy statement/prospectus provides Memorial stockholders with
information they need to know to be able to vote or instruct their vote to be cast at the Memorial special
meeting.
Date, Time and Place
The special meeting of Memorial stockholders will be held at Memorial’s offices at 500 Dallas Street, Suite
1800, Houston, Texas 77002, on September 15, 2016, at 10:00 a.m., local time.
Purpose of the Memorial Special Meeting
At the Memorial special meeting, Memorial stockholders will be asked to consider and vote on the following:
•   a proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement, including the merger;
•   a proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis the compensation that may be paid or become
payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger; and
•   a proposal to approve the adjournment of the Memorial special meeting to a later date or dates, if
necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies in the event there are not sufficient votes at the time
of the special meeting to approve the first proposal listed above.
Completion of the merger is conditioned on the approval and adoption of the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, by the Memorial stockholders,
which requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock
entitled to vote thereon. The proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation
that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger
is a vote separate and apart from the vote on the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and
the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger. Accordingly, a Memorial
stockholder may vote to approve one proposal and not the other. Because the vote on the proposal to
approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or become payable to
Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger is advisory in nature only, it will not be
binding on Memorial or Range, and the approval of that proposal is not a condition to the completion of the
merger.
Recommendation of the Memorial Board of Directors
At a special meeting held on May 15, 2016, the Memorial board of directors unanimously determined that
the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement are fair to, and in the best
interests of Memorial stockholders, and approved, adopted and declared advisable the merger agreement
and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger. Accordingly, the
Memorial board of directors unanimously recommends that Memorial stockholders vote “FOR” the
proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement, including the merger, “FOR” the approval, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, of the
compensation that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection
with the merger and “FOR” the proposal to approve the adjournment of the Memorial special meeting, if
necessary or appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
Table of Contents
47
Memorial stockholders should read carefully this joint proxy statement/prospectus—including any
documents incorporated by reference—and the Annexes in their entirety for more detailed information
concerning the merger and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
Memorial Record Date; Stockholders Entitled to Vote
The record date for the Memorial special meeting is August 10, 2016. Only record holders of shares of
Memorial common stock at the close of business on such date are entitled to notice of, and to vote at, the
Memorial special meeting. At the close of business on the record date, the only outstanding voting
securities of Memorial were shares of common stock, and 206,034,330 shares of Memorial common stock
were issued and outstanding and entitled to vote at the Memorial special meeting. A list of the Memorial
stockholders of record who are entitled to vote at the Memorial special meeting will be available for
inspection by any Memorial stockholder for any purpose germane to the special meeting during ordinary
business hours for the ten days preceding the Memorial special meeting at Memorial’s executive offices at
500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800, Houston, Texas 77002 and will also be available at the Memorial special
meeting for examination by any stockholder present at such meeting.
Each share of Memorial common stock outstanding on the record date for the Memorial special meeting is
entitled to one vote on each proposal and any other matter coming before the Memorial special meeting.
Voting by Memorial’s Directors and Executive Officers
At the close of business on the record date for the Memorial special meeting, Memorial directors and
executive officers were entitled to vote 1,361,432 shares of Memorial common stock or approximately 0.7%
of the shares of Memorial common stock issued and outstanding and entitled to vote at the Memorial
special meeting (exclusive of shares beneficially owned by Kenneth A. Hersh and Jay C. Graham as those
shares are subject to the voting and support agreement with Range discussed in the paragraph below). The
Memorial directors and executive officers are currently expected to vote their shares in favor of all Memorial
proposals.
In connection with the execution of the merger agreement, MRD Holdco LLC, Jay Graham (Memorial’s chief
executive officer), Anthony Bahr and WHR Incentive LLC (a limited liability company controlled by
Mr. Graham and Mr. Bahr) have entered into the voting and support agreement with Range. The Memorial
stockholders that executed the voting and support agreement have agreed to vote all of the Memorial
shares held by them in favor of the approval and adoption of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger. As of the date of this joint proxy
statement/prospectus, those stockholders hold and are entitled to vote in the aggregate approximately
47.7% of the issued and outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled to vote at the Memorial
special meeting. In addition, certain other stockholders of Memorial who are not party to the voting and
support agreement are party to the existing voting agreement pursuant to which such stockholders are
required to vote all of the shares of Memorial common stock that they own as directed by MRD Holdco LLC.
As of the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus, those additional stockholders hold and are entitled
to vote in the aggregate approximately 2.7% of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled
to vote at the Memorial special meeting. Accordingly, as long as the Memorial board of directors does not
change its recommendation with respect to such proposal (in which case the voting and support
obligations of such stockholders would terminate), and as long as those additional stockholders retain
ownership of their shares of Memorial common stock through the record date for the Memorial special
meeting, approval of that proposal at the Memorial special meeting is nearly assured. See “The Merger
Agreement—Voting and Support Agreement” beginning on page 143 for more information.
Quorum
No business may be transacted at the Memorial special meeting unless a quorum is present. Stockholders
who hold shares representing at least a majority of the voting power of all outstanding shares of capital
stock entitled to vote at the Memorial special meeting must be present in person or represented by proxy to
constitute a
Table of Contents
48
quorum. If a quorum is not present—or if fewer shares are voted in favor of the proposal to approve and
adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the
merger, then the chairman of the meeting has the power to adjourn the meeting, or, alternatively, Memorial
stockholders may be asked to vote on a proposal to adjourn the Memorial special meeting in order to
permit the further solicitation of proxies. No notice of an adjourned meeting need be given unless the date,
time and place of the resumption of the meeting are not announced at the adjourned meeting, the
adjournment is for more than 30 days or, if after the adjournment, a new record date is fixed for the
adjourned meeting, in which cases a notice of the adjourned meeting shall be given to each stockholder of
record entitled to vote at the meeting. At any adjourned meeting, all proxies will be voted in the same
manner as they would have been voted at the original convening of the special meeting, except for any
proxies that have been effectively revoked or withdrawn prior to the adjourned meeting. Unless otherwise
agreed to by Range and Memorial, the special meeting may not be adjourned or postponed to a date more
than 20 business days after the date for which the meeting was previously scheduled and the special
meeting may not be adjourned or postponed to a date on or after two business days before December 15,
2016.
All shares of Memorial common stock represented at the Memorial special meeting, including shares that
are represented but that abstain from voting on one or more proposals, will be treated as present for
purposes of determining the presence of a quorum. Broker non-votes will not be treated as present for
purposes of determining the presence of a quorum.
Required Vote
The required votes to approve the Memorial proposals are as follows:
•   The approval and adoption of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement, including the merger, requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the outstanding shares of
Memorial common stock entitled to vote on this proposal. Each share of Memorial common stock
outstanding on the record date for the Memorial special meeting is entitled to one vote on this proposal.
Failures to vote, broker non-votes (if any) and abstentions will have the same effect as a vote “AGAINST”
the approval of such proposal.
•   The approval, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, of the compensation that may be paid or become
payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger requires the affirmative vote
of a majority of the voting power of the outstanding shares present in person or represented by proxy at the
meeting and entitled to vote on this proposal, assuming a quorum is present. Each share of Memorial
common stock outstanding on the record date for of the Memorial special meeting is entitled to one vote on
this proposal. Assuming a quorum is present, shares that are not present in person or by proxy and broker
non-votes (if any) will have no effect on the vote for this proposal; however, abstentions will have the same
effect as a vote “AGAINST” the approval of such proposal.
•   The approval of the adjournment of the Memorial special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit
additional proxies requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the voting power of the outstanding shares
present in person or represented by proxy at the meeting and entitled to vote on this proposal, regardless
of whether there is a quorum. Each share of Memorial common stock outstanding on the record date for of
the Memorial special meeting is entitled to one vote on this proposal. Assuming a quorum is present,
shares that are not present in person or by proxy and broker non-votes (if any) will have no effect on the
vote for this proposal; however, abstentions will have the same effect as a vote “AGAINST” the approval of
such proposal.
Voting of Proxies by Holders of Record
If you were a record holder of Memorial stock at the close of business on the record date for the Memorial
special meeting, a proxy card is enclosed for your use. Memorial requests that you vote your shares as
promptly
Table of Contents
49
as possible by (i) accessing the internet site listed on the Memorial proxy card, (ii) calling the toll-free
number listed on the Memorial proxy card or (iii) submitting your Memorial proxy card by mail by using the
provided self-addressed, stamped envelope. Information and applicable deadlines for voting through the
internet or by telephone are set forth on the enclosed proxy card. When the accompanying proxy is
returned properly executed, the shares of Memorial common stock represented by it will be voted at the
Memorial special meeting in accordance with the instructions contained in the proxy card. Your internet or
telephone vote authorizes the named proxies to vote your shares in the same manner as if you had marked,
signed and returned a proxy card.
If a proxy is returned without an indication as to how the shares of Memorial common stock represented are
to be voted with regard to a particular proposal, the Memorial common stock represented by the proxy will
be voted in accordance with the recommendation of the Memorial board of directors and, therefore, “FOR”
the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement, including the merger, “FOR” the proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the
compensation that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection
with the merger and “FOR” the proposal to adjourn the Memorial special meeting, if necessary or
appropriate, to permit further solicitation of proxies.
At the date hereof, the Memorial board of directors has no knowledge of any business that will be presented
for consideration at the Memorial special meeting and that would be required to be set forth in this joint
proxy statement/prospectus or the related proxy card other than the matters set forth in Memorial’s Notice
of Special Meeting of Stockholders. If any other matter is properly presented at the Memorial special
meeting for consideration, it is intended that the persons named in the enclosed form of proxy and acting
thereunder will vote in accordance with their best judgment on such matter.
Your vote is important. Accordingly, if you were a record holder of Memorial common stock on the record
date for the Memorial special meeting, please sign and return the enclosed proxy card or vote via the
internet or telephone regardless of whether you plan to attend the Memorial special meeting in person.
Proxies submitted through the specified internet website or by phone must be received by 11:59 p.m.,
eastern time, on September  14, 2016 to ensure that your vote is counted.
Shares Held in Street Name
If you hold shares of Memorial common stock through a broker, bank or other nominee, you are considered
the “beneficial holder” of the shares held for you in what is known as “street name.” The “record holder” of
such shares is your broker, bank or other nominee, and not you, and you must provide the record holder of
your shares with instructions on how to vote your shares. Please follow the voting instructions provided by
your broker, bank or other nominee. Please note that you may not vote shares held in street name by
returning a proxy card directly to Memorial or by voting in person at the Memorial special meeting unless
you have a “legal proxy,” which you must obtain from your broker, bank or other nominee. Furthermore,
brokers, banks or other nominees who hold shares of Memorial common stock on behalf of their customers
may not give a proxy to Memorial to vote those shares without specific instructions from their customers.
If you are a Memorial stockholder and you do not instruct your broker, bank or other nominee on how to
vote your shares, your broker, bank or other nominee may not vote your shares on any of the Memorial
proposals.
Voting in Person
If you plan to attend the Memorial special meeting and wish to vote in person, you will be given a ballot at
the special meeting. If you are a registered stockholder, please be prepared to provide proper identification,
such as a driver’s license, at the Memorial special meeting. If your shares are held in “street name,” you
must bring to the special meeting a proxy executed in your favor from the record holder (your broker, bank
or other nominee) of the shares authorizing you to vote at the special meeting.
Table of Contents
Revocation of Proxies
50
If you are the record holder of Memorial common stock, you can change your vote or revoke your proxy at
any time before your proxy is voted at the special meeting. You can do this by:
•   timely delivering a signed written notice of revocation;
•   timely delivering a new, valid proxy bearing a later date (including by mail, telephone or through the
internet); or
•   attending the Memorial special meeting and voting in person, which will automatically cancel any proxy
previously given, or revoking your proxy in person. Simply attending the Memorial special meeting without
voting will not revoke any proxy that you have previously given or change your vote.
A registered stockholder may revoke a proxy by any of these methods, regardless of the method used to
deliver the stockholder’s previous proxy. Written notices of revocation and other communications with
respect to the revocation of proxies should be addressed as follows:
Memorial Resource Development Corp.
500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 588-8339
Attention: Corporate Secretary
If your shares are held in “street name” through a broker, bank or other nominee, you may change your
vote by submitting new voting instructions to your broker, bank or nominee in accordance with its
established procedures. If your shares are held in the name of a broker, bank or other nominee and you
decide to change your vote by attending the special meeting and voting in person, your vote in person at
the special meeting will not be effective unless you have obtained and present an executed proxy issued in
your name from the record holder (your broker, bank or nominee).
Solicitation of Proxies
Memorial is soliciting proxies for the Memorial special meeting from its stockholders. In accordance with the
merger agreement, Memorial will pay its own cost of soliciting proxies from its stockholders, including the
cost of mailing this joint proxy statement/prospectus. In addition to solicitation of proxies by mail, proxies
may be solicited by Memorial’s officers, directors and regular employees, without additional remuneration,
by personal interview, telephone or other means of communication.
Memorial will make arrangements with brokerage houses, custodians, nominees and fiduciaries to forward
proxy solicitation materials to beneficial owners of Memorial common stock. Memorial may reimburse these
brokerage houses, custodians, nominees and fiduciaries for their reasonable expenses incurred in
forwarding the proxy materials.
To help ensure the presence in person or by proxy of the largest number of stockholders possible, Range
has engaged Innisfree, a proxy solicitation firm, to solicit proxies on Memorial’s behalf. Range has agreed
to pay Innisfree a proxy solicitation fee not to exceed $25,000 per month. Range will also reimburse
Innisfree for its reasonable out-of-pocket costs and expenses.
Adjournments
The Memorial special meeting may be adjourned from time to time by the chairman of the Memorial special
meeting or by the affirmative vote of a majority of the voting power of the outstanding shares of Memorial
common stock so represented, regardless of whether there is a quorum. Notice does not need to be given
of any
Table of Contents
51
such adjourned meeting if the time and place of the adjourned meeting are announced at the meeting at
which the adjournment is taken. However, if the adjournment is for more than 30 days, a notice of the
adjourned meeting must be given to each Memorial stockholder of record entitled to vote at the meeting. At
the adjourned meeting, Memorial may transact any business that might have been transacted at the original
meeting. If a quorum is not present at the Memorial special meeting—or if a quorum is present at the special
meeting but there are not sufficient votes at the time of the special meeting to approve the proposal to
approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement,
including the merger—then Memorial stockholders may be asked to vote on a proposal to adjourn the
Memorial special meeting in order to permit the further solicitation of proxies. Unless otherwise agreed to
by Range and Memorial, the Memorial special meeting may not be adjourned or postponed to a date more
than 20 business days after the date for which the meeting was previously scheduled and the special
meeting may not be adjourned or postponed to a date on or after two business days before December 15,
2016.
52
Table of Contents
Effects of the Merger
THE MERGER
At the effective time of the merger, Merger Sub, a wholly owned subsidiary of Range that was formed for the
sole purpose of effecting the merger, will merge with and into Memorial. Memorial will survive the merger
and become a wholly owned subsidiary of Range.
In the merger, each share of Memorial common stock outstanding immediately prior to the effective time will
be converted at the effective time into the right to receive 0.375 of a share of Range common stock, with
cash (without interest) paid in lieu of fractional shares. This exchange ratio is fixed and will not be adjusted
to reflect stock price changes prior to the closing of the merger. Range stockholders will continue to hold
their existing Range shares.
Background of the Merger
On June 18, 2014, Memorial completed its initial public offering. Since its initial public offering, the Memorial
management team and the Memorial board of directors have periodically reviewed and discussed potential
strategic alternatives for Memorial, including possible business combination transactions to further
enhance stockholder value. However, until early 2016, these strategic reviews did not lead to any serious
discussions with third parties regarding a transaction. This was the case for a number of reasons, including
gaps in relative valuation expectations and complexities arising from the unfamiliarity of competitors with
Memorial’s main assets in the Terryville field of Northern Louisiana. Nevertheless, the Memorial board of
directors has remained vigilant in exploring additional avenues for enhancing stockholder value.
The Range board of directors and Range’s management team have also periodically reviewed and
discussed potential strategic alternatives for Range, including possible acquisitions and business
combination transactions, in order to enhance stockholder value. Furthermore, as a result of the significant
drop in commodity prices, Range has implemented a number of initiatives to preserve capital and reduce
leverage, such as reducing capital spending and operating costs and increasing the hedging of its
commodity price risk in order to ensure that Range has the funds to execute its drilling program and
maintain liquidity. In this regard, the Range board of directors and Range’s management team have also
considered from time to time various strategies to manage financial leverage, including the reduction of
debt with the proceeds of asset sales or the offerings of shares of Range common stock, as well as by
acquisitions—paid for with newly issued shares of Range common stock—that would have the effect of
reducing financial leverage.
On January 26, 2016, Jeffrey L. Ventura, Range’s Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, had
lunch with Kenneth A. Hersh, the Chief Executive Officer of NGP Energy Capital Management, LLC
(together with its affiliates “NGP”) and a member of the Memorial board of directors. NGP owns
approximately 36% of the outstanding shares of Memorial and, through contractual arrangements, may be
deemed to beneficially own an aggregate of approximately 50.4% of the outstanding shares of Memorial.
Three principals of NGP serve on the Memorial board of directors. Mr. Ventura and Mr. Hersh discussed the
state of the energy industry, the status of certain of the oil and gas companies in which NGP was an
investor and potential business combinations. During the course of discussing potential business
combinations, the two men discussed the potential fit of Memorial and Range.
On February 2, 2016, Mr. Ventura and Mr. Hersh talked by phone. Mr. Hersh informed Mr. Ventura that
Memorial could be interested in pursuing a business combination with Range if Range was interested.
Mr. Ventura told Mr. Hersh that he would discuss the matter with Range’s senior management team.
On February 10, 2016, at a regularly scheduled board meeting, Mr. Ventura gave the Range board of
directors an overview of possible strategic transactions that the Range management team was exploring.
As part of that discussion, he informed the Range board of directors that he had met with Mr. Hersh and
had discussed a potential business combination with Memorial. It was the consensus of the Range board of
directors that Mr. Ventura should inform Mr. Hersh that Range was interested in further evaluating a
potential strategic combination with Memorial.
Table of Contents
53
Shortly after that board meeting, Mr. Ventura sent an email to Mr. Hersh advising him that Range was
interested in further evaluating a potential strategic combination with Memorial. Mr. Hersh agreed to
introduce Mr. Ventura to Jay C. Graham, Chief Executive Officer of Memorial. The next day, Mr. Hersh
passed along Range’s interest to Mr. Graham, and Mr. Graham then contacted members of Memorial’s
management to discuss Memorial’s potential interest. Mr. Graham requested that Kyle N. Roane, the Senior
Vice President and General Counsel of Memorial, prepare a draft bilateral confidentiality agreement.
On February 12, 2016, Mr. Ventura contacted Mr. Graham to discuss the potential strategic business
combination of Range and Memorial. The two men agreed that to better explore such a transaction, the two
companies should enter into a bilateral confidentiality agreement. Throughout his discussions with Range,
Mr. Graham kept the following individuals apprised of those discussions, as well as his discussions with
other potential counterparties described more fully below: Tony Weber, the Managing Partner and Chief
Operating Officer of NGP and the Chairman of the Memorial board of directors; Scott Gieselman, a
Managing Director of NGP and a member of the Memorial board of directors; and Mr. Hersh. Beginning on
April 15, 2016, Mr. Graham also periodically updated the full Memorial board of directors of his discussions.
On February 16, 2016, Range and Memorial executed a bilateral confidentiality agreement. The parties held
an in-person meeting on February 18, 2016. At that meeting, Memorial’s management team presented
Range with an overview of Memorial’s assets and operations. Subsequent to the February 18, 2016
meeting, the parties made several follow-up due diligence requests of each other and met again in person
on March 9, 2016. At this meeting, Range’s management team provided Memorial with an overview of
Range’s assets and operations.
On March 9, 2016, Roger S. Manny, Range’s Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, contacted
representatives of Credit Suisse to discuss engaging Credit Suisse as Range’s financial advisor in
connection with a potential transaction with Memorial. Range was interested in engaging Credit Suisse as
Range’s financial advisor based on Credit Suisse’s knowledge and familiarity with Range and Memorial and
their respective upstream oil and gas businesses, as well as Credit Suisse’s experience as a financial
advisor in connection with mergers and acquisitions similar to the potential transaction with Memorial,
including mergers and acquisitions involving companies engaged in the upstream oil and gas business.
On March 10, 2016, David P. Poole, Range’s Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Corporate
Secretary, contacted representatives of Sidley Austin LLP (“Sidley”) to request that Sidley serve as
Range’s legal counsel in connection with of a potential transaction with Memorial.
On March 16, 2016, Mr. Graham had lunch in Fort Worth, Texas with Mr. Ventura, Mr. Manny and Ray N.
Walker, Jr., Range’s Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer. Mr. Graham and the Range
executives discussed the strategic benefits of a possible combination of Range and Memorial, with all
agreeing that both companies should move forward with the evaluation of a possible combination.
On March 17, 2016, representatives of Company A, an oil and gas focused private equity firm, contacted
Mr. Graham, to discuss a potential acquisition of the controlling position in Memorial held by MRD Holdco
LLC. On March 21, 2016, Memorial and Company A entered into a confidentiality agreement with a
customary standstill provision that fell away upon Memorial’s entry into the merger agreement. Discussions
between Memorial and Company A ceased in early April 2016 because Company A wanted to acquire only
the controlling position in Memorial and was unwilling to pay a premium.
On March 29, 2016, David W. Hayes, a Managing Director and Director of Corporate Finance for NGP,
contacted an executive of Company B—a publicly-traded, independent upstream oil and gas company—to
gauge Company B’s interest in a potential strategic business combination with Memorial. Mr. Hayes
advised the Company B executive that Memorial was in discussions with another strategic party and that if
Company B was interested, it should engage with Memorial immediately. On March 31, 2016, Mr. Hayes
provided Mr. Graham’s contact information to the Company B executive. From this date forward, except in
its capacity as a stockholder with respect to the voting agreement and lock-up arrangements discussed
more fully below, and except for the participation of its board nominees in certain negotiations in their
capacities as directors and in the deliberations
Table of Contents
54
of the Memorial board of directors, NGP was not involved in the structuring or negotiation of the proposed
merger.
On March 31, 2016, Company B’s chief executive officer contacted Mr. Graham and invited him to lunch to
discuss a potential strategic business combination of Memorial and Company B. The two men met for
lunch on April 4, 2016 and agreed to continue their discussions upon execution of a bilateral confidentiality
agreement. Later that day, Memorial and Company B entered into a confidentiality agreement with a
customary standstill provision that fell away upon Memorial’s entry into the merger agreement. On April 7,
2016, the management teams of Memorial and Company B held an in-person meeting to provide each other
with an overview of the each other’s assets and operations and to provide an opportunity for each party to
ask due diligence questions of the other.
Also on April 7, 2016, the Range board of directors held an in-person and telephonic board meeting
attended by members of Range management, as well as representatives from Credit Suisse and Sidley.
Mr. Ventura provided the Range board of directors an update regarding Range’s evaluation of a potential
proposal to acquire Memorial. A representative from Credit Suisse then reviewed and discussed certain
preliminary financial analyses of Range, Memorial and the potential transaction and answered questions
from the Range board of directors regarding that potential transaction and certain other strategic
transactions that might be available to Range, including a potential equity offering by Range, either in
connection with an acquisition or on a stand-alone basis. The Range board of directors discussed NGP’s
ownership position, as well as whether NGP would want a seat on the Range board of directors and
whether NGP should be considered a long-term holder if Range common stock were issued in a potential
merger. The Range board of directors also asked Mr. Ventura whether he had discussed the composition of
the combined company’s senior management team with Mr. Graham. Mr. Ventura informed the Board that
Mr. Graham had told Mr. Ventura that Memorial’s senior management team understood that Range desired
that the combined company be led by Range senior management and that the Memorial management team
did not intend to stay with the combined company.
Each member of the Range board of directors present at the meeting also confirmed in the meeting that he
or she had no interest in Memorial, financial or otherwise, related to the proposed transaction with
Memorial. Mr. Poole reminded the Range board of directors that Jonathan Linker, who was then serving as
a Range director but who would not be standing for re-election at Range’s annual meeting scheduled for
May 18, 2016, had elected to recuse himself from all discussions regarding the proposed transaction.
Accordingly, Mr. Linker was not in attendance at the April 7th meeting, nor did he participate in any
deliberations of the Range board of directors at any of the subsequent meetings described below.
Mr. Linker’s recusal was not because of a conflict of interest, but instead because of his impending
departure as a director.
Following that discussion, the Credit Suisse attendees were excused from the meeting and the Range
board of directors discussed the potential Memorial transaction. As part of that discussion, Mr. Ventura
also gave the Range board of directors an update on other potential acquisition transactions that Range’s
senior management team had been considering for further development. Those potential acquisition
transactions were at various stages of development and probability of completion. At that time, the
discussions with Memorial had progressed to a more advanced stage than the other possible transactions,
and—given that Range’s pursuit of a transaction with Memorial would not have precluded Range from
pursuing any of the other transactions or from pursuing an equity offering—the Range board of directors
determined that it should continue to engage with Memorial. Following that discussion, the consensus of
the Range board of directors was to support making a proposal to Memorial.
On April 13, 2016, Mr. Ventura and Mr. Graham met in person to discuss the status of each party’s review of
the other party. At this meeting, Mr. Ventura proposed that Range would be willing to enter into a strategic,
stock-for-stock transaction, with Memorial stockholders receiving Range common stock at a 10% premium
to Memorial’s closing stock price of April 12, 2016. Mr. Ventura also delivered to Mr. Graham a letter
outlining Range’s proposal. The letter outlining Range’s proposal did not state an exchange ratio. However,
the exchange ratio would have been 0.360 of a share of Range common stock for each share of Memorial
common stock, based
Table of Contents
55
on the stated 10% premium and the closing price of Memorial’s common stock of $12.44 on April 12, 2016.
Mr. Graham immediately informed the Memorial board of directors of Range’s proposal and requested that
the Memorial board of directors meet on April 15, 2016 to discuss next steps. The following day, at
Memorial’s request, Range provided Memorial with access to Range’s property database.
On April 15, 2016, Mr. Graham contacted representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley to gauge their
willingness to assist Memorial in evaluating the Range proposal, as well as potential alternative proposals.
Both of Memorial’s financial advisors were viewed as having strong upstream merger and acquisition
experience and a deep understanding of Memorial and its Terryville assets.
Later that morning, the Memorial board of directors held a special telephonic meeting attended by members
of Memorial management. Mr. Graham summarized for the Memorial board of directors the discussions to
date with Range and with Company B and advised the Memorial board of directors of Range’s proposal.
Following that discussion, Mr. Graham recommended that the Memorial board of directors engage both
Barclays and Morgan Stanley to assist the Memorial board of directors in evaluating a possible
combination with Range, Company B or another third party. Memorial management also recommended that
the Memorial board of directors engage Vinson & Elkins LLP (“Vinson & Elkins”) as its legal advisor.
Following discussion of the qualifications of each of Barclays, Morgan Stanley and Vinson & Elkins, the
Memorial board of directors authorized Mr. Graham to engage each investment bank to serve as Memorial’s
financial advisor, and Vinson & Elkins to serve as legal counsel, to Memorial. Memorial subsequently
entered into an engagement letter with each of Barclays and Morgan Stanley.
On April 19, 2016, representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley met with members of Memorial’s
management team and Mr. Gieselman, in his capacity as a director of Memorial, to discuss whether there
were potential strategic partners other than Range and Company B that could potentially enter into a value-
enhancing business combination with Memorial. After discussing approximately 20 potential
counterparties, Memorial management—with advice from Barclays and Morgan Stanley—determined to
recommend to the Memorial board of directors that Barclays and Morgan Stanley be instructed to
confidentially contact four other publicly traded, independent upstream companies to gauge their interest
in entering into strategic discussions with Memorial.
On the morning of April 20, 2016, the Memorial board of directors held a special telephonic meeting
attended by members of Memorial management and by Vinson & Elkins. Mr. Graham and Mr. Gieselman
updated the Memorial board of directors on the discussions that had occurred with Range and with
Company B. Mr. Graham advised the Memorial board of directors that Company B was expected to provide
an indication of its interest by the close of business that day. Mr. Graham also advised the Memorial board
of directors that management reviewed with Barclays and Morgan Stanley approximately 20 additional
potential counterparties that might be contacted to gauge their interest in a strategic combination with
Memorial. Mr. Graham advised the Memorial board of directors that—given concerns over confidentiality,
the uniqueness of Memorial’s assets and the relative likelihood that those companies would be interested
or able to consummate a transaction—Memorial’s management recommended that the Memorial’s financial
advisors contact only four of these additional 20 identified companies. The Memorial board of directors
indicated its support for continuing discussions and due diligence with Range and with Company B, as well
as for Memorial’s financial advisors’ contacting the four additional identified counterparties. Later that
morning, the Chief Executive Officer of Company B called Mr. Graham to advise him that Company B was
no longer interested in pursuing a transaction with Memorial, citing a lack of strategic fit of the two
companies’ assets.
Over the next two days, representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley contacted each of the four
additional counterparties to gauge their interest in a strategic combination with Memorial. Each of the
parties was advised that Memorial had received an overture from another company at a premium and that
time was of the essence. One party declined immediately, citing its strategic focus on its current geographic
location. The other three companies agreed to consider and evaluate a possible combination with
Memorial. At the request of the Memorial board of directors, representatives of Barclays and Morgan
Stanley held several due diligence calls
Table of Contents
56
with those parties as they considered a potential combination with Memorial. Ultimately, all three declined to
make a proposal for a transaction with Memorial.
On Friday, April 22, 2016, the Memorial board of directors held a telephonic board meeting. Members of
Memorial management also attended the meeting, as did representatives of Barclays, Morgan Stanley,
Vinson & Elkins and Morris, Nichols, Arsht & Tunnell LLP, Memorial’s Delaware counsel (“Morris Nichols”).
Mr. Graham updated the Memorial board of directors on the status of the discussions with Company B and
the discussions with the other identified potential counterparties. Representatives of Barclays and Morgan
Stanley updated the Memorial board of directors on the status of their review of Range and advised that
they would be prepared to provide a more detailed analysis the following Monday. Memorial’s financial
advisors were excused from the meeting, and Vinson & Elkins provided a detailed presentation to the
Memorial board of directors on the fiduciary duties of the directors under Delaware law in connection with
strategic business combinations and other legal considerations relating to the proposed transaction,
including the likelihood of litigation challenging the transaction.
On April 25, 2016, the Memorial board of directors held an in-person and telephonic board meeting.
Members of management, as well as representatives of Barclays, Morgan Stanley, Vinson & Elkins and
Morris Nichols, were also in attendance. Representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley jointly presented
the Memorial board of directors with a preliminary analysis of the proposed merger. In that joint
presentation, they reviewed the rationale for the transaction, the benefits to each party’s stockholders, an
analysis of the proposed merger consideration and the associated premium, and the various valuation
analyses undertaken by Memorial’s financial advisors with respect to both Memorial and Range.
Representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley also updated the Memorial board of directors on their
discussions with the other potential counterparties that had been contacted by Memorial’s financial
advisors, noting that two of the counterparties were continuing to engage in due diligence and could
potentially make a proposal. Following this presentation, the Memorial board of directors unanimously
agreed to continue discussions with Range and to make a counterproposal to Range, while at the same
time providing the other potential counterparties with information sufficient to allow them to make a
proposal. The Memorial board of directors, together with representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley,
discussed a range of exchange ratios that might be acceptable to the Memorial board of directors and the
strategy for a counterproposal to Range. Following these discussions, the Memorial board of directors
authorized Mr. Graham to deliver a written counterproposal to Mr. Ventura the following day with an
exchange ratio of between 0.390 and 0.400. Vinson & Elkins then presented the Memorial board of directors
with a summary of the proposed merger agreement that Vinson & Elkins had prepared for use with either
Range or another third party and that Memorial would deliver to Range following the delivery of the
counterproposal.
Following the Memorial board of directors meeting, Mr. Graham and Memorial management conferred with
Barclays, Morgan Stanley and Vinson & Elkins concerning the counterproposal. After discussion,
management determined to propose an exchange ratio of 0.395, which implied a 19% premium to
Memorial’s closing stock price on April 25, 2016. Mr. Graham contacted each member of the Memorial board
of directors to inform them of this decision and each member of the Memorial board of directors indicated
their agreement with the proposed 0.395 exchange ratio.
On April 26, 2016, Messrs. Graham, Weber and Gieselman (with respect to Messrs. Weber and Gieselman, in
their capacities as directors of Memorial) met Mr. Ventura and Mr. Manny in Fort Worth. In the course of
discussions, Mr. Graham proposed a 0.395 exchange ratio to Mr. Ventura. Mr. Ventura and Mr. Manny left
the meeting to confer with members of Range’s senior management. Upon their return, Mr. Ventura advised
Mr. Graham that Range was prepared to move up to an exchange ratio of 0.375, but no more, and that his
proposal was subject to approval by the Range board of directors, the negotiation of definitive agreements
and satisfactory completion of due diligence. Mr. Ventura’s proposed exchange ratio represented an
approximately 12% premium to the price of Memorial common stock, based on the closing prices of Range
common stock and Memorial common stock at that time. Messrs. Graham, Gieselman and Weber then
conferred among themselves and with Mr. Hersh, in his capacity as a director of Memorial, by telephone.
Based on the exchange ratio discussion with the Memorial board of directors the previous day, Mr. Graham
advised Mr. Ventura that, while
Table of Contents
57
he would need to obtain the Memorial board of directors’ authorization, he believed that Memorial would be
willing to move forward at Mr. Ventura’s proposed exchange ratio. That afternoon, on behalf of Memorial,
Vinson & Elkins delivered to Range a draft merger agreement and a due diligence document request list.
On the morning of April 27, 2016, the Memorial board of directors met telephonically. Members of
management, as well as representatives of Barclays, Morgan Stanley, Vinson & Elkins and Morris Nichols
were also in attendance. Mr. Graham summarized his meeting with Mr. Ventura for the Memorial board of
directors, including Mr. Ventura’s counterproposal of an exchange ratio of 0.375. Representatives of
Barclays and Morgan Stanley advised as to their view of the proposed exchange ratio. Members of the
Memorial board of directors, Memorial management and the advisors discussed whether to make another
counterproposal. Having determined that Range had likely gone as high as they were willing to go, the
Memorial board of directors authorized Mr. Graham to advise Mr. Ventura that the Memorial board of
directors was willing to move forward at an exchange ratio of 0.375, subject to the negotiation of acceptable
definitive agreements and satisfactory completion of due diligence. Following the meeting, Mr. Graham
called Mr. Ventura and delivered the Memorial board of directors’ response as instructed.
Later that day, Sidley delivered a legal due diligence request list to Vinson & Elkins and Memorial, and
Vinson & Elkins delivered a revised legal due diligence request list to Range and Sidley. The parties and
their respective advisors each conducted ongoing legal, financial and commercial due diligence on the
other party throughout the process.
On April 28, 2016, Range announced its financial and operating results for the first quarter ended March 31,
2016 and discussed those results in a conference call.
Also on that day, the Range board of directors held an in-person and telephonic board meeting attended by
members of Range management, as well as representatives from Credit Suisse and Sidley. Mr. Poole
explained the timing of the meeting and the matters that the Range board of directors would be asked to
consider. Among other things, Mr. Poole reminded the other members of the board that Credit Suisse had
previously provided the Range board of directors with information regarding Credit Suisse’s relationships
with Range and Memorial. The Range board of directors did not believe that such relationships would
impair Credit Suisse’s ability to provide the Range board of directors with objective advice regarding a
potential transaction with Memorial. Mr. Ventura then provided an update of Range’s evaluation of a
potential transaction with Memorial, including reviewing the events that had occurred since the prior
meeting of the Range board of directors. A representative from Credit Suisse then reviewed and discussed
certain preliminary financial implications of the potential transaction. Mr. Manny then discussed Range’s
analysis of the economic attributes of the potential transaction with Memorial and compared the benefits of
the potential transaction with Range with certain other alternatives. A partner from Sidley then provided to
the Range board of directors a review of fiduciary duties of directors under Delaware law in the context of
consideration of the potential transaction with Memorial, including the duties of loyalty and care, the
applicability of the business judgment rule and the consideration of the information related to the
transaction. The Sidley partner noted certain of the key issues yet to be negotiated. Members of
management and representatives of Credit Suisse and Sidley responded to questions posed by members
of the Range board of directors who then engaged in an extensive discussion regarding the potential
transaction with Memorial. Following this discussion, the Range board of directors confirmed its support
for proceeding with further due diligence of Memorial and discussions with Memorial and its counsel
regarding the potential terms of a merger agreement.
On May 2, 2016, representatives of Vinson & Elkins had a telephone conference with representatives of
Sidley to discuss status, logistics and the draft merger agreement.
On May 4, 2016, Sidley delivered, on behalf of Range, a markup of the draft merger agreement to Memorial
and Vinson & Elkins. Later that afternoon, Sidley delivered to Memorial and Vinson & Elkins a draft term
sheet related to a proposed voting and support agreement, lock-up, registration rights and standstill
agreement with
Table of Contents
58
NGP and certain other Memorial stockholders. Vinson & Elkins forwarded the draft term sheet to
representatives of NGP and Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP (“Akin Gump”), counsel to NGP.
On May 6, 2016, the Memorial board of directors held an in-person and telephonic board meeting. Members
of management, as well as representatives of Barclays, Morgan Stanley, Vinson & Elkins and Morris
Nichols were also in attendance. Mr. Graham updated the Memorial board of directors on discussions with
Range. Representatives of Vinson & Elkins provided the Memorial board of directors with a summary of the
key open issues between the parties reflected in the Range markup of the merger agreement, which largely
focused on the parties’ deal protection and remedies provisions. After discussion among members of the
Memorial board of directors, Vinson & Elkins, Barclays and Morgan Stanley, the Memorial board of
directors provided Vinson & Elkins with parameters for responding on the merger agreement terms.
Representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley then updated the Memorial board of directors regarding
progress with potential counterparties. The Memorial board of directors then authorized representatives of
Barclays and Morgan Stanley to contact two additional counterparties that Barclays and Morgan Stanley
had not originally contacted, one of which was Company C, a publicly-traded independent energy
company. Representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley noted that each of the original potential
alternative counterparties contacted had indicated that they were not interested in pursuing a combination
with Memorial. Representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley further noted that it was unlikely in their
view that either of the two additional potential counterparties would have a strong interest in pursuing a
transaction with Memorial at that time. A representative of Vinson & Elkins also presented the Memorial
board of directors with the results of questionnaires that each officer and director had submitted
concerning any relationships with, or equity holders in, Range, and the Memorial board of directors
determined that no officers or directors had any actual or potential material conflict of interest with respect
to Range. The representatives from Barclays and Morgan Stanley then reviewed information as to the
historical relationship of Barclays and Morgan Stanley, respectively, with Range. After discussing the
information provided by Barclays and Morgan Stanley, the members of the Memorial board of directors
acknowledged these relationships and agreed that they did not present concerns with respect to their
independence in acting as Memorial’s financial advisors to the Memorial board of directors in connection
with the proposed transaction with Range.
That afternoon, Akin Gump sent Vinson & Elkins a markup of Sidley’s draft term sheet for the proposed
voting and support agreement, lock-up, registration rights and standstill agreement. This markup
eliminated the registration rights agreement and removed the proposed lock-up provisions.
Representatives of Vinson & Elkins and Akin Gump also discussed the proposed changes that afternoon.
On May 7, 2016, Vinson & Elkins, Sidley, Mr. Roane and David S. Goldberg, Range’s Vice President—Legal,
Deputy General Counsel & Assistant Secretary, held a conference call to discuss certain due diligence
questions that Sidley had previously submitted to Vinson & Elkins. Later that day, Vinson & Elkins
delivered, on behalf of Memorial, a markup of the draft merger agreement to Range and Sidley. Vinson &
Elkins also sent Range and Sidley the Akin Gump markup of the term sheet. After receiving Akin Gump’s
mark-up of the lock-up term sheet, a representative of Sidley reached out to Vinson & Elkins and Akin
Gump to understand MRD Holdco LLC’s intentions with respect to shares of Range common stock to be
received in the merger. A representative of Akin Gump told Sidley that, after the completion of the Memorial
stockholder vote, MRD Holdco LLC intended to distribute its shares of Memorial common stock—
approximately 36% of the total shares of Memorial common stock outstanding—to the three NGP-affiliated
private equity funds that owned MRD Holdco LLC’s common units. Akin Gump further explained that those
three funds intended to distribute approximately 10% of the total shares of Memorial common stock
outstanding to the general partners of the three funds. The remaining 26% of the total shares of Memorial
common stock would be distributed to approximately 500 different limited partners. Under the terms of the
merger, those shares of Memorial common stock to be distributed to NGP’s investors would be converted
in the merger into a total of approximately 8% of the outstanding Range common stock on a pro forma
basis for the merger. Akin Gump indicated that it was NGP’s position that because the pro forma 8% stock
position would be spread among 500 different investors (with the largest position owned by any single
investor not to exceed approximately 0.3%), locking up those shares was not necessary.
Table of Contents
59
On May 10, 2016, Memorial announced its financial and operating results for the first quarter ended
March 31, 2016 and discussed those results in a conference call.
That afternoon, the Range board of directors held a telephonic and in person board meeting that was also
attended by representatives of Credit Suisse and Sidley. At that meeting, Mr. Ventura provided the Range
board of directors with management’s recommendation of the transaction with Memorial—as well the
reasons underlying that recommendation—and answered questions posed by various members of the
Range board of directors. A representative from Credit Suisse reviewed and discussed Credit Suisse’s
preliminary financial analysis of Range, Memorial and the potential transaction and answered questions
posed by members of the Range board of directors.
Following a discussion among the Range board of directors, a Sidley partner discussed several issues
under discussion with Vinson & Elkins regarding the terms of a potential merger agreement, including
whether the Memorial board of directors would need to determine that accepting a superior proposal was
consistent with its fiduciary duties under applicable law before terminating the merger agreement in order
to accept a superior proposal. The Range board of directors also discussed the provision that Vinson &
Elkins included in the draft merger agreement that Memorial be entitled to appoint two members to the
board of the combined company. It was the consensus of the Range board of directors not to add any
Memorial designees to the combined company’s board. The Sidley partner then informed the Range board
of directors with respect to Akin Gump’s explanation for why it had removed the lock-up provision. The
Sidley partner also discussed certain due diligence items including regarding certain aspects of Memorial’s
relationship with Memorial Production Partners LP and prior drop-down transactions between Memorial
and Memorial Production Partners LP. After further discussions, the Range board of directors authorized
senior management to continue negotiations with Memorial on the basis described in the next paragraph.
At the direction of the Range board of directors, Mr. Ventura and representatives of Credit Suisse contacted
Mr. Graham after the Range board meeting and advised him that the Range board of directors had
authorized moving forward with the proposed transaction if the following terms were met: (i) Memorial’s
acceptance of satisfactory deal protection provisions, (ii) no board seats for Memorial on the board of the
combined company, (iii) satisfactory negotiation of the merger agreement generally, (iv) a 180-day post-
closing lock-up on the shares of Range common stock received by MRD Holdco LLC, Mr. Graham and
certain other Memorial stockholders, and (v) assuming a May 18, 2016 signing and subject to the limitations
described below, an exchange ratio based on the 10-trading day VWAP of each of Range and Memorial as
of May 17, 2016 (the “10-Trading Day VWAP Exchange Ratio”). Under Range’s proposal, the exchange ratio
reflected in the definitive merger agreement would be a fixed exchange ratio at signing, and the fixed
exchange ratio would be 0.375 unless (i) 0.375 was greater than a 20% premium over the 10-Trading Day
VWAP Exchange Ratio, in which case the exchange ratio would be reduced to result in a 20% premium over
the 10-Trading Day VWAP Exchange Ratio or (ii) 0.375 was less than a 10% premium over the 10-Trading
Day VWAP Exchange Ratio, in which case the exchange ratio would be increased to result in a 10%
premium over the 10-Trading Day VWAP Exchange Ratio (the “Proposed VWAP Exchange Ratio
Mechanism”). As of May 10, 2016, the application of the Proposed VWAP Exchange Ratio Mechanism
would have resulted in an exchange ratio of 0.357. Mr. Ventura also emphasized to Mr. Graham that the
Range board of directors was very sensitive to the size of the premium.
On May 11, 2016, Memorial management, its advisors and certain members of the Memorial board of
directors met to discuss how best to respond to Range’s May 10th proposal. That evening, representatives
of Barclays and Morgan Stanley contacted representatives of Credit Suisse to advise them that (i) Memorial
was not prepared to discuss any change to the 0.375 exchange ratio at that time, (ii) NGP was unwilling to
agree to any post-closing lock-up that would limit its ability to distribute shares of Memorial common stock
or Range common stock to its limited partners, or limit those limited partners’ ability to dispose of those
shares, in either case after the completion of the Memorial stockholder vote, (iii) Memorial needed to
understand Range’s view of the proposed merger agreement terms, in particular as it related to each party’s
deal protection provisions and
Table of Contents
60
(iv) Memorial believed that the parties needed to resolve all open points over the next four or five days
instead of waiting until May 18th to sign a merger agreement and announce the transaction.
A representative of Vinson & Elkins had a telephone conference with a representative of Sidley in which the
above points were also communicated to Sidley. During that discussion, the two lawyers discussed the
major open points, including (i) whether in order for the Memorial board of directors to terminate the merger
agreement to accept a superior proposal, the Memorial board of directors needed to determine that the
failure to accept the superior proposal was inconsistent with its fiduciary duties under applicable law,
(ii) whether a superior proposal for Memorial had to be for the entire company, (iii) the outside date,
(iv) whether Memorial would be entitled to board representation, (v) certain interim covenants applicable to
Range, (vi) the size of the termination fees, (vii) the size of no vote expense payments and when those
payments may be payable, (viii) the ability of the Memorial board of directors to change its recommendation,
(ix) the parameters of the tail termination fee on Range and (x) Range’s plan for refinancing the Memorial
indebtedness.
On May 12, 2016, the Memorial board of directors held an in-person and telephonic board meeting.
Members of management, as well as representatives of Barclays, Morgan Stanley, Vinson & Elkins and
Morris Nichols, were also in attendance. Mr. Graham updated the Memorial board of directors on the events
of the preceding 48 hours, including the Range proposal of the evening of May 10th. Representatives of
Vinson & Elkins then walked the Memorial board of directors through the perceived key open points on the
merger agreement, after which the Memorial board of directors provided Vinson & Elkins with parameters
for negotiating those points. Representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley each then provided the
Memorial board of directors with their updated analysis of the pro forma combined company and the
potential benefits of the combination. Members of management and Vinson & Elkins provided the Memorial
board of directors with an update on Memorial’s due diligence review of Range.
That afternoon, Mr. Roane, Mr. Poole, and representatives of Vinson & Elkins and Sidley discussed by
teleconference key open issues on the merger agreement and other related matters, in particular the deal
protection provisions. Sidley advised Vinson & Elkins and Mr. Roane that the Range board of directors was
not willing to pay a termination fee in the event that Range’s stockholders fail to approve the transaction
(i.e., in the absence of a change in recommendation by the Range board of directors or a competing
transaction, which is sometimes referred to as a “no vote”). Sidley also indicated Range’s view that the
absolute amount of the termination fees for Memorial and Range should be the same.
Later that afternoon, the Range board of directors held a special telephonic meeting. Mr. Ventura provided a
further update of Range’s evaluation of a potential transaction with Memorial and described the recent
discussions with Memorial. Mr. Poole commented on Memorial’s request that the Range board of directors
consider electing one independent member of the Memorial board of directors to the Range board of
directors. Mr. Ventura then reviewed the status of discussions regarding a possible exchange ratio and
potential lock-up terms. With respect to the lock-up, it was the consensus of the Range board of directors
that it was willing to exclude the shares of Range common stock issued in the merger to NGP’s limited
partner investors for the lock-up, given that those shares would represent only 8% of Range’s total shares
of outstanding common stock after the merger. It was also the consensus of the Range board of directors
that it would be acceptable, as part of an overall resolution of issues, to reduce the post-closing lock-up
period from 180 days to 90 days for NGP and the other parties to the voting and support agreement,
including Mr. Graham. A representative from Credit Suisse then summarized the discussions that Credit
Suisse had had with Barclays and Morgan Stanley at the request of the Range board of directors. After
Credit Suisse’s summary, the Range board of directors, with the assistance of Range’s management, and
representatives of Credit Suisse and Sidley, had an extensive discussion regarding the lock-up issue. A
partner from Sidley then reviewed with the Range board of directors the current issues under discussion
with Vinson & Elkins regarding the terms of a merger agreement, including the interim operating covenants,
certain terms regarding possible termination of the agreement, termination fee payment terms and terms
regarding a smaller fee in a no vote scenario.
Table of Contents
61
The Range board of directors then discussed those open issues and directed representatives of Sidley and
Credit Suisse to continue discussions with representatives of Vinson & Elkins, Morgan Stanley and
Barclays regarding the remaining open deal points. As instructed, representatives of Credit Suisse and
Sidley proposed a “package deal” on behalf of Range pursuant to which: (i) Memorial would be entitled to
designate one director for appointment to the Range board of directors, subject to the customary process
utilized by the Range nominating and governance committee, (ii) Memorial’s proposed sale of the general
partner of Memorial Production Partners LP must be consummated as a condition to closing, (iii) the
proposed termination fee would be $70,000,000 for both parties, (iv) if either party’s stockholders rejected
the transaction pursuant to a no vote, the other party would be paid $15,000,000, (v) the boards of directors
of both Range and Memorial (instead of just the Memorial board of directors) must have the right to change
its recommendation if failing to do so would be inconsistent with their respective duties under applicable
law, (vi) NGP would be permitted, after the completion of the Memorial stockholder vote, to distribute its
shares of Memorial common stock or Range common stock to NGP limited partners free of any lock-up,
(vii) the lock-up on any shares retained by NGP or held by the other parties to the voting and support
agreement, including Mr. Graham, would be reduced from 180 days to 90 days post-closing, (viii) the
exchange ratio would be determined using the Proposed VWAP Exchange Rate Mechanism and (ix) the
parties would endeavor to resolve all issues and be in position to announce a transaction prior to the
opening of the U.S. stock markets on May 16, 2016.
That evening, Sidley distributed an initial draft of the voting and support agreement to NGP, Akin Gump and
Vinson & Elkins. Later that night, Sidley also distributed a revised draft of the merger agreement to
Memorial and Vinson & Elkins.
On May 13, 2016, Vinson & Elkins advised Sidley of Memorial’s counterproposal to Range’s packaged deal
proposal of the previous day: (i) Memorial would not accept the Proposed VWAP Exchange Rate
Mechanism and would provide a response to the proposed exchange ratio later in the day, (ii) NGP had
advised that it was willing to accept Range’s proposal on the lock-up, (iii) Memorial would accept that the
Range board of directors could also change its recommendation if failing to do so would be inconsistent
with its duties under applicable law, but (A) such a right could only be exercised for an intervening event
that would not include an alternative acquisition proposal for Range and (B) the termination fee for Range
would be $140,000,000, given Range’s relative market capitalization as compared to Memorial’s,
(iv) Memorial would accept one director appointee and agree to the condition concerning the sale of the
general partner of MEMP, and (v) Range would pay Memorial $35,000,000 if Range’s stockholders failed to
approve the transaction in a no vote (subject to an additional $140,000,000, in certain circumstances, if
Range entered into an alternative proposal within 12 months of such termination).
That afternoon, the Memorial board of directors held a telephonic board meeting. Members of management,
as well as representatives of Barclays, Morgan Stanley, Vinson & Elkins and Morris Nichols were also in
attendance. Mr. Graham updated the Memorial board of directors on the status of negotiations with Range.
A representative of Vinson & Elkins then provided the Memorial board of directors with a detailed
description of the key open points based on the competing proposals between the parties. Mr. Graham then
discussed his view that the exchange ratio should remain at 0.375, and the other members of the Memorial
board of directors agreed with that position.
Following this call, Mr. Graham met briefly with representatives of Barclays, Morgan Stanley and Vinson &
Elkins and then called Mr. Ventura to advise him that Memorial was not willing to move off of the 0.375
exchange ratio. At the request of the Memorial board of directors, representatives of Barclays and Morgan
Stanley conveyed the same position to representatives of Credit Suisse.
That afternoon, the Range board of directors held a special telephonic meeting. Mr. Ventura gave the Range
board of directors a further update on events occurring since the prior meeting regarding Range’s
evaluation of a potential transaction with Memorial, including a description of a conversation he had had
with Mr. Graham shortly before the meeting regarding the exchange ratio and the amount of the payments
to be paid by the parties
Table of Contents
62
in connection with certain termination events under the merger agreement. A representative from Credit
Suisse then updated the Range board of directors regarding the discussions with Barclays and Morgan
Stanley that had taken place at the request of the Range board of directors since the prior meeting. A
partner from Sidley then advised the Range board of directors of the status of the preparation of a merger
agreement, noting the changes that had been made to the draft agreement since it was last circulated to the
Range board of directors on the previous day. The Range board of directors, with the assistance of Range
management and representatives of Credit Suisse and Sidley, engaged in an extensive discussion
regarding the potential transaction. The Range board of directors noted that, based on current trading
prices, it appeared that the one-day premium at a 0.375 exchange ratio would be less than 20%. Following
that discussion, the Range board of directors expressed its support of management’s recommendation to
proceed with negotiation of an agreement with a fixed exchange ratio of 0.375, as long as certain other
matters were adequately addressed, as described in the next paragraph.
Following the Range board of directors meeting, Mr. Ventura advised Mr. Graham that Range was willing to
move forward on the terms proposed by Memorial, including a fixed exchange ratio of 0.375, but (i) the
termination fee amounts should be $75,000,000 for Memorial and $125,000,000 for Range and (ii) the no vote
expense payment in the event either party’s stockholders rejected the transaction should be $25,000,000
(subject to the higher termination fees in certain circumstances where the party whose stockholders
rejected the transaction entered into an alternative proposal within 12 months of that termination). Shortly
after the call between the two CEOs, a representative of Vinson & Elkins had a telephone conference with a
representative of Sidley in which the above points were also discussed. During that discussion Sidley
informed Vinson & Elkins that an intervening event concept was acceptable subject to negotiating the
appropriate language in the merger agreement.
Following this discussion, the Memorial board of directors held a telephonic board meeting. Members of
management, as well as representatives of Barclays, Morgan Stanley, Vinson & Elkins and Morris Nichols,
were also in attendance. Mr. Graham advised the Memorial board of directors of his conversation with
Mr. Ventura. Representatives of Barclays and Morgan Stanley advised the Memorial board of directors that
they had spoken with representatives of Company C, who had advised Barclays and Morgan Stanley that
Company C might have an interest in pursuing a business combination with Memorial, but would require
several weeks of due diligence. Furthermore, Company C did not provide an indication of the consideration
it was willing to pay. The Memorial board of directors discussed how this development affected the
proposed transaction with Range, including a discussion of its ability to terminate the merger agreement or
change its recommendation if Company C later made a superior proposal, the views of Memorial’s financial
advisors and management regarding Company C and the view of NGP regarding its interest in exploring a
transaction with Company C. Following these discussions, the Memorial board of directors determined to
pursue the proposed transaction with Range. The Memorial board of directors then authorized Vinson &
Elkins to prepare a revised merger agreement that reflected the agreed upon terms and work with
Mr. Roane to resolve any open issues with Mr. Poole and Sidley. That evening, Vinson & Elkins distributed
a revised draft of the merger agreement and the voting and support agreement to Sidley and Range. The
revised draft of the merger agreement limited the ability of the Range board of directors to change its
recommendation to the occurrence of an intervening event, and excluded an alternative acquisition
proposal for Range from the definition of intervening event.
The next day, May 14, 2016, representatives from NGP, Akin Gump and Sidley, with Mr. Roane also
participating, discussed MRD Holdco LLC’s and NGP’s plans for distributing to NGP’s limited partners
shares of Memorial common stock or Range common stock, as applicable.
Shortly after the call to discuss the voting and support agreement ended, Mr. Poole, Mr. Roane, Sidley and
Vinson & Elkins discussed the key open points on the merger agreement by telephone. Among other
things discussed, Sidley advised that it was Range’s position that the Range board of directors needed to
be able to change its recommendation if it received an alternative acquisition proposal that was a superior
proposal. Later that evening, a representative of Sidley advised a representative of Vinson & Elkins that it
was Range’s position that the Range board of directors should also have a termination right if Range
received an alternative proposal
Table of Contents
63
that was a superior proposal. After a series of discussions between Vinson & Elkins and Sidley that
evening, a representative of Vinson & Elkins advised Sidley late that night that Memorial would consider
permitting the Range board of directors to change its recommendation for an alternative acquisition
proposal, but giving Range a termination right in that context would not be acceptable. Furthermore, in light
of this increased flexibility, the termination fee triggered by such a change of recommendation in those
circumstances would need to increase from $125,000,000 to $225,000,000. A representative of Sidley
advised a representative of Vinson & Elkins that he would discuss the matter with members of the Range
board of directors and Range management as soon as possible. Later that night, Sidley then sent the
Range board of directors a detailed explanation of the change of recommendation and termination issues
relating to an alternative acquisition proposal for Range. Mr. Poole then invited the Range board of
directors to participate in an update call at 10:00 a.m. central time the next morning to discuss the
developments of the day.
Before the update call that following morning, Sidley sent a revised draft of the voting and support
agreement to NGP, Akin Gump, Vinson & Elkins and Memorial. Shortly after that distribution, Sidley sent a
revised draft of the merger agreement to Vinson & Elkins and Memorial.
During the update call, several Range directors, Range senior executives and representatives of Sidley
held an extensive discussion of what would happen under the merger agreement if Range were to receive
an alternative acquisition proposal between the signing and closing of the merger agreement. During this
discussion, a representative of Sidley described the most recent proposal from Vinson & Elkins that was
sent late the night before, as well as the legal consequences of the various alternatives. After much
discussion by the Range directors on the call, it was the consensus that the Range board of directors
would need to be able to terminate the merger agreement if it received an alternative proposal that was a
superior proposal, just as the Memorial board of directors would be able to do under similar circumstances.
The Range board of directors instructed representatives Sidley to coordinate with representatives of Credit
Suisse in order to communicate that message to Memorial’s financial and legal advisors.
As instructed, Credit Suisse promptly contacted Morgan Stanley and Barclays to communicate that
message, and Sidley had similar conversations with Vinson & Elkins. Memorial’s financial and legal
advisors were informed that the Range board of directors would convene a special telephonic meeting at
2:00 p.m. central time to decide whether to proceed with the merger.
Following this discussion, representatives of Vinson & Elkins, Barclays and Morgan Stanley discussed the
matter with Messrs. Graham, Gieselman and Roane, and Messrs. Graham, Gieselman and Roane
determined to recommend that Memorial give the Range board of directors a termination right in the event
of an alternative acquisition proposal for Range that was a superior proposal, but only if the termination fee
for that termination event was increased to $300,000,000. Shortly before the beginning of the 2:00 p.m.
meeting of the Range board of directors, a representative of Vinson & Elkins conveyed Memorial’s position
to a representative of Sidley, and Mr. Roane conveyed the message to Mr. Poole. Mr. Graham also called
Mr. Ventura and advised that Memorial was unwilling to move forward if this proposal was unacceptable to
the Range board of directors.
At the beginning of the 2:00 p.m. meeting of the Range board of directors, Mr. Ventura relayed Memorial’s
counterproposal. A partner from Sidley then commented on the communications with Vinson & Elkins
regarding the same issues, after which the Range board of directors, with the assistance of Range senior
management and representatives from Sidley and Credit Suisse, engaged in extensive discussions
regarding an appropriate response to Memorial’s counterproposal. The Range board of directors
discussed its assessment of the probability of the occurrence of certain termination events under
consideration and, following that discussion, directed Sidley to communicate to Vinson & Elkins the
acceptance by the Range board of directors of Memorial’s proposal. The Range board of directors also
directed Sidley to work with Vinson & Elkins to finalize the terms of the merger agreement on that basis.
Table of Contents
64
Thereafter, a representative of Credit Suisse reviewed and discussed Credit Suisse’s financial analyses of
Range, Memorial and the proposed transaction and responded to questions from the Range board of
directors. The Range board of directors also discussed that, based on the closing price of Range common
stock on the NYSE of $42.01 on May 13, 2016, the last trading day before the public announcement of the
merger agreement, the merger consideration represented a premium of approximately 17.1% to the $13.45
per share closing price of Memorial common stock on May 13, 2016.
After a discussion by the Range board of directors, Mr. Ventura described plans that had been coordinated
with Memorial regarding logistics for externally communicating the potential transaction if it were to be
approved. The meeting was then recessed until 8:00 p.m. central time. After the Range board of directors
meeting was recessed, a Sidley partner informed Vinson & Elkins that the Range board of directors was
prepared to move forward with the transaction on the basis most recently proposed by Memorial. Over the
course of the next four hours, Vinson & Elkins and Sidley exchanged drafts of the merger agreement in
order to substantially finalize the draft.
Later that evening, at 8:00 p.m. central time, the Range board of directors reconvened its telephonic
meeting. A partner from Sidley reviewed in detail for the Range board of directors the key terms of the draft
merger agreement and related voting and support agreement, both of which had been summarized in
materials previously provided to the Range board of directors. Another partner from Sidley then reviewed
certain covenants in the proposed merger agreement that were drafted to address the potential redemption
of Memorial’s senior notes. Sidley then provided a more detailed review of the provisions of the voting and
support agreement and the effect of the planned distribution of stock of Memorial to limited partners in
certain funds that are stockholders of Memorial.
After Sidley’s presentation, at the request of the Range board of directors, Credit Suisse rendered its oral
opinion to the Range board of directors (which was subsequently confirmed in writing by delivery of Credit
Suisse’s written opinion addressed to the Range board of directors dated as of the same date) as to, as of
May 15, 2016, the fairness, from a financial point of view, to Range of the exchange ratio in the merger
pursuant to the merger agreement. After receiving management’s recommendation to approve the
proposed transaction with Memorial on the terms set forth in the proposed merger agreement, all members
of the Range board of directors that were present resolved to authorize and approve the proposed merger
agreement and the merger. At the conclusion of this board meeting, Mr. Poole informed Mr. Roane, and a
representative of Sidley informed a representative of Vinson & Elkins, that the Range board of directors had
approved the proposed transaction.
While the meeting of the reconvened meeting of the Range board of directors was winding down, the
Memorial board of directors met telephonically with certain members of Memorial’s senior management
team and representatives from Barclays, Morgan Stanley, Vinson & Elkins and Morris Nichols. Vinson &
Elkins advised the Memorial board of directors on the changes to the proposed terms of the merger
agreement that had arisen in the prior 36 hours, including the changes required by Range with respect to
its right to consider alternative proposals and the increased termination fee required from Range as a
result. A representative of Vinson & Elkins provided the Memorial board of directors with an updated,
detailed summary of the terms and conditions of the proposed merger agreement. Following this
presentation, at the request of the Memorial board of directors, representatives of Barclays and Morgan
Stanley each separately provided the Memorial board of directors with an explanation of the financial
analyses of the proposed transaction and orally advised the Memorial board of directors that each was of
the opinion that, as of such date and based upon and subject to the various assumptions made,
procedures followed, matters considered and qualifications and limitations on the scope of the review
undertaken by each financial advisor as stated in their respective written opinions, the exchange ratio
pursuant to the merger agreement was fair, from a financial point of view, to the holders of Memorial
common stock (other than excluded shares). Following these discussions, the Memorial board adopted the
merger agreement and determined that the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby,
including the merger, were advisable and in the best interests of Memorial and its stockholders and the
members present, representing all of the directors of Memorial, unanimously voted to approve the merger
agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby.
Table of Contents
65
In the late evening of May 15, 2016, the respective parties to the merger agreement and the voting and
support agreement executed those agreements.
Prior to the opening of the U.S. stock markets on May 16, 2016, Range and Memorial issued a joint press
release announcing the proposed merger and Range hosted a conference call for the investment
community to explain the specific details of the proposed merger.
Range’s Reasons for the Merger; Recommendation of the Range Board of Directors
In approving the merger agreement and recommending approval of the issuance of shares of Range
common stock to Memorial stockholders as part of the merger, the Range board of directors consulted with
members of Range’s management, as well as with Range’s outside legal and financial advisors. The Range
board of directors also considered a number of factors that the Range board of directors viewed as bearing
on its decisions.
The principal factors that the Range board of directors viewed as supporting its decisions were:
•   that the combined company would have core acreage positions in Appalachia and Northern Louisiana—
two prolific, high-quality natural gas plays in North America—providing Range with regional diversity;
•   that Memorial has a sizeable, concentrated position in the North Louisiana Terryville Complex with close
proximity to U.S. Gulf Coast industrial petrochemical demand, liquefied natural gas export facilities and
new power generation demand;
•   that each of Range and Memorial has successfully employed a strategy of reducing costs, improving
returns and increasing cash flow;
•   the complementary nature of the skill sets for the technical teams of Range and Memorial;
•   that the combined company would be led by Range’s existing senior management team, key members of
which have prior operational experience in Northern Louisiana;
•   that the merger would provide opportunities to reduce Range’s costs and increase cash flow, including by
means of marketing opportunities, capital cost reductions and overhead efficiencies;
•   the expectation of the Range board of directors that the merger will be cash flow accretive to Range;
•   that the merger is expected to be credit enhancing to Range, including in respect of reduced debt
leverage, strengthened balance sheet and enhanced liquidity;
•   the potential that the combined company will be able to identify additional exploration and development
opportunities and achieve exploration and production drilling efficiencies;
•   the terms and conditions of the merger agreement, including the commitments by both Range and
Memorial to complete the merger;
•   the restrictions on the conduct of Memorial’s business during the period between the execution of the
merger agreement and the completion of the merger as set forth in the merger agreement;
•   that the merger agreement permits Range, during the period between signing and closing of the merger
agreement, to pursue mergers, consolidations, and acquisitions of any business or any corporation or
other business organization and joint ventures, as long as no such transaction would or would reasonably
be expected to prevent, materially delay or materially impede Range’s or Merger Sub’s ability to complete
the merger as contemplated by the merger agreement;
•   that the merger agreement permits Range, during the period between signing and closing of the merger
agreement, to issue its capital stock as consideration for acquisitions or to refinance the indebtedness
issued or assumed in connection with any acquisitions, including Memorial’s senior notes, as long as
Table of Contents
66
no such transaction would or would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially delay or materially
impede Range’s or Merger Sub’s ability to complete the merger as contemplated by the merger
agreement;
•   that Range’s obligation to close the merger is conditioned on a vote of its stockholders to approve the
issuance of Range common stock to be used as merger consideration;
•   the terms of the merger agreement relating to no shop covenants and termination fees, and that such
provisions are reasonably constructed;
•   the right of the Range board of directors to change its recommendation to Range stockholders, subject to
certain conditions (including considering any adjustments to the merger agreement proposed by Memorial
and payment to Memorial of a $125,000,000 termination fee if Memorial terminates the merger agreement
because of such change of recommendation);
•   the right of the Range board of directors to terminate the merger agreement in order to accept a Range
superior proposal, subject to certain conditions (including payment to Memorial by Range of a
$300,000,000 alternative proposal fee);
•   that the termination fee of $125,000,000, the alternative proposal fee of $300,000,000 and the no vote
expense payment of $25,000,000, in each case payable by Range to Memorial under the circumstances
specified in the merger agreement, were not unreasonable in the judgment of the Range board of directors
after consultation with its legal and financial advisors;
•   that, the merger agreement provides that only one fee (i.e., the highest applicable fee) relating to a
termination of the merger agreement would be payable by Range, if Range was required to pay a fee
under one or more of the circumstances specified in the merger agreement;
•   that certain Memorial stockholders (including Memorial’s chief executive officer) holding, in the aggregate,
approximately 47.7% of the issued and outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled to vote at
the Memorial special meeting had entered into a voting and support agreement with Range obligating
such stockholders to vote all of the Memorial shares held by them in favor of the adoption of the merger, as
more fully described in “—Voting and Support Agreement” beginning on page 143;
•   the financial analyses reviewed and discussed with the Range board of directors by representatives of
Credit Suisse as well as the oral opinion of Credit Suisse rendered to the Range board of directors on
May 15, 2016 (which was subsequently confirmed in writing by delivery of Credit Suisse’s written opinion
addressed to the Range board of directors dated the same date) as to, as of May 15, 2016, the fairness,
from a financial point of view, to Range of the exchange ratio in the merger pursuant to the merger
agreement, as more fully described below under the caption “—Opinion of Range’s Financial Advisor”
beginning on page 69; and
•   that—prior to the execution of the merger agreement—Memorial Production Partners LP had announced
that it had entered into an agreement with Memorial to acquire that master limited partnership’s general
partner from Memorial and that the completion of the merger is conditioned upon the closing of that
disposition by Memorial, as more fully described in the section “The Merger Agreement—MEMP GP
Purchase and Sale Agreement” beginning on page 144.
In addition to considering the factors above, the Range board of directors also considered the following
factors:
•   the recommendation of the merger by Range’s senior management team;
•   the knowledge of the Range board of directors of Range’s business, financial condition, results of
operations and prospects, as well as Memorial’s business, financial condition, results of operation and
prospects, taking into account the results of Range’s due diligence review of Memorial;
Table of Contents
67
•   that the exchange ratio for merger consideration is fixed and will not increase or decrease based on
changes in the market price of Range common stock or Memorial common stock between the date of the
merger agreement and the date of the completion of the merger;
•   the review by the Range board of directors, after consultation with Range’s management and advisors, of
the structure of the merger and the terms and conditions of the merger agreement;
•   that, based on the closing price of shares of Range common stock on the NYSE of $42.01 on May 13,
2016, the last trading day before the public announcement of the merger agreement, the merger
consideration represented an implied value of $15.75 for each share of Memorial common stock, which
represented a premium of approximately 17.1% to the $13.45 per share closing price of Memorial common
stock on May 13, 2016;
•   that the merger agreement provides that the Range board of directors must take all necessary corporate
action to appoint one Memorial independent director designated by the Memorial board of directors to
serve on the combined company’s board of directors, subject to consent by the Governance and
Nominating Committee of the Range board of directors;
•   that, under the terms of the merger agreement, Memorial will be required to pay to Range a termination fee
of $75,000,000 or a no vote expense payment of $25,000,000 if the merger agreement is terminated under
certain circumstances (see “The Merger Agreement—Termination Fees and Expenses” beginning on
page 141);
•   that Range’s representations and interim operating covenants are not unduly burdensome and provide
Range with sufficient flexibility to operate its business between signing and closing of the merger
agreement;
•   that Range’s representations and interim operating covenants are less restrictive than Memorial’s
representations and interim operating covenants are, as a result of which Range has more flexibility than
Memorial between signing and closing of the merger agreement;
•   the expectation that the merger will obtain all necessary regulatory approvals without unacceptable
conditions; and
•   the likelihood of consummating the merger on the anticipated schedule.
The Range board of directors weighed the foregoing against certain potentially negative factors, including:
•   the restrictions on the conduct of Range’s business during the period between the execution of the merger
agreement and the completion of the merger as set forth in the merger agreement;
•   that Memorial’s obligation to close the merger is conditioned on the approval of the merger by holders of a
majority of the outstanding Memorial common stock;
•   that the voting and support agreement would terminate upon any change in recommendation, thereby
relieving MRD Holdco LLC, WHR Incentive LLC, Jay Graham and Anthony Bahr of their respective
obligations to support the merger;
•   the costs associated with the completion of the merger, including management’s time and energy and
potential opportunity cost;
•   the amount of indebtedness of Memorial and the annual debt service costs of such indebtedness, as well
as the terms of Memorial’s and Range’s debt instruments;
•   the challenges in absorbing the effect of any failure to complete the merger, including potential termination
and other fees, as well as employee, stockholder and market reactions;
•   that forecasts of future financial and operational results of the combined company are necessarily
estimates based on assumptions and may vary significantly from future performance;
Table of Contents
68
•   the potential earnings and net asset value dilution to Range stockholders following the merger;
•   the challenges inherent in the combination of two businesses of the size and complexity of Range and
Memorial, including the possible diversion of management attention for an extended period of time;
•   the risk of not realizing the magnitude and timing of all of the anticipated cost savings and operational
efficiencies between Range and Memorial and the risk that other anticipated benefits might not be
realized;
•   the risks and contingencies relating to the announcement and pendency of the merger (including the
likelihood of litigation brought by or on behalf of Range or Memorial stockholders challenging the
transaction) and the risks and costs to Range if the merger does not close in a timely manner or if the
merger does not close at all, including potential employee attrition, the impact on Range’s relationships
with third parties and the effect termination of the merger agreement may have on Range’s operating
results;
•   that approximately 36% of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock is held by MRD Holdco LLC,
which is owned by three related private equity funds, and that those private equity funds intend to
distribute a total of approximately 26% of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock to their private
equity limited partners (approximately 8% of the Range common stock on a pro forma basis for the merger,
based on the exchange ratio), which could potentially have an adverse effect on the market price for
Range common stock; and
•   the risks of the type and nature described under “Risk Factors” beginning on page 33 and the matters
described under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” beginning on page 31.
This discussion of the information and factors considered by the Range board of directors in reaching its
conclusions and recommendation includes the principal factors considered by the Range board of
directors, but is not intended to be exhaustive and may not include all of the factors considered by the
Range board of directors. In view of the wide variety of factors considered in connection with its evaluation
of the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, and the complexity of
these matters, the Range board of directors did not find it useful and did not attempt to quantify, rank or
assign any relative or specific weights to the various factors that it considered in reaching its determination
to approve the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, and to make its
recommendation to Range stockholders. Rather, the Range board of directors viewed its decisions as
being based on the totality of the information presented to it and the factors it considered, including its
discussions with, and questioning of, members of Range’s management and outside legal and financial
advisors. In addition, individual members of the Range board of directors may have assigned different
weights to different factors.
The Range board of directors has approved the merger and the merger agreement and determined that the
merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the issuance of
shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger, are in the best
interests of Range and its stockholders.
Accordingly, the Range board of directors unanimously recommends that the Range stockholders vote
“FOR” the proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders
in connection with the merger.
Opinion of Range’s Financial Advisor
On May 15, 2016, Credit Suisse rendered its oral opinion to the Range board of directors (which was
subsequently confirmed in writing by delivery of Credit Suisse’s written opinion addressed to the Range
board of directors dated the same date) as to, as of May 15, 2016, the fairness, from a financial point of view,
to Range of the exchange ratio in the merger pursuant to the merger agreement.
Table of Contents
69
Credit Suisse’s opinion was directed to the Range board of directors (in its capacity as such), and only
addressed the fairness, from a financial point of view, to Range of the exchange ratio in the merger
pursuant to the merger agreement and did not address any other aspect or implication (financial or
otherwise) of the merger. The summary of Credit Suisse’s opinion in this joint proxy statement/prospectus
is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of its written opinion, which is included as Annex B to
this joint proxy statement/prospectus and sets forth the procedures followed, assumptions made,
qualifications and limitations on the review undertaken and other matters considered by Credit Suisse in
preparing its opinion. However, neither Credit Suisse’s written opinion nor the summary of its opinion and
the related analyses set forth in this joint proxy statement/prospectus are intended to be, and they do not
constitute, advice or a recommendation to any holder of Range common stock as to how such holder
should vote or act on any matter relating to the merger.
In arriving at its opinion, Credit Suisse:
•   reviewed the merger agreement and certain publicly available business and financial information relating
to Memorial and Range including, without limitation, information regarding their respective net operating
loss carry-forwards;
•   reviewed certain other information relating to Memorial and Range, including:
•
financial forecasts and projected production and operating data prepared by and provided to Credit
Suisse by Range management relating to Memorial under two alternative cases reflecting differing
projected oil and gas development and operating assumptions (the “Case 1 Range Projections for
Memorial” and the “Case 2 Range Projections for Memorial,” respectively, and, together, the “Range
Projections for Memorial”), which were based on certain oil and gas reserve information prepared by
Memorial management regarding Memorial’s proved and unproved oil and gas reserves (the
“Memorial Reserve Information”), as adjusted by Range management (the “Range Reserve
Information for Memorial”) and the Range Riskings for Memorial referred to below;
•
•
•
•
•
financial forecasts and projected production and operating data prepared by and provided to Credit
Suisse by Range management relating to Range under two alternative cases reflecting differing
projected oil and gas development and operating assumptions (including Range management’s
projections model for Range (the “Range Model”) and Range Management’s reserves projection
model for Range (the “Range Reserves Model”), and, together, the “Range Projections for Range”),
which were based on certain oil and gas reserve information prepared by Range management
regarding Range’s proved, probable and possible oil and gas reserves (the “Range Reserve
Information for Range”) and the Range Riskings for Range referred to below;
riskings for Memorial’s proved and unproved oil and gas reserves prepared by Range management
(the “Range Riskings for Memorial”);
riskings for Range’s proved, probable and possible oil and gas reserves prepared by Range
management (the “Range Riskings for Range”);
certain publicly available market data regarding future oil and gas commodity pricing (the “Publicly
Available Future Oil and Gas Pricing Data”) and certain alternative estimates regarding future oil and
gas commodity pricing prepared and provided to Credit Suisse by Range management (the “Range
Projected Oil and Gas Pricing Data” and, together with the Publicly Available Future Oil and Gas
Pricing Data, the “the Future Oil and Gas Pricing Data”); and
an estimate of the value of certain Memorial acreage prepared by Range management (the
“Estimated Value of the Southern Extension”);
•   spoke with the managements of Memorial and Range and certain of their representatives regarding the
business and prospects of Memorial and Range, and Memorial’s and Range’s respective oil and gas
reserves and their respective oil and gas development and operating assumptions;
Table of Contents
70
•   considered certain financial and stock market data of Memorial and Range, and compared that data with
similar data for other companies with publicly traded equity securities in businesses that Credit Suisse
deemed similar to those of Memorial and Range, respectively;
•   considered, to the extent publicly available, the financial terms of certain other business combinations and
other transactions that had been effected or announced; and
•   considered such other information, financial studies, analyses and investigations and financial, economic
and market criteria that Credit Suisse deemed relevant.
In connection with its review, Credit Suisse did not independently verify any of the foregoing information,
and Credit Suisse assumed that such information was complete and accurate in all respects material to its
analyses and opinion and relied upon such assumption. With respect to the Range Projections for
Memorial that Credit Suisse used in its analyses, management of Range advised Credit Suisse, and Credit
Suisse assumed, that those financial forecasts were reasonably prepared in good faith and reflected such
management’s best currently available estimates and judgments as to the future financial performance of
Memorial. With respect to the Range Projections for Range that Credit Suisse used in its analyses,
management of Range advised Credit Suisse, and Credit Suisse assumed, that those financial forecasts
were reasonably prepared in good faith and reflected such management’s best currently available
estimates and judgments as to the future financial performance of Range. With respect to the Memorial
Reserve Information that Credit Suisse reviewed, management of Memorial advised Credit Suisse, and
Credit Suisse assumed, that such reserve information was reasonably prepared in good faith and reflected
such management’s best currently available estimates and judgments as to Memorial’s proved and
unproved oil and gas reserves. With respect to the Range Reserve Information for Memorial that Credit
Suisse reviewed, management of Range advised Credit Suisse, and Credit Suisse assumed, that such
reserve information was reasonably prepared in good faith and reflected such management’s best currently
available estimates and judgments as to Memorial’s proved and unproved oil and gas reserves. With
respect to the Range Reserve Information for Range that Credit Suisse reviewed, management of Range
advised Credit Suisse, and Credit Suisse assumed, that such reserve information was reasonably prepared
in good faith and reflected such management’s best currently available estimates and judgments as to
Range’s proved, probable and possible oil and gas reserves. With respect to the Range Riskings for
Memorial and the Range Riskings for Range, management of Range advised Credit Suisse, and Credit
Suisse assumed, that such riskings were reasonably prepared in good faith and reflected such
management’s best currently available estimates and judgments as to the appropriate riskings for the
Range Reserve Information for Memorial and the Range Reserve Information for Range, respectively. With
respect to the Estimated Value of the Southern Extension, management of Range advised Credit Suisse,
and Credit Suisse assumed, that such estimated value was reasonably prepared in good faith and reflected
such management’s best currently available estimates and judgments as to the estimated value of certain
Memorial acreage.
Credit Suisse expressed no view or opinion with respect to the Range Projections for Memorial, the Range
Projections for Range, the Memorial Reserve Information, the Range Reserve Information for Memorial, the
Range Reserve Information for Range, the Range Riskings for Memorial, the Range Riskings for Range, the
Publicly Available Future Oil and Gas Pricing Data, the Range Projected Oil and Gas Pricing Data, the
Estimated Value of the Southern Extension or the assumptions upon which any of the foregoing were
based. At Range’s direction, Credit Suisse assumed that the Range Projections for Memorial, the Range
Projections for Range, the Range Reserve Information for Memorial, the Range Reserve Information for
Range, the Range Riskings for Memorial, the Range Riskings for Range, the Publicly Available Future Oil
and Gas Pricing Data, the Range Projected Oil and Gas Pricing Data and the Estimated Value of the
Southern Extension were a reasonable basis on which to evaluate Memorial, Range and the merger, and
Credit Suisse used and relied upon such information for purposes of its analyses and opinion.
In addition, Credit Suisse relied upon, without independent verification (i) the assessments of the
management of Range with respect to Range’s ability to integrate the businesses of Memorial and Range
and (ii) the assessments of the management of Range as to Memorial’s and Range’s existing technology
and future capabilities with respect
Table of Contents
71
to the extraction of Memorial’s and Range’s oil and gas reserves and other oil and gas resources and
associated timing and costs and, with Range’s consent, assumed that there had been no developments
that would adversely affect such management’s views with respect to such technologies, capabilities,
timing and costs. Range advised Credit Suisse and for purposes of its analyses and its opinion Credit
Suisse assumed that, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, the merger will qualify as a “reorganization”
within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. Credit Suisse also assumed, with Range’s consent, that,
in the course of obtaining any regulatory or third party consents, approvals or agreements in connection
with the merger, no delay, limitation, restriction or condition would be imposed that would have an adverse
effect on Memorial, Range or the contemplated benefits of the merger, that the merger would be
consummated in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, and that the merger would be
consummated in accordance with the terms of the merger agreement, without waiver, modification or
amendment of any term, condition or agreement thereof material to Credit Suisse’s analyses or opinion. In
addition, Credit Suisse was not requested to, and did not, make an independent evaluation or appraisal of
the assets or liabilities (contingent or otherwise) of Memorial or Range, and Credit Suisse was not furnished
with any such evaluations or appraisals other than as set forth above.
Credit Suisse’s opinion addressed only the fairness, from a financial point of view, to Range of the
exchange ratio in the merger pursuant to the merger agreement and, other than assuming the
consummation of the previously announced sale of Memorial Production Partners GP LLC by Memorial to
Memorial Production Partners LP pursuant to the MEMP GP PSA, did not address any other aspect or
implication (financial or otherwise) of the merger or any agreement, arrangement or understanding entered
into in connection therewith or otherwise, including, without limitation, the transactions contemplated by
the MEMP GP PSA, or the fairness of the amount or nature of, or any other aspect relating to, any
compensation or consideration to be received or otherwise payable to any officers, directors, employees,
securityholders or affiliates of any party to the merger, or class of such persons, relative to the exchange
ratio or otherwise. Furthermore, Credit Suisse did not express any advice or opinion regarding matters that
require legal, regulatory, accounting, insurance, tax, environmental, executive compensation or other
similar professional advice, including, without limitation, any advice regarding the amounts of any
company’s oil and gas reserves, the riskings of such reserves or any other aspects of any company’s
(including Memorial’s or Range’s) oil and gas reserves. Credit Suisse assumed that Range had or would
obtain such advice or opinions from the appropriate professional sources. The issuance of Credit Suisse’s
opinion was approved by its authorized internal committee.
Credit Suisse’s opinion was necessarily based upon information made available to Credit Suisse as of the
date of its opinion and financial, economic, market and other conditions as they existed and could be
evaluated on the date of its opinion. Credit Suisse did not undertake, and is under no obligation, to update,
revise, reaffirm or withdraw its opinion, or otherwise comment on or consider events occurring or coming to
its attention after the date of its opinion. In addition, as Range was aware, the financial projections and
estimates that Credit Suisse reviewed relating to the future financial performance of Memorial and Range
reflected certain assumptions regarding the oil and gas industry and future commodity prices associated
with that industry that were subject to significant uncertainty and volatility and that, if different than
assumed, could have a material impact on Credit Suisse’s analyses and opinion. Credit Suisse’s opinion
did not address the relative merits of the merger as compared to alternative transactions or strategies that
might have been available to Range, nor did it address the underlying business decision of the Range
board of directors or Range to proceed with or effect the merger. Credit Suisse did not express any opinion
as to what the value of shares of Range common stock actually would be when issued pursuant to the
merger or the price or range of prices at which Memorial common stock or Range common stock may be
purchased or sold at any time. Credit Suisse assumed that the shares of Range common stock to be issued
to the holders of Memorial common stock in the merger would be approved for listing on the New York
Stock Exchange prior to the consummation of the merger.
In preparing its opinion to the Range board of directors, Credit Suisse performed a variety of analyses,
including those described below. The summary of Credit Suisse’s financial analyses is not a complete
description of the analyses underlying Credit Suisse’s opinion. The preparation of such an opinion is a
complex process involving various quantitative and qualitative judgments and determinations with respect
to the financial,
Table of Contents
72
comparative and other analytic methods employed and the adaptation and application of those methods to
the unique facts and circumstances presented. As a consequence, neither Credit Suisse’s opinion nor the
analyses underlying its opinion are readily susceptible to partial analysis or summary description. Credit
Suisse arrived at its opinion based on the results of all analyses undertaken by it and assessed as a whole
and did not draw, in isolation, conclusions from or with regard to any individual analysis, analytic method or
factor. Accordingly, Credit Suisse believes that its analyses must be considered as a whole and that
selecting portions of its analyses, analytic methods and factors, without considering all analyses and
factors or the narrative description of the analyses, could create a misleading or incomplete view of the
processes underlying its analyses and opinion.
In performing its analyses, Credit Suisse considered business, economic, industry and market conditions,
financial and otherwise, and other matters as they existed on, and could be evaluated as of, the date of its
opinion. No company, business or transaction used in Credit Suisse’s analyses for comparative purposes
is identical to Range, Memorial or the proposed merger. While the results of each analysis were taken into
account in reaching its overall conclusion with respect to fairness to Range of the exchange ratio in the
merger, Credit Suisse did not make separate or quantifiable judgments regarding individual analyses. The
reference ranges indicated by Credit Suisse’s financial analyses are illustrative and not necessarily
indicative of actual values nor predictive of future results or values, which may be significantly more or less
favorable than those suggested by the analyses. In addition, any analyses relating to the value of assets,
businesses or securities do not purport to be appraisals or to reflect the prices at which businesses or
securities actually may be sold, which may depend on a variety of factors, many of which are beyond
Range’s control and the control of Credit Suisse. Much of the information used in, and accordingly the
results of, Credit Suisse’s analyses are inherently subject to substantial uncertainty.
Credit Suisse’s opinion and analyses were provided to the Range board of directors (in its capacity as
such) in connection with its consideration of the proposed merger and were among many factors
considered by the Range board of directors in evaluating the proposed merger. Neither Credit Suisse’s
opinion nor its analyses were determinative of the exchange ratio or of the views of the Range board of
directors with respect to the proposed merger. Under the terms of its engagement by Range, neither Credit
Suisse’s opinion nor any other advice or services rendered by it in connection with the proposed merger or
otherwise, should be construed as creating, and Credit Suisse should not be deemed to have, any fiduciary
duty to the Range board of directors, Range, Memorial, any security holder or creditor of Range or Memorial
or any other person, regardless of any prior or ongoing advice or relationships.
The following is a summary of certain financial analyses reviewed by Credit Suisse with the Range board of
directors in connection with the rendering of its opinion to the Range board of directors on May 15, 2016.
The summary does not contain all of the financial data holders of Range common stock may want or need
for purposes of making an independent determination of fair value. Holders of Range common stock are
encouraged to consult their own financial and other advisors before making any investment decision in
connection with the proposed merger. The analyses summarized below include information presented in
tabular format. The tables alone do not constitute a complete description of the analyses. Considering the
data in the tables below without considering the full narrative description of the analyses—as well as the
methodologies underlying, and the assumptions, qualifications and limitations affecting, each analysis—
could create a misleading or incomplete view of Credit Suisse’s analyses.
For purposes of its analyses, Credit Suisse reviewed a number of financial metrics including:
•   Enterprise Value—generally the value as of a specified date of the relevant company’s outstanding
equity securities (taking into account its options and other outstanding convertible securities) plus the
value as of such date of its net debt (the value of its outstanding indebtedness, preferred stock and capital
lease obligations less the amount of cash on its balance sheet).
•   EBITDAX—generally the amount of the relevant company’s earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation
and amortization and exploration expense for a specified time period.
Table of Contents
73
Unless the context indicates otherwise, (1) share prices for the selected companies used in the selected
companies analysis described below were as of May 13, 2016, (2) the transaction values for the selected
transactions analysis described below were calculated on an enterprise value basis based on the
consideration proposed to be paid in the selected transactions as of the date of announcement,
(3) estimates of future financial performance of Memorial used in the discounted cash flow analysis and the
net asset value analysis described below were based on the Range Projections for Memorial and
(4) estimates of future financial performance of Range used in the discounted cash flow analysis and the
net asset value analysis described below were based on the Range Reserves Model. Estimates of future
financial performance for the selected companies, including Memorial and Range, for the years ending
December 31, 2016 and 2017 listed below under the selected companies analysis used to select the implied
multiple ranges were based on publicly available research analyst estimates for those companies. Credit
Suisse was authorized by Range to rely upon the unaudited prospective financial and operating
information from the Range Model and the Range Projections for Memorial for 2016E and 2017E for its
selected companies analyses using First Call oil and gas pricing as of May 13, 2016. Credit Suisse was also
authorized by Range to rely upon the unaudited prospective financial and operating information from the
Range Reserves Model and the Range Projections for Memorial for its net asset value and discounted cash
flow analyses using NYMEX oil and gas pricing as of May 12, 2016 and the Range Projected Oil and Gas
Pricing Data.
Selected Companies Analyses
Credit Suisse considered certain financial data for Memorial, Range and selected companies with publicly
traded equity securities Credit Suisse deemed relevant. The selected companies were selected because
they were deemed to be similar to Memorial and Range in one or more respects.
The financial data reviewed included:
•   Enterprise Value as a multiple of estimated EBITDAX for the year ended December 31, 2016, or “2016E
EBITDAX”;
•   Enterprise Value as a multiple of estimated EBITDAX for the year ended December 31, 2017, or “2017E
EBITDAX”;
•   Enterprise Value as a multiple of the most recent publicly reported present value of estimated future pre-
tax oil and gas revenues, net of estimated direct expenses, discounted at an annual discount rate of 10%,
or “Pre-tax PV10%”;
•   Enterprise Value as a multiple of estimated daily production on a thousand cubic feet equivalent per day,
or “Mcfed,” basis for the year ended December 31, 2016, or “2016E Daily Production”; and
•   Enterprise Value as a multiple of estimated daily production on an Mcfed basis for the year ended
December 31, 2017, or “2017E Daily Production.”
74
Table of Contents
The selected companies and corresponding financial data based on publicly available research analyst
estimates were:
Company Name
EQT Corporation
Antero Resources Corporation
Cabot Oil and Gas Corporation
Southwestern Energy Company
Range
CONSOL Energy Inc.
Rice Energy Inc.
Gulfport Energy Corporation
Memorial
EBITDAX
2016E        
14.9x    
 
10.0x    
 
 
23.4x    
19.1x    
 
19.9x    
 
10.7x    
 
 
10.3x    
11.1x    
 
 
8.4x
2017E        
11.6x    
 
10.0x    
 
 
13.0x    
12.3x    
 
16.7x    
 
9.3x    
 
 
8.5x    
8.9x    
 
 
10.1x
Pre-Tax
PV10%
7.4x     $
 
2.3x    
3.4x    
 
 
3.7x    
 
2.8x    
 
1.9x    
3.9x    
 
 
5.5x    
4.5x
Enterprise Value /
Daily Production ($/Mcfed)  
    2017E      
    2016E         
4,945  
4,116  
6,788  
4,513  
6,384  
2,898  
3,822  
4,955  
8,345
5,325     $
 
4,842    
7,129    
 
 
3,924    
 
6,932    
 
2,973    
4,731    
 
 
5,812    
9,306
Memorial. Taking into account the results of the selected companies analysis, Credit Suisse applied
multiple ranges of 9.0x to 11.0x to Memorial’s 2016E EBITDAX based on the Case 1 Range Projections for
Memorial, 8.0x to 10.0x to Memorial’s 2017E EBITDAX based on the Case 1 Range Projections for Memorial,
9.0x to 11.0x to Memorial’s 2016E EBITDAX based on the Case 2 Range Projections for Memorial, 8.0x to
10.0x to Memorial’s 2017E EBITDAX based on the Case 2 Range Projections for Memorial, 3.0x to 5.0x to
Memorial’s Pre-tax PV10%, $8,000 to $10,000 per Mcfed to Memorial’s estimated daily production for 2016,
and $7,000 to $9,000 per Mcfed to Memorial’s estimated daily production for 2017. The selected companies
analysis indicated an implied reference range of $9.10 to $13.95 per share of Memorial common stock.
Range. Taking into account the results of the selected companies analysis, Credit Suisse applied multiple
ranges of 15.0x to 20.0x to Range’s 2016E EBITDAX based on Case 1 of the Range Model provided to
Credit Suisse by Range management and First Call oil and gas pricing, 10.0x to 15.0x to Range’s 2017E
EBITDAX based on Case 1 of the Range Model provided to Credit Suisse by Range management and First
Call oil and gas pricing, 15.0x to 20.0x to Range’s 2016E EBITDAX based on Case 2 of the Range Model
provided to Credit Suisse by Range management and First Call oil and gas pricing, 10.0x to 15.0x to
Range’s 2017E EBITDAX based on Case 2 of the Range Model provided to Credit Suisse by Range
management and First Call oil and gas pricing, 2.0x to 4.0x to Range’s Pre-tax PV10%, $6,000 to $8,000 per
Mcfed to Range’s estimated daily production for 2016 based on the Range Model provided to Credit Suisse
by Range management, and $5,000 to $7,000 per Mcfed to Range’s estimated daily production for 2017
based on the Range Model provided to Credit Suisse by Range management. The selected companies
analysis indicated an implied reference range of $28.43 to $48.86 per share of Range common stock.
The selected companies analysis indicated an implied exchange ratio reference range of 0.186 to 0.491 of a
share of Range common stock for each share of Memorial common stock, as compared to the exchange
ratio in the merger of 0.375 of a share of Range common stock for each share of Memorial common stock.
Net Asset Value Analysis
Memorial. Credit Suisse calculated implied net asset values of Memorial’s proved and unproved oil and gas
reserves based on the Range Reserve Information for Memorial, the Range Riskings for Memorial and the
Range Projections for Memorial. With respect to the Case 1 Range Projections for Memorial, at the direction
of Range management, Credit Suisse applied NYMEX oil and gas pricing as of May 12, 2016 with prices held
flat after 2020. With respect to the Case 2 Range Projections for Memorial, at the direction of Range
management, Credit Suisse applied the Range Projected Oil and Gas Pricing Data with prices held flat after
2020. For purposes of the Memorial Net Asset Value analysis, Credit Suisse applied discount rates ranging
from 10.0% to 12.0% to projected unlevered free cash flows. Taking into account the results of the net asset
value analysis for Memorial, adjustments for general and administrative expenses (including non-cash
general and administrative expenses
Table of Contents
75
that, according to Range management, were treated as a cash expense), adjustments for certain hedging
transactions by Memorial and the Estimated Value of the Southern Extension, the net asset value analysis
for Memorial indicated implied reference ranges of $5.22 to $6.40 per share of Memorial common stock
based on the Case 1 Range Projections for Memorial and $3.41 to $4.39 per share of Memorial common
stock based on the Case 2 Range Projections for Memorial.
Range. Credit Suisse calculated implied net asset values of Range’s proved, probable and possible oil and
gas reserves based on the Range Reserve Information for Range, the Range Riskings for Range and the
Range Reserves Model. With respect to the Case 1 of the Range Reserves Model, at the direction of Range
management, Credit Suisse applied NYMEX oil and gas pricing as of May 12, 2016 with prices held flat after
2020. With respect to the Case 2 of the Range Reserves Model, at the direction of Range management,
Credit Suisse applied the Range Projected Oil and Gas Pricing Data with prices held flat after 2020. For
purposes of the Range Net Asset Value analysis, Credit Suisse applied discount rates ranging from 11.0%
to 13.0% to projected unlevered free cash flows. Taking into account the results of the net asset value
analysis for Range, adjustments for general and administrative expenses (including non-cash general and
administrative expenses that, according to Range management, were treated as a cash expense) and
adjustments for certain hedging transactions by Range, the net asset value analysis for Range indicated
implied reference ranges of $13.59 to $21.95 per share of Range common stock based on the Case 1 of the
Range Reserves Model and $4.15 to $9.87 per share of Range common stock based on the Case 2 of the
Range Reserves Model.
The net asset value analysis indicated implied exchange ratio reference ranges of 0.238 to 0.471 of a share
of Range common stock for each share of Memorial common stock based on the Case 1 Range Projections
for Memorial and the Case 1 of the Range Reserves Model and 0.345 to 1.058 shares of Range common
stock for each share of Memorial common stock based on the Case 2 Range Projections for Memorial and
the Case 2 of the Range Reserves Model, as compared to the exchange ratio in the merger of 0.375 of a
share of Range common stock for each share of Memorial common stock.
Discounted Cash Flow Analysis
Memorial. Credit Suisse performed a discounted cash flow analysis of Memorial by calculating the
estimated net present value of the projected after-tax, unlevered, free cash flow of Memorial based on the
Range Reserve Information for Memorial, the Range Riskings for Memorial and the Range Projections for
Memorial. Credit Suisse applied a range of terminal value EBITDAX multiples of 6.0x to 8.0x to Memorial’s
estimated 2020E EBITDAX. The estimated net present value of the projected future cash flow and terminal
values were then calculated using discount rates ranging from 10.0% to 12.0%. For purposes of the
discounted cash flow analysis, Memorial’s projected non-cash general and administrative expenses were,
according to Range management, treated as a cash expense. The discounted cash flow analysis for
Memorial indicated implied reference ranges per share of Memorial common stock of $7.40 to $12.08 based
on the Case 1 Range Projections for Memorial and $4.83 to $8.62 based on the Case 2 Range Projections
for Memorial.
Range. Credit Suisse performed a discounted cash flow analysis of Range by calculating the estimated net
present value of the projected after-tax, unlevered, free cash flow of Range based on the Range Reserve
Information for Range, the Range Riskings for Range and the Range Reserves Model. Credit Suisse applied
a range of terminal value EBITDAX multiples of 9.0x to 11.0x to Range’s estimated 2020E EBITDAX. The
estimated net present value of the projected future cash flow and terminal values were then calculated
using discount rates ranging from 11.0% to 13.0%. For purposes of the discounted cash flow analysis,
Range’s projected non-cash general and administrative expenses were, according to Range management,
treated as a cash expense. The discounted cash flow analysis for Range indicated implied reference ranges
per share of Range common stock of $24.27 to $36.19 based on the Case 1 of the Range Reserves Model
and $12.39 to $20.71 based on the Case 2 of the Range Reserves Model.
The discounted cash flow analysis indicated implied exchange ratio reference ranges of 0.205 to 0.498 of a
share of Range common stock for each share of Memorial common stock based on the Case 1 Range
Projections
Table of Contents
76
for Memorial and the Case 1 of the Range Reserves Model and 0.233 to 0.695 of a share of Range common
stock for each share of Memorial common stock based on the Case 2 Range Projections for Memorial and
the Case 2 of the Range Reserves Model, as compared to the exchange ratio in the merger of 0.375 of a
share of Range common stock for each share of Memorial common stock.
Selected Transactions Analysis
Credit Suisse also considered the financial terms of certain business combinations and other transactions
that Credit Suisse deemed relevant. The selected transactions were selected because the target companies
or assets were deemed by Credit Suisse to be similar to Memorial in one or more respects. The financial
data reviewed included the implied Transaction Value as a multiple of:
•   EBITDAX for last twelve months, or LTM EBITDAX;
•   Proved reserves; and
•   Daily production.
The selected transactions and corresponding financial data were:
Date
Announced
07/11
11/10
12/09
07/07
01/07
06/06
04/06
Acquiror
BHP Billiton Ltd.
Chevron Corporation
Exxon Mobil
Corporation
Plains Exploration &
Production Co.
Forest Oil Corporation
Anadarko Petroleum
Corporation
Target
Petrohawk Energy
Corporation
Atlas Energy, Inc.
XTO Energy
Incorporated
Pogo Producing
Company
Houston Exploration
Company
Western Gas
Resources
Incorporated
Petrohawk Energy
KCS Energy
Transaction Value /
LTM
EBITDAX   
 
12.4x  
 
6.4x   
6.0x  
 
7.1x  
 
4.6x  
 
10.2x
Proved
Reserves
($/Mcfe)    
$
2.75  
 
5.08   
1.92  
 
2.85  
 
2.43  
 
4.11
5.7x
4.34
Daily
Production
($/Mcfed)  
$
18,426
53,941  
13,946
12,733
7,751
19,213
13,251
04/06
12/05
01/05
12/04
05/04
04/04
04/04
05/01
05/01
Corporation
ConocoPhillips Co.
Cimarex Energy Co.
Noble Energy, Inc.
Pioneer Natural
 
Resources Co.
  EnCana Corp.
Kerr-McGee Corp.
Kerr-McGee Corp.
Williams Companies,
Inc.
Incorporated
Burlington Resources
Incorporated
Magnum Hunter
Resources
Corporation
Patina Oil & Gas
Corp.
Evergreen
 
Resources, Inc.
  Tom Brown Inc.
Westport Resources
Corp.
HS Resources Inc.
Barrett Resources
Corp.
6.3x  
 
6.6x
9.0x  
 
12.6x  
 
7.8x   
6.5x  
 
6.7x   
9.2x
2.92  
 
2.14
2.01  
 
1.31  
 
2.09   
1.79  
 
1.28   
1.31
12,607
8,756
10,802
14,423
8,442  
7,762
7,348  
8,868
Taking into account the results of the selected transactions analysis, Credit Suisse applied a multiple range
of 7.0x to 9.0x to Memorial’s LTM EBITDAX, $2.00 to $2.50 per Mcfe to Memorial’s proved reserves as of
December 31, 2015, and $8,000 to $12,000 per Mcfed to Memorial’s daily production for the first quarter of
2016. The selected transactions analysis indicated an implied reference range per share of Memorial
common stock of $9.10 to $16.37. The selected transactions analysis for Memorial and the selected
companies analysis for Range indicated an implied exchange ratio reference range of 0.186 to 0.576 of a
share of Range common stock for each share of Memorial common stock as compared to the exchange
ratio in the merger of 0.375 of a share of Range common stock for each share of Memorial common stock.
Other Matters
Range retained Credit Suisse as its financial advisor in connection with the merger based on Credit
Suisse’s qualifications, experience and reputation as an internationally recognized investment banking and
financial advisory firm. Pursuant to the engagement letter between Range and Credit Suisse, Range has
agreed to pay
Table of Contents
77
Credit Suisse a fee of $11 million for its services of which $2 million became payable to Credit Suisse upon
the rendering of its opinion to the Range board of directors and the remainder of which is contingent upon
the consummation of the merger. In addition, Range has agreed to reimburse certain of Credit Suisse’s
expenses and to indemnify Credit Suisse and certain related parties for certain liabilities and other items
arising out of or related to its engagement.
Credit Suisse and its affiliates have provided other financial advice and services, and may in the future
provide financial advice and services, to Memorial, Range and their respective affiliates including Natural
Gas Partners (“NGP”), a group of private investment funds managed by NGP Energy Capital Management,
LLC, and a significant investor in Memorial, and certain entities affiliated or associated with NGP
(collectively with NGP, the “NGP Group”) for which Credit Suisse and its affiliates have received, and would
expect to receive, compensation including, during the past two years, (a) with respect to Memorial, having
acted as a co-managing underwriter of the initial public offering of Memorial common stock in June 2014
and co-managing underwriter of a follow-on offering of Memorial common stock in November 2014, (b) with
respect to Range, having acted as joint bookrunning lead managing underwriter of an offering of debt
securities of Range in May 2015 and (c) with respect to NGP, having provided certain securities distribution
services. In addition, Credit Suisse has been having discussions with representatives of a member of the
NGP Group regarding and has been mandated to participate in a potential offering of securities by such
entity for which Credit Suisse would expect to receive compensation. Credit Suisse is a full service
securities firm engaged in securities trading and brokerage activities as well as providing investment
banking and other financial services. In the ordinary course of business, Credit Suisse and its affiliates may
acquire, hold or sell, for its and its affiliates’ own accounts and the accounts of customers, any currency or
commodity that may be involved in the merger and equity, debt and other securities and financial
instruments (including bank loans and other obligations) of Memorial, Range and any other company that
may be involved in the merger, as well as provide investment banking and other financial services to such
companies and their affiliates.
Memorial’s Reasons for the Merger; Recommendation of the Memorial Board of Directors
In determining that the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement are fair to,
and in the best interests of Memorial stockholders, in approving, adopting and declaring advisable the
merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, and
in recommending the adoption of the merger agreement by Memorial stockholders, the Memorial board of
directors consulted with Memorial’s management, as well as with Memorial’s legal and financial advisors,
and considered a number of factors. The principal factors that the Memorial board of directors viewed as
being generally positive or favorable in coming to its determination and related recommendation are:
•   the aggregate value and composition of the consideration to be received in the merger by holders of
Memorial common stock;
•   based on the closing price of shares of Range common stock on the NYSE of $42.01 on May 13, 2016, the
last trading day before the public announcement of the merger agreement, the merger consideration
represented an implied value of $15.75 for each share of Memorial common stock, which represented a
premium of:
•
•
approximately 17.1% to the $13.45 per share closing price of Memorial common stock on May 13,
2016, the last trading day before the public announcement of the merger agreement; and
approximately 54.6% to the $10.19 per share volume-weighted average trading price of Memorial
common stock for the 30 trading days ended May 13, 2016, the last trading day before the public
announcement of the merger agreement;
•   following the merger, Memorial stockholders will have the opportunity as equity holders to participate in
the value of the combined company, including the expected future growth;
•   the combination of Range and Memorial will create a leading North American natural gas producer with
core positions in both Appalachia and Northern Louisiana, providing greater marketing
Table of Contents
78
capabilities and opportunities, with added beneficial exposure to growing natural gas and NGLs demand;
•   the fact that the merger diversifies Memorial from its pure-play nature, providing complementary resources,
including that:
•
•
Memorial’s U.S. Gulf Coast assets provide Range with improved gas differentials and enhanced
linkage between the Gulf Coast and Northeast natural gas and NGLs markets; and
Range’s size and scale should reduce Memorial stockholder exposure to standalone share price
volatility to individual well announcements on Memorial’s expansion acreage;
•   the merger should derisk the delineation and development of Memorial’s expansion acreage by creating a
combined company with enhanced size, scale and access to (and lower cost of) capital;
•   the merger will provide Memorial stockholders with the benefits of Range’s strong and extensive operating
history of maximizing asset value through optimizing long-term unconventional development;
•   the fact that the pro forma asset base, which will be weighted to the Marcellus and Utica shale plays, has
many established offset operators, deeper well control and is widely followed by Wall Street analysts and
investors;
•   the belief of the Memorial board of directors that the merger will be accretive to Memorial stockholders;
•   the expectation that the combined company will have greater financial and operational flexibility to pursue
acquisitions and other growth opportunities in Memorial’s current areas of focus, and in complementary
plays, as compared to Memorial on a standalone basis;
•   each of Range and Memorial has successfully employed a strategy of reducing costs, improving returns
and increasing cash flow;
•   the complementary nature of the skill sets for the technical teams of Range and Memorial;
•   the operating synergies attributable to the combination of the two companies, particularly with respect to
market access, operating expenses, improved drilling and targeting techniques and overhead expenses;
•   cost reductions through leveraging service provider relationships and reducing drilling or completion
times;
•   the benefits of the merger discussed would be amplified in the event that natural gas prices rise above the
current strip prices;
•   the merger will provide Memorial stockholders with increased trading liquidity, as Range’s common stock
has a larger average daily trading volume and public float than Memorial’s common stock;
•   the fact that the merger agreement provides that the Range board of directors must take all necessary
corporate action to appoint one Memorial independent director designated by the Memorial board of
directors to serve on the combined company’s board of directors, subject to consent by the Governance
and Nominating Committee of the Range board of directors;
•   the fact that the merger will qualify for federal income tax purposes as a reorganization within the meaning
of Section 368(a) of the Code, which means that the transaction will be a tax-free transaction for Memorial
stockholders; and
•   the financial analysis reviewed and discussed with the Memorial board of directors by representatives of
Barclays and Morgan Stanley, as well as the oral opinions of Barclays and Morgan Stanley rendered to
the Memorial board of directors on May 15, 2016, which opinions were subsequently confirmed by delivery
of written opinions dated May 15, 2016, to the effect that, as of such date and based upon and subject to
the qualifications, limitations, and assumptions stated in their respective opinions, from a
Table of Contents
79
financial point of view, the exchange ratio was fair to the stockholders of Memorial (other than holders of
excluded shares), each as more fully described below under the caption “— Opinions of Memorial’s
Financial Advisors” beginning on page 83.
In addition to considering the factors above, the Memorial board of directors also considered the following
factors:
•   the recommendation of the merger by Memorial management;
•   the knowledge of the Memorial board of directors of Memorial’s business, financial condition, results of
operations and prospects, as well as Range’s business, financial condition, results of operation and
prospects, taking into account the results of Memorial’s due diligence review of Range;
•   the fact that the exchange ratio is fixed and will not increase or decrease based upon changes in the
market price of Memorial or Range common stock between the date of the merger agreement and the date
of completion of the merger;
•   the review by the Memorial board of directors, in consultation with Memorial’s management and advisors,
of the structure of the merger and the terms and conditions of the merger agreement;
•   the belief of the Memorial board of directors, following consultation with management, Morgan Stanley and
Barclays, that it was unlikely that an alternative bidder could consummate a transaction that would be on
superior terms, and that would provide Memorial stockholders greater consideration, than is being
provided in connection with the merger;
•   the fact that the merger agreement nevertheless does not preclude a third party from making an unsolicited
competing proposal to Memorial and, under certain circumstances more fully described in “The Merger
Agreement—No Solicitation of Competing Proposals”, Memorial may furnish non-public information to and
enter into discussions with such third party regarding the competing proposal;
•   the right of the Memorial board of directors to change its recommendation to Memorial stockholders or to
terminate the merger agreement in order to accept a Memorial superior proposal, subject to certain
conditions (including considering any adjustments to the merger agreement proposed by Range and
payment to Range by Memorial of a $75,000,000 termination fee);
•   the right of the Memorial board of directors to change its recommendation to Memorial stockholders
regarding the merger upon the occurrence of an intervening event if it determines in good faith (after
consultation with its financial advisors and outside legal counsel) that the failure to take such action would
be inconsistent with its duties under applicable law;
•   that the termination fee of $75,000,000 and the no vote expense payment of $25,000,000, in each case
payable by Memorial to Range under the circumstances specified in the merger agreement, were not
unreasonable in the judgment of the Memorial board of directors after consultation with its legal and
financial advisors;
•   the support of the merger by MRD Holdco LLC, WHR Incentive LLC, Jay Graham and Anthony Bahr, as
evidenced by their execution of the voting and support agreement, and that these stockholders are
receiving the same per-share consideration in the merger as all other Memorial stockholders generally
and are not receiving, in connection with the merger, any other consideration or benefit not received by all
other Memorial stockholders generally;
•   the fact that the voting and support agreement would terminate upon any change in recommendation,
thereby relieving MRD Holdco LLC, WHR Incentive LLC, Jay Graham and Anthony Bahr of their
respective obligations to support the merger;
•   the fact that Range has agreed that it will not:
•
enter into, participate or engage in or continue any discussions or negotiations with respect to:
•   a merger, consolidation, combination or amalgamation with any person other than another
wholly-owned subsidiary of Range;
80
Table of Contents
•   an acquisition or agreement to acquire, any business or any corporation, partnership,
association or other business organization or division thereof; or
•   entry into any partnership, joint venture or similar arrangement involving a material investment
or expenditure of funds by Range or any of its subsidiaries,
in each case if such action would or would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially delay or materially
impede Range’s or Merger Sub’s ability to consummate any of the transactions contemplated by the
merger agreement; or
•
take any action that would or would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially delay or materially
impede the consummation of any of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
•   that the restrictions contemplated by the merger agreement on Memorial’s actions between the date of the
merger agreement and the completion of the merger are not, in the judgment of the Memorial board of
directors, unreasonable restrictions on the operation of Memorial’s business during that period;
•   the restrictions contemplated by the merger agreement on Range’s actions between the date of the merger
agreement and the completion of the merger;
•   the expectation that the merger will obtain all necessary regulatory approvals without unacceptable
conditions; and
•   the likelihood of consummating the merger on the anticipated schedule.
The Memorial board of directors weighed the foregoing against a number of potentially negative factors,
including:
•   that, because the merger agreement can be approved by holders of a majority of the outstanding Memorial
common stock, and MRD Holdco LLC, WHR Incentive LLC, Jay Graham and Anthony Bahr indirectly own
approximately 47.7% of the outstanding Memorial common stock and have entered into the voting and
support agreement with Range to vote in favor of the merger, the merger could be approved by the
affirmative vote of Memorial stockholders representing only a small percentage of the remaining
outstanding Memorial common stock;
•   that, because the merger consideration is based on a fixed exchange ratio rather than a fixed value,
Memorial stockholders bear the risk of a decrease in the trading price of Range common stock during the
pendency of the merger and the fact that the merger agreement does not provide Memorial with a value-
based termination right;
•   the restrictions on the conduct of Memorial’s business during the period between the execution of the
merger agreement and the completion of the merger as set forth in the merger agreement;
•   that Memorial stockholders will now be exposed to Marcellus-Utica basin differentials and infrastructure
constraints;
•   that the merger agreement imposes limitations on Memorial’s ability to solicit competing proposals or
terminate the merger agreement;
•   the right of the Range board of directors to change its recommendation to Range stockholders, subject to
certain conditions (including considering any adjustments to the merger agreement proposed by Memorial
and payment to Memorial of a $125,000,000 termination fee);
•   the right of the Range board of directors to terminate the merger agreement in order to accept a Range
superior proposal, subject to certain conditions (including payment to Memorial by Range of a
$300,000,000 termination fee);
•   the costs associated with the completion of the merger, including management’s time and energy and
potential opportunity cost;
Table of Contents
81
•   the risks and contingencies relating to the announcement and pendency of the merger (including the
likelihood of litigation brought by or on behalf of Memorial stockholders or Range stockholders challenging
the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement) and the risks and costs to
Memorial if the closing of the merger is not accomplished in a timely manner or if the merger does not
close at all, including potential employee attrition, the impact on Memorial’s relationships with third parties
and the effect termination of the merger agreement may have on the trading price of Memorial’s common
stock and Memorial’s operating results;
•   the challenges in absorbing the effect of any failure to complete the merger, including potential termination
fees and stockholder and market reactions;
•   the challenges inherent in the combination of two businesses of the size and complexity of Memorial and
Range, including the possible diversion of management attention for an extended period of time;
•   that forecasts of future financial and operational results of the combined company are necessarily
estimates based on assumptions and may vary significantly from future performance;
•   the risk of not being able to realize all of the anticipated cost savings and operational synergies between
Memorial and Range and the risk that other anticipated benefits might not be realized;
•   that Range’s obligation to close the merger is conditioned on a vote of its stockholders to approve the
issuance of Range common stock to be used as merger consideration;
•   that Memorial’s directors and executive officers have interests in the merger that may be different from, or
in addition to, the interests of Memorial stockholders generally, as more fully described under “The Merger
—Interests of Memorial Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger” beginning on page 114;
•   the terms of the merger agreement relating to no shop covenants and termination fees, and the potential
that such provisions might deter alternative bidders that might have been willing to submit a superior
proposal to Memorial;
•   that, under the terms of the merger agreement, Memorial will be required to pay to Range a termination fee
of $75,000,000 and to pay Range a no vote expense payment of $25,000,000 if the merger agreement is
terminated under certain circumstances (see “The Merger Agreement—Termination Fees and Expenses”
beginning on page 141);
•   that Memorial’s representations and interim operating covenants are more restrictive than Range’s
representations and interim operating covenants are, thereby giving Range more flexibility than Memorial
between signing and closing of the merger agreement;
•   that the potential benefits sought in the merger might not be fully realized;
•   that Memorial stockholders will be forgoing the potential benefits, if any, that could be realized by
remaining as stockholders of Memorial as a standalone entity;
•   the transaction costs to be incurred in connection with the merger; and
•   the risks of the type and nature described under “Risk Factors,” beginning on page 33 and the matters
described under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” beginning on page 31.
This discussion of the information and factors considered by the Memorial board of directors in reaching
its conclusions and recommendation includes the principal factors considered by the Memorial board of
directors, but is not intended to be exhaustive and may not include all of the factors considered by the
Memorial board of directors. In view of the wide variety of factors considered in connection with its
evaluation of the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, and the
complexity of these matters, the Memorial board of directors did not find it useful and did not attempt to
quantify, rank or assign any relative or specific weights to the various factors that it considered in reaching
its determination to approve the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement,
and to make its recommendation to Memorial stockholders.
Table of Contents
82
Rather, the Memorial board of directors viewed its decisions as being based on the totality of the
information presented to it and the factors it considered, including its discussions with, and questioning of,
members of Memorial’s management and outside legal and financial advisors. In addition, individual
members of the Memorial board of directors may have assigned different weights to different factors.
Memorial’s directors and executive officers have interests in the merger that may be different from, or in
addition to, the interests of Memorial stockholders generally, as more fully described under “The Merger—
Interests of Memorial Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger” beginning on page 114. The Memorial
board of directors was aware of and considered these potential interests, among other matters, in
evaluating the merger and in making its recommendation to Memorial stockholders.
The Memorial board of directors unanimously determined that the merger and the other transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement are fair to, and in the best interests of Memorial stockholders, and
approved, adopted and declared advisable the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by
the merger agreement, including the merger. The Memorial board of directors unanimously recommends
that Memorial stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger.
Opinions of Memorial’s Financial Advisors
Opinion of Barclays Capital Inc.
Memorial engaged Barclays Capital Inc. to act as its financial advisor with respect to the merger. On May 15,
2016, Barclays rendered its oral opinion (which was subsequently confirmed in writing) to the Memorial
board of directors that, as of such date and based upon and subject to the qualifications, limitations and
assumptions stated in its opinion, the exchange ratio provided for in the merger is fair, from a financial
point of view, to the holders of Memorial common stock (other than excluded shares).
The full text of Barclays’ written opinion, dated as of May 15, 2016, is attached as Annex C to this Proxy
Statement. Barclays’ written opinion sets forth, among other things, the assumptions made, procedures
followed, factors considered and limitations upon the review undertaken by Barclays in rendering its
opinion. You are encouraged to read the opinion carefully in its entirety. The following is a summary of
Barclays’ opinion and the methodology that Barclays used to render its opinion. This summary is qualified
in its entirety by reference to the full text of the opinion.
Barclays’ opinion, the issuance of which was approved by Barclays’ Fairness Opinion Committee, is
addressed to the Memorial board of directors, addresses only the fairness, from a financial point of view, of
the exchange ratio to the holders of Memorial common stock (other than excluded shares) and does not
constitute a recommendation to any stockholder of Memorial as to how such stockholder should vote with
respect to the merger or any other matter. The terms of the merger were determined through arm’s-length
negotiations between Memorial and Range and were unanimously approved by the Memorial board of
directors. Barclays did not recommend any specific form of consideration to Memorial or that any specific
form of consideration constituted the only appropriate consideration for the merger. Barclays was not
requested to address, and its opinion does not in any manner address, Memorial’s underlying business
decision to proceed with or effect the merger. In addition, Barclays expressed no opinion on, and its does
not in any manner address, the fairness of the amount or the nature of any compensation to any officers,
directors or employees of any parties to the merger, or any class of such persons, relative to the
consideration to be offered to the stockholders of Memorial in the merger. No limitations were imposed by
the Memorial board of directors upon Barclays with respect to the investigations made or procedures
followed by it in rendering its opinion.
In arriving at its opinion, Barclays, among other things:
•   reviewed and analyzed the merger agreement, including all ancillary documents thereto, and the specific
terms of the merger;
Table of Contents
83
•   reviewed and analyzed publicly available information concerning Memorial and Range that Barclays
believed to be relevant to its analysis, including, without limitation, each of Memorial’s and Range’s
Annual Reports on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015 and Quarterly Reports on
Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2016;
•   reviewed and analyzed certain financial and operating information with respect to the business, operations
and prospects of Memorial furnished to Barclays by Memorial, including financial projections prepared by
Memorial’s management;
•   reviewed and analyzed certain financial and operating information with respect to the business, operations
and prospects of Range furnished to Barclays by Range, including financial projections prepared by
Range’s management;
•   reviewed and analyzed estimates of certain proved, probable and possible reserves (the “Memorial 3P
Reserves”), as of April 1, 2016, for Memorial as prepared by the management of Memorial (the “Memorial
Reserve Report”);
•   reviewed and analyzed estimates of certain proved, probable and possible reserves (the “Range 3P
Reserves”), as of April 1, 2016, for Range as prepared by management of Range (the “Range Reserve
Report”);
•   reviewed and analyzed the trading history of Memorial’s common stock and Range’s common stock from
June 13, 2014 through May 13, 2016 and a comparison of such trading history with those of other
companies that Barclays deemed relevant;
•   reviewed and analyzed a comparison of the historical financial results and present financial condition of
Memorial and Range with each other and with those of other companies that Barclays deemed relevant;
•   reviewed and analyzed a comparison of the financial terms of the merger with the financial terms of certain
other transactions that Barclays deemed relevant;
•   reviewed and analyzed the pro forma impact of the merger on the future financial performance of the
combined company, including the amounts and timing of the cost savings and operating synergies
expected by the management of Memorial from a combination of the businesses and other strategic
benefits expected by the managements of each of Memorial and Range to result from a combination of the
businesses;
•   reviewed and analyzed published estimates of independent research analysts with respect to the future
financial performance and price targets of Memorial and Range;
•   reviewed and analyzed the relative contributions of Memorial and Range to the future financial and
operating performance of the combined company on a pro forma basis;
•   reviewed and analyzed commodity price assumptions and the outlook for future commodity prices
published by independent information service providers;
•   held discussions with the management of each of Memorial and Range concerning their respective
businesses, operations, assets, liabilities, financial condition and prospects; and
•   undertook such other studies, analyses and investigations as Barclays deemed appropriate.
In arriving at its opinion, Barclays assumed and relied upon the accuracy and completeness of the financial
and other information used by Barclays without any independent verification of such information. Barclays
also relied upon the assurances of the management of each of Memorial and Range that they were not
aware of any facts or circumstances that would make such information inaccurate or misleading. With
respect to the financial projections of Memorial, upon the advice of Memorial, Barclays assumed that such
projections were reasonably prepared on a basis reflecting the best currently available estimates and
judgments of the management of Memorial as to Memorial’s future financial performance and that Memorial
would perform substantially in accordance with such projections. With respect to the Memorial Reserve
Report, Barclays discussed this reserve
Table of Contents
84
database with the management of Memorial and upon the advice of Memorial, Barclays assumed that the
Memorial Reserve Report was a reasonable basis on which to evaluate the Memorial 3P Reserves. However,
for purposes of its analysis, Barclays also considered certain somewhat more conservative assumptions
and estimates which resulted in certain adjustments to the Memorial 3P Reserves. Barclays discussed
these adjusted Memorial 3P Reserves with the management of Memorial and they agreed with the
appropriateness of the use of such adjusted Memorial 3P Reserves in performing the analysis and Barclays
relied upon such projections in arriving at its opinion. With respect to the financial projections of Range,
upon the advice of Memorial and Range, Barclays assumed that such projections were reasonably
prepared on a basis reflecting the best currently available estimates and judgments of the management of
Range as to Range’s future financial performance and that Range would perform substantially in
accordance with such projections. With respect to the Range Reserve Report, Barclays discussed this
reserve database with the management of each of Memorial and Range and upon the advice of Memorial
and Range, Barclays assumed that the Range Reserve Report was a reasonable basis on which to evaluate
the Range 3P Reserves. However, for purposes of its analysis, Barclays also considered certain somewhat
more conservative assumptions and estimates which resulted in certain adjustments to the Range 3P
Reserves. Barclays discussed these adjusted Range 3P Reserves with the management of Memorial and
they agreed with the appropriateness of the use of such adjusted Range 3P Reserves in performing the
analysis and Barclays relied upon such projections in arriving at its opinion. In arriving at its opinion,
Barclays assumed no responsibility for and expressed no view as to any such projections or estimates or
the assumptions on which they were based. In arriving at its opinion, Barclays did not conduct a physical
inspection of the properties and facilities of Memorial or Range and did not make or obtain any evaluations
or appraisals of the assets or liabilities of Memorial or Range. Barclays’ opinion was necessarily based
upon market, economic and other conditions as they existed on, and could be evaluated as of, May 15,
2016. Barclays assumed no responsibility for updating or revising its opinion and expressly disclaimed any
responsibility to do so based on events or circumstances that may have occurred after May 15, 2016.
In connection with rendering its opinion, Barclays performed certain financial, comparative and other
analyses as summarized below. In arriving at its opinion, Barclays did not ascribe a specific range of values
to the shares of Memorial common stock but rather made its determination as to fairness, from a financial
point of view, to holders of Memorial common stock (other than excluded shares) of the exchange ratio
provided for in the merger on the basis of various financial and comparative analyses. The preparation of a
fairness opinion is a complex process and involves various determinations as to the most appropriate and
relevant methods of financial and comparative analyses and the application of those methods to the
particular circumstances. Therefore, a fairness opinion is not readily susceptible to summary description.
In arriving at its opinion, Barclays did not attribute any particular weight to any single analysis or factor
considered by it but rather made qualitative judgments as to the significance and relevance of each
analysis and factor relative to all other analyses and factors performed and considered by it and in the
context of the circumstances of the particular transaction. Accordingly, Barclays believes that its analyses
must be considered as a whole, as considering any portion of such analyses and factors, without
considering all analyses and factors as a whole, could create a misleading or incomplete view of the
process underlying its opinion.
The following is a summary of the material financial analyses used by Barclays in preparing its opinion to
the Memorial board of directors. Certain financial analyses summarized below include information
presented in tabular format. In order to fully understand the financial analyses used by Barclays, the tables
must be read together with the text of each summary, as the tables alone do not constitute a complete
description of the financial analyses. In performing its analyses, Barclays made numerous assumptions
with respect to industry performance, general business and economic conditions and other matters, many
of which are beyond the control of Memorial or any other parties to the merger. None of Memorial, Range,
Medina Merger Sub, Inc., Barclays or any other person assumes responsibility if future results are
materially different from those discussed. Any estimates contained in these analyses are not necessarily
indicative of actual values or predictive of future results or values, which may be significantly more or less
favorable than as set forth below. In addition, analyses
Table of Contents
85
relating to the value of the businesses do not purport to be appraisals or reflect the prices at which the
businesses may actually be sold.
Summary of Analyses
The following is a summary of the principal financial analyses performed by Barclays with respect to
Memorial and Range in preparing Barclays’ opinion:
•   net asset valuation analyses;
•   comparable company analysis; and
•   comparable transaction analysis.
Each of these methodologies was used to generate reference enterprise and equity value ranges for each
of Memorial and Range. The enterprise value ranges for each company were adjusted for appropriate on-
balance sheet and off-balance sheet assets and liabilities to arrive at implied equity value ranges (in
aggregate dollars) for each company, including, as applicable without limitation, the after-tax estimated
value impact of each company’s current commodity hedging portfolio, net debt, future estimated general
and administrative expenses, and, additionally for Memorial, the value impact of minimum volume
commitments and, additionally for Range, the value impact of acreage not included in the Range Reserve
Report and the value impact of Range’s divestiture of Oklahoma assets announced on April 28, 2016. The
implied equity value ranges for each of Memorial and Range were then divided by diluted shares
outstanding, consisting of primary shares and incorporating the dilutive effect of outstanding options and
other dilutive securities, as appropriate, in order to derive implied equity value ranges per share for each
company. For the net asset valuation analysis, the comparable company analysis, and the comparable
transaction analysis the implied equity value range per share of Memorial common stock and per share of
Range common stock were used to derive implied exchange ratios which were then compared to the
exchange ratio provided for in the merger.
In addition to analyzing the value of the common stock of Memorial and Range and implied exchange
ratios, Barclays also analyzed and reviewed: (i) the relative financial and operating contribution of Memorial
and Range to the pro forma company; (ii) certain publicly available information related to selected corporate
transactions to calculate the amount of the premiums paid by the acquirers to the acquired company’s
stockholders; (iii) the pro forma impact to the combined company of the merger on projected discretionary
cash flow (“DCF”), production and reserves; (iv) the publicly available price targets published by
independent Wall Street research analysts; (v) the historical exchange ratios of Memorial common stock
and Range common stock for the period from June 13, 2014 to May 13, 2016 and (vi) the daily historical
closing prices of Memorial common stock and Range common stock for the period from June 13, 2014 to
May 13, 2016.
Net Asset Valuation Analyses
Barclays estimated the present value of the future after-tax cash flows expected to be generated from the
Memorial 3P Reserve Report and the Range 3P Reserve Report based on reserve, production, and capital
and operating cost estimates as of April 1, 2016 provided by Memorial and Range, respectively. The present
value of the future after-tax cash flows was determined using a range of discount rates and risking factors
and assuming a tax rate of 35%. Barclays then adjusted the present values of the cash flows by adding or
subtracting as applicable: (i) the value impact of after-tax general and administrative costs for both
Memorial and Range, calculated based on assumed normalized multiples for each company; (ii) the
discounted value of hedges for each company; (iii) the value impact of minimum volume commitment
deficiency payments for Memorial; (iv) the value impact of Range’s divestiture of Oklahoma assets
announced on April 28, 2016 for Range; and (v) the value impact of acreage not included in the Range 3P
Reserve Report for Range.
Certain of the oil and natural gas price scenarios employed by Barclays were based on New York
Mercantile exchange, or NYMEX, price forecasts (Henry Hub, Louisiana delivery for natural gas and West
Texas Intermediate, Cushing Oklahoma delivery for oil) to which adjustments were made to reflect location
and quality
Table of Contents
86
differentials. NYMEX gas price quotations stated in heating value equivalents per million British Thermal
Units, or Mmbtu, were adjusted to reflect the value per thousand cubic feet, or Mcf, of gas. NYMEX oil price
quotations are stated in dollars per barrel, or Bbl, of crude oil.
The following table summarizes the oil and natural gas price scenarios Barclays employed to estimate the
future after-tax cash flows for each of the reserve categories Barclays considered for Memorial and Range.
Case I reflects an approximation of the NYMEX strip as of the close of business on May 13, 2016. For 2016E
– 2019E, Case II reflects the median of the Wall Street research analysts’ estimates as calculated by
Bloomberg as of the close of business on May 13, 2016. The Case III price case represents a low commodity
price case and the Case IV price case represents a high commodity price case, in each case relative to the
NYMEX Strip case and held constant over the period of time set forth below. Based on its experience in the
oil and gas exploration and production industry, Barclays determined Case III and IV to be appropriate
sensitivities to the Case I Strip and the Case II Consensus.
Gas – Henry Hub ($/Mmbtu)
Case I Strip
Case II Consensus
Case III
Case IV
Crude Oil – WTI ($/Bbl)
Case I Strip
Case II Consensus
Case III
Case IV
Natural Gas Liquids ($/Bbl)
Case I Strip
Case II Consensus
Case III
Case IV
2016E     2017E     2018E     2019E    
  
  
   $ 2.32     $ 2.92     $ 2.94     $ 2.96     $
   $ 2.35     $ 2.90     $ 3.00     $ 3.01     $
   $ 2.50     $ 2.50     $ 2.50     $ 2.50     $
   $ 3.50     $ 3.50     $ 3.50     $ 3.50     $
2016E     2017E     2018E     2019E    
  
  
   $46.60     $49.40     $50.18     $51.14     $
   $42.32     $52.65     $58.50     $63.00     $
   $45.00     $45.00     $45.00     $45.00     $
   $70.00     $70.00     $70.00     $70.00     $
2016E     2017E     2018E     2019E    
  
  
   $18.64     $19.76     $20.07     $20.46     $
   $16.93     $21.06     $23.40     $25.20     $
   $18.00     $18.00     $18.00     $18.00     $
   $28.00     $28.00     $28.00     $28.00     $
2020E /
Thereafter
3.05  
3.25  
2.50  
3.50
2020E /
Thereafter
52.32  
63.00  
45.00  
70.00
2020E /
Thereafter
20.93  
25.20  
18.00  
28.00
These net asset valuation analyses yielded valuations for Memorial and Range that implied an exchange
ratio range of 0.2062 to 0.4502 of a share of Range common stock for each share of Memorial common
stock for Case I, an exchange ratio of 0.2108 to 0.4158 of a share of Range common stock for each share of
Memorial common stock for Case II, an exchange ratio of 0.1160 to 0.5050 of a share of Range common
stock for each share of Memorial common stock for Case III, and an exchange ratio of 0.2201 to 0.3948 of a
share of Range common stock for each share of Memorial common stock for Case IV, in each case as
compared to the proposed exchange ratio of 0.375 of a share of Range common stock for each share of
Memorial common stock. Barclays noted that the proposed exchange ratio was in line with the range of
implied exchange ratios under each of the four price scenarios as yielded by Barclays’ net asset valuation
analyses for Memorial and Range.
Selected Comparable Company Analysis
In order to assess how the public market values shares of similar publicly traded companies, Barclays
reviewed and compared specific financial and operating data relating to Memorial and Range with selected
companies that Barclays, based on its experience in the oil and gas exploration and production ( “E&P”)
industry, deemed comparable to Memorial and Range.
87
Table of Contents
With respect to Memorial, the selected comparable companies were:
•   Antero Resources Corporation
•   Cabot Oil & Gas Corporation
•   EQT Corporation
•   Gulfport Energy Corporation
•   PDC Energy, Inc.
•   Range
•   Rice Energy Inc.
With respect to Range, the selected comparable companies were:
•   Antero Resources Corporation
•   Cabot Oil & Gas Corporation
•   EQT Corporation
•   Gulfport Energy Corporation
•   Rice Energy Inc.
Barclays calculated and compared various financial multiples and ratios of Memorial and Range and their
selected comparable companies, respectively. As part of its selected comparable company analysis,
Barclays calculated and analyzed the ratio of equity value to discretionary cash flow for 2016 and 2017
based on Wall Street research estimates per FactSet Research Systems (“FactSet”), an independent third
party data provider. In addition, Barclays calculated and analyzed the ratio of enterprise value to earnings
before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization and exploration expense (“EBITDAX”) for 2016 and
2017 based on Wall Street research estimates per FactSet, latest quarter average daily production as of
March 31, 2016 (measured in Mmcfed), and proved reserves as of December 31, 2015 (measured in Bcfe),
pro forma for any acquisition and divestiture activity. The enterprise value of each company was obtained
by adding its short and long-term debt to the sum of the market value of its common equity and subtracting
its cash and cash equivalents. All of these calculations were performed, and based on publicly available
financial data including company filings and FactSet estimates and closing prices, as of May 13, 2016, the
last trading date prior to the delivery of Barclays’ opinion.
The results from the Memorial comparable companies analysis are summarized below:
Equity Value to 2016 Discretionary Cash Flow
Equity Value to 2017 Discretionary Cash Flow
Enterprise Value to 2016 EBITDAX
Enterprise Value to 2017 EBITDAX
Enterprise Value to Latest Daily Production ($/Mcfed)
Enterprise Value to Proved Reserves ($/Mcfe)
Low     
  6.3x    
  4.8x    
  7.2x    
  7.0x
High      Median     Mean  
  
  12.2x  
  
  9.4x  
  
  13.6x  
  
  
  10.7x  
   $4,832     $10,564     $ 6,061     $6,140  
   $ 0.55     $
2.46     $ 1.48     $ 1.43
23.6x    
  17.1x    
  23.8x    
  17.4x
10.9x    
 
8.7x    
  10.9x    
9.3x
The results from the Range comparable companies analysis are summarized below:
Equity Value to 2016 Discretionary Cash Flow
Equity Value to 2017 Discretionary Cash Flow
Enterprise Value to 2016 EBITDAX
Enterprise Value to 2017 EBITDAX
Enterprise Value to Latest Daily Production ($/Mcfed)
Enterprise Value to Proved Reserves ($/Mcfe)
88
Table of Contents
Low     
  6.3x    
  4.8x    
  9.5x    
  8.4x
High      Median     Mean  
  
  11.9x  
  23.6x    
  
  8.4x  
  13.2x    
  
  23.8x    
  13.7x  
  
  
  10.0x  
  13.2x    
   $2,722     $6,878     $ 4,843     $5,067  
   $ 0.55     $ 2.46     $ 1.48     $ 1.41
10.9x    
 
8.7x    
  10.9x    
9.3x
Barclays selected the comparable companies listed above because their businesses and operating profiles
are reasonably similar to that of Memorial or Range, as applicable. However, because no selected
comparable company is exactly the same as Memorial or Range, Barclays believed that it was inappropriate
to, and therefore did not, rely solely on the quantitative results of the selected comparable company
analysis. Accordingly, Barclays also made qualitative judgments concerning differences between the
respective businesses, financial and operating characteristics and prospects of each of Memorial and
Range and the selected comparable companies that could affect the public trading values of each in order
to provide a context in which to consider the results of the quantitative analysis. These qualitative
judgments related primarily to the differing sizes, growth prospects, profitability levels and degree of
operational risk between Memorial and Range and the companies included in the selected company
analysis.
Based upon these judgments, Barclays’ comparable company analysis yielded an exchange ratio range of
0.2223 to 0.5668 of a share of Range common stock for each share Memorial common stock. Barclays
noted that the exchange ratio of 0.375 of a share of Range common stock for each share Memorial common
stock provided for in the merger falls within the range of implied exchange ratios as calculated by Barclays’
comparable company analysis.
Selected Precedent Transaction Analysis
Barclays reviewed and compared the purchase prices and financial multiples paid in selected other
transactions in the oil and gas industry that Barclays, based on its experience with merger and acquisition
transactions, deemed relevant. Barclays chose such transactions based on, among other things, the
similarity of the applicable target companies in the transactions to Memorial and Range with respect to the
size, focus, commodity mix, reserve profile, margins and other characteristics of their businesses.
The reasons for and the circumstances surrounding each of the selected precedent transactions analyzed
were diverse and there are inherent differences in the respective businesses, operations, financial
condition and prospects of each of Memorial and Range and the companies included in the selected
precedent transaction analysis. Accordingly, Barclays believed that a purely quantitative selected
precedent transaction analysis would not be particularly meaningful in the context of considering the
merger. Barclays therefore made qualitative judgments concerning differences between the characteristics
of the selected precedent transactions and the merger which would affect the acquisition values of the
selected target companies, Memorial and Range. The criteria used in selecting, from the IHS Herold M&A
database, the transactions analyzed included all transactions: (i) with target corporations that are public
and private; (ii) announced since January 1, 2005 with upstream value greater than $500 million, and
(iii) where the target’s assets are primarily onshore the continental United States.
The following table sets forth the transactions analyzed based on such characteristics and the results of
such analysis:
Date
Announced
7/14/15
5/21/15
5/11/15
4/20/15
9/29/14
7/14/14
5/12/14
11/4/13
8/12/13
12/17/12
12/5/12
12/5/12
11/1/12
5/13/12
4/25/12
1/23/12
Table of Contents
Date
Announced
7/15/11
6/8/11
4/12/11
3/24/11
11/17/10
11/9/10
7/21/10
7/20/10
6/2/10
Target
RKI Exploration & Production, LLC
  Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P.
  Rosetta Resources Inc.
  LRR Energy, L.P.
  Athlon Energy Inc.
  Kodiak Oil and Gas Corp.
  Aurora Oil and Gas Limited, LLC
  Berry Petroleum Company
  Pioneer Southwest Energy Partners LP
  TLP Energy LLC
  Plains Exploration & Production Co.
  McMoRan Exploration Company
  Quantum Energy, Inc. / Ute Energy, LLC
  Riverstone Holdings LLC / Carlyle Group LP
  GeoResources, Inc.
  Cordillera Energy LLC / EnCap Investments LP
Acquirer
WPX Energy, Inc.
  Vanguard Natural Resources LLC
  Noble Energy, Inc.
  Vanguard Natural Resources LLC
  Encana Corporation
  Whiting Petroleum Corporation
  Baytex Energy Corp.
  Linn Energy, LLC / LinnCo, LLC
  Pioneer Natural Resources Co.
  Sabine Oil & Gas LLC
  Freeport-McMoRan Inc.
  Freeport-McMoRan Inc.
  Crescent Point Energy Corp.
  Concho Resources Inc.
  Halcon Resources Corporation
  Apache Corporation
89
Target
 
 
  BHP Billiton Ltd.
  Petrohawk Energy Corporation
  Exxon Mobil Corporation
  Phillips Resources, Inc.; TWP Inc.
  Eagle Rock Energy Partners LP
  Crow Creek Energy LLC / NGP
  Encore Energy Partners LP
  Vanguard Natural Resources LLC
  Denbury Resources Inc. / Encore Energy Partners LP   Vanguard Natural Resources LLC
  Atlas Energy, Inc.
Chevron Corporation
Acquirer
Ellora Energy Inc.
  Marbob Energy Corporation
Exxon Mobil Corporation
  Concho Resources Inc.
6/2/10
4/15/10
3/23/10
12/14/09
11/1/09
8/3/09
6/5/08
6/10/08
9/19/06
7/17/07
1/7/07
4/17/06
9/8/06
6/23/06
5/2/06
4/21/06
12/12/05
10/3/05
7/19/05
4/4/05
1/26/05
1/11/05
Arena Resources Inc.
  Mariner Energy Inc.
  Chaparral Energy LLC
  XTO Energy Incorporated
  Encore Acquisition Company
  Resolute Energy Corporation
  Henry Petroleum Corp.
  Hunt Petroleum Corporation
  Calumet Oil Company
  Pogo Producing Company
  The Houston Exploration Company
  Latigo Petroleum Inc.
  American Real Estate Partners LP
  Western Gas Resources Incorporated
  Chief Oil & Gas LLC
  KCS Energy Incorporated
  Burlington Resources Incorporated
  Columbia Natural Resources, LLC
  Medicine Bow Energy Corporation
  Mission Resources Corporation
  Magnum Hunter Resources Corporation
  Antero Resources Corporation
SandRidge Energy, Inc.
  Apache Corporation
  CCMP Capital Advisors, LP
  Exxon Mobil Corporation
  Denbury Resources Inc.
  Hicks Acquisition Co. I
  Concho Resources Inc.
  XTO Energy Incorporated
  Chaparral Energy LLC
  Plains Exploration & Production Co.
  Forest Oil Corporation
  Pogo Producing Company
  SandRidge Energy, Inc.
  Anadarko Petroleum Corporation
  Devon Energy Corporation
  Petrohawk Energy Corporation
  ConocoPhillips Co.
  Chesapeake Energy Corporation
  El Paso Corporation
  Petrohawk Energy Corporation
  Cimarex Energy Co.
  XTO Energy Incorporated
As part of its comparable transaction analysis, Barclays calculated and analyzed the ratio of enterprise
value to latest daily production and proved reserves. The enterprise value of each company was obtained
by adding its short and long-term debt to the sum of the market value of its common equity, and subtracting
its cash and cash equivalents. All of these calculations were performed and based on publicly available
financial data including company filings. The results of the comparable transactions analysis are
summarized below:
Enterprise Value to Latest Daily Production ($/Mcfed)
Enterprise Value to Proved Reserves ($/Mcfe)
High      Median     Mean  
  
   $7,800     $43,182     $16,912     $18,658  
   $ 1.22     $
3.70
3.35     $
Low
9.34     $
Based upon Barclays’ judgments as described above, Barclays’ comparable transaction analysis yielded
an implied exchange ratio range of 0.1424 to 0.3208 of a share of Range common stock for each share
Memorial common stock. Barclays noted that the exchange ratio to be offered to holders of Memorial
common stock of 0.375 of a share of Range common stock for each share Memorial common stock falls
above the range of implied exchange ratios as calculated by Barclays’ comparable transactions analysis.
Relative Contribution Analysis
Barclays reviewed and analyzed the relative equity contribution of Memorial and Range, respectively, to the
pro forma company based on selected asset metrics, including reserves and production, and financial
metrics,
Table of Contents
90
including DCF, in comparison to the pro forma equity received by Memorial stockholders in the pro forma
company. The analysis excluded synergies. For the selected asset metrics, the relative equity contribution
was calculated by multiplying Memorial’s percent asset contribution by the market enterprise value of the
combined company (assuming no premium), based on prices as of May 13, 2016, and subtracting short and
long-term debt and adding cash and cash equivalents.
Barclays reviewed and analyzed Memorial and Range’s contribution of reserves of the combined company
on a proved (“1P”), proved plus probable (“2P”) and proved plus probable plus possible (“3P”) basis,
based on the Memorial 3P Reserves and the Range 3P Reserves. Memorial contributed approximately 5.7%,
6.9% and 23.7% of the pro forma equity value based on 1P, 2P and 3P reserves, respectively. Barclays also
reviewed and analyzed Memorial and Range’s contribution of production based on Memorial’s
management and Range’s management estimates of production each for 2016 and 2017. Memorial
contributed 19.6% and 22.6% of the pro forma equity value based on 2016 and 2017 estimated production,
respectively. Barclays also reviewed and analyzed Memorial and Range’s estimated contribution of
production for 2016, 2017 and 2018 based on Wall Street research analysts’ estimates provided by FactSet.
Memorial contributed 20.0%, 21.1% and 27.0% of the pro forma equity value of the combined company for
2016, 2017 and 2018 production, respectively. Further, Barclays reviewed and analyzed Memorial and
Range’s DCF contribution, on a hedged and unhedged basis, for 2016 and 2017 to the combined company
based on estimates provided by the management of each of Memorial and Range. Barclays noted that
Memorial contributed 51.1% and 39.6% of the pro forma equity value based on 2016 and 2017, respectively,
on a hedged basis, and 66.4% and 34.6% of the pro forma equity value based on 2016 and 2017,
respectively, on an unhedged basis. Barclays also reviewed and analyzed the DCF contribution based on
Wall Street estimates provided by FactSet for 2016, 2017 and 2018 for Memorial and Range. Barclays noted
that Memorial contributed 52.6%, 44.6% and 35.7% pro forma equity value for 2016, 2017 and 2018,
respectively, to the combined company. Barclays noted that the pro forma ownership received by Memorial
stockholders in the merger of 31.1% was greater than the equity contribution based on selected asset
metrics and less than the equity contribution based on financial metrics. Barclays notes that the primary
shortcoming of a contribution analysis is that it treats all cash flow, reserves and production the same
regardless of capitalization, expected growth rates, upside potential, risk profile or credit profile.
Transaction Premium Analysis
In order to assess the premium offered to the stockholders of Memorial in the merger relative to the
premiums offered to stockholders in other transactions, Barclays reviewed the premiums paid in the oil and
gas industry in all public transactions of E&P companies domiciled in the U.S. valued between $250 million
and $10 billion from January 1, 2004 to May 13, 2016. For each transaction, Barclays calculated the premium
per share paid by the acquirer by comparing the announced transaction value per share to the target
company’s historical closing share price as of the following periods: (i) 1 trading day prior to
announcement; (ii) 5 trading days prior to announcement; (iii) 30 trading days prior to announcement, and
(iv) the 52-week high prior to announcement. Barclays selected 38 transactions for the transaction premium
analysis and highlighted the 12 transactions that reflected all stock transactions. The selected transactions
and results of this transaction premium analysis are summarized below:
Target
Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P.
  Rosetta Resources Inc.
  LRR Energy, L.P.
  Athlon Energy Inc.
  QR Energy, L.P.
  Kodiak Oil & Gas Corp.
  EPL Oil & Gas Inc.
  Crimson Exploration, Inc.
  Berry Petroleum Company, LLC
  GeoResources, Inc.
91
Acquirer
Vanguard Natural Resources LLC
  Noble Energy, Inc.
  Vanguard Natural Resources LLC
  EnCana Corporation
  BreitBurn Energy Partners LP
  Whiting Petroleum Corporation
  Energy XXI Ltd.
  Contango Oil and Gas Company
  LinnCo, LLC
  Halcon Resources Corporation
Date
Announced
05/21/15
05/11/15
04/21/15
09/29/14
07/24/14
07/13/14
03/12/14
04/30/13
02/21/13
04/25/12
Table of Contents
Date
Target
 
  Brigham Exploration Company
  Venoco, Inc.
  Encore Energy Partners LP
  Atlas Energy, Inc.
  American Oil & Gas Inc.
  Mariner Energy, Inc.
  Arena Resources Inc.
  Encore LP
  Parallel Petroleum Corp.
  Hiland Partners, LP / Hiland Holdings GP, LP
  Bois d’Arc Energy, Inc.
  Pogo Producing Company
  The Houston Exploration Company
  Cascade Natural Gas Corp.
  Western Gas Resources Incorporated
  KCS Energy Incorporated
  Remington Oil & Gas Corp.
  Spinnaker Natural Gas Corp.
  Tipperary Corporation
  Mission Resources Corporation
  Magnum Hunter Resources Corporation
  Patina Oil & Gas Corp.
  Prima Energy Corporation
  The Wiser Oil Co.
  Evergreen Resources, Inc.
  Tom Brown Inc.
  Westport Resources Corp.
  Nuevo Energy Co.
Date
Announced
10/17/11
08/29/11
03/25/11
11/09/10
07/27/10
04/15/10
04/04/10
11/01/09
09/15/09
01/15/09
04/30/08
07/17/07
01/07/07
07/08/06
06/23/06
04/21/06
01/23/06
09/19/05
07/01/05
04/04/05
01/26/05
12/16/04
06/09/04
05/24/04
05/04/04
04/15/04
04/07/04
02/12/04
Median
Mean
High
Low
Implied premium based on the exchange ratio provided for in the merger
(as of May 13, 2016 close)
Acquirer
Statoil ASA
  Venoco, Inc. Management
  Vanguard Natural Resources LLC
  Chevron Corporation
  Hess Corporation
  Apache Corporation
  Sand Ridge Energy, Inc.
  Denbury Resources Inc.
  Apollo Global Management LLC
  HH GP Holding, LLC
  Stone Energy Corporation
  Plains Exploration Co.
  Forest Oil Corporation
  MDU Resources Group Inc.
  Anadarko Petroleum Corporation
  Petrohawk Energy Corporation
  Cal Dive International Inc.
  Norsk Hydro ASA
  Santos Limited
  Petrohawk Energy Corporation
  Cimarex Energy Co.
  Noble Energy, Inc.
  Petro-Canada
  Forest Oil Corporation
  Pioneer Natural Resources Co.
  EnCana Corp.
  Kerr-McGee Corp.
  Plains Exploration & Production Co.
Premiums on Selected All-
Stock Deals
52-
Week
   1 Day     5 Days    30 Days    
High  
   11.6%      14.8%       18.8%       (6.3%)  
   12.9%      14.6%       17.7%      (17.9%)  
   37.7%      33.9%       37.2%       18.4%   
    (5.2%)      (4.6%)     
(2.0%)     (63.8%)
17.1%      31.7%       54.6%      (22.2%)
The reasons for and the circumstances surrounding each of the transactions analyzed in the transaction
premium analysis were diverse and there are inherent differences in the business, operations, financial
conditions and prospects of Memorial and the companies included in the transaction premium analysis.
Accordingly, Barclays believed that a purely quantitative transaction premium analysis would not be
particularly meaningful in the context of considering the merger. Barclays therefore made qualitative
judgments concerning the differences between the characteristics of the selected transactions and the
merger which would affect the acquisition values of the target companies and Memorial.
Pro Forma Merger Consequences Analysis
Barclays reviewed and analyzed the pro forma impact of the merger on projected DCF per share, proved
reserves per share and production per share for Memorial and Range, respectively. With respect to DCF per
share
Table of Contents
92
and production per share for Memorial and Range, Barclays reviewed the pro forma impact of these metrics
for 2016 and 2017 using projections provided by management of each of Memorial and Range as well as
Wall Street estimates provided by FactSet. Barclays noted that pro forma DCF per share would be dilutive
to Memorial standalone DCF per share for each of 2016 and 2017, respectively, and accretive to Range DCF
per share for each of 2016 and 2017, respectively. Barclays noted that pro forma proved reserves per share
and production per share would be accretive to Memorial standalone proved reserves per share and
production per share, respectively, and dilutive to Range standalone proved reserves per share and
production per share, respectively.
Analysis of Equity Research Analyst Price Targets
Barclays evaluated the publicly available price targets of Memorial and Range published by independent
equity research analysts associated with various Wall Street firms. The range of undiscounted analyst price
targets for Memorial common stock was $11.00 to $23.00 per share as of May 13, 2016 and the range of
undiscounted analyst price targets for Range common stock was $26.00 to $55.00 per share as of May 13,
2016.
Historical Exchange Ratio Analysis
To provide background information and perspective to the historical share prices of Memorial and Range
common stock, Barclays reviewed the daily historical closing prices of the Memorial common stock and
Range common stock over the period from June 13, 2014 to May 13, 2016. In addition, Barclays reviewed
the implied relative exchange ratio based on the average 5-day, 10-day, 20-day, 30-day, 60-day, 180-day, 1-
year and the period since June 13, 2014 share prices of Memorial common stock and Range common
stock, as of May 13, 2016. This analysis implied relative exchange ratios from 0.3016 to 0.4638 shares of
Range common stock per share of Memorial common stock.
Historical Share Price Analysis
To illustrate the trend in the historical trading prices of Memorial common stock, Barclays considered
historical data with regard to the trading prices of Memorial common stock for the period from June 13,
2014 to May 13, 2016 and compared such data with the relative stock price performances during the same
periods of Range, the PHLX SIG Oil Exploration and Production Index (the “EPX”) and a composite of the
selected companies listed under the caption “Selected Comparable Company Analysis” consisting of the
following companies: Antero Resources Corporation, Cabot Oil & Gas Corporation, EQT Corporation,
Gulfport Energy Corporation, PDC Energy, Inc. and Rice Energy Inc.
General
Barclays is an internationally recognized investment banking firm and, as part of its investment banking
activities, is regularly engaged in the valuation of businesses and their securities in connection with
mergers and acquisitions, investments for passive and control purposes, negotiated underwritings,
competitive bids, secondary distributions of listed and unlisted securities, private placements and
valuations for estate, corporate and other purposes. The Memorial board of directors selected Barclays
because of its familiarity with Memorial and its qualifications, reputation and experience in the valuation of
businesses and securities in connection with mergers and acquisitions generally, as well as its substantial
experience in transactions comparable to the merger.
Barclays is acting as financial advisor to Memorial in connection with the merger. As compensation for its
services in connection with the merger, Memorial paid Barclays $1,000,000 upon the delivery of Barclays’
opinion. Additional compensation of $12,500,000 will be payable on completion of the merger against which
the amount paid for the opinion will be credited. In addition, Memorial has agreed to reimburse Barclays for
a portion of its reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the merger and to indemnify
Barclays for certain liabilities that may arise out of its engagement by Memorial and the rendering of
Barclays’ opinion. Barclays has performed various investment banking and financial services for Memorial,
Range and their affiliates in the past, and is likely to perform such services in the future, and has received,
and is likely to
Table of Contents
93
receive, customary fees for such services. Specifically, in the past two years, Barclays has: (A) for
Memorial, acted or currently act, as applicable, (i) in September 2015, as sole bookrunner on Memorial’s
$243 million block trade; (ii) in November 2014, as a bookrunner on Memorial’s $790 million secondary
offering; (iii) in June 2014, as bookrunner on Memorial’s $600 million senior secured notes offering; (iv) in
June 2014, as an active bookrunner on Memorial’s $935 million initial public offering; and (v) as lender
under Memorial’s existing credit facilities; and (B) for Range, acted or currently act, as applicable, (i) in May
2015, as a bookrunner on Range’s $750 million senior notes offering and (ii) as lender under Range’s
existing credit facility. In addition Barclays and its affiliates in the past have provided, currently are
providing, or in the future may provide, investment banking services to NGP Energy Capital Management,
L.L.C. (“NGP”), and certain of its affiliates and portfolio companies and have received or in the future may
receive customary fees for rendering such services, including (i) having acted or acting as financial advisor
to NGP and certain of its portfolio companies and affiliates in connection with certain mergers and
acquisition transactions; (ii) having acted or acting as arranger, bookrunner and/or lender for NGP and
certain of its portfolio companies and affiliates in connection with the financing for various acquisition
transactions and (iii) having acted or acting as underwriter, initial purchaser and placement agent for
various equity and debt offerings by NGP and certain of its portfolio companies and affiliates.
Barclays and its affiliates engage in a wide range of businesses from investment and commercial banking,
lending, asset management and other financial and non-financial services. In the ordinary course of its
business, Barclays and affiliates may actively trade and effect transactions in the equity, debt and/or other
securities (and any derivatives thereof) and financial instruments (including loans and other obligations) of
Memorial and Range for their own account and for the accounts of their customers and, accordingly, may at
any time hold long or short positions and investments in such securities and financial instruments.
Opinion of Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC
Memorial retained Morgan Stanley to act as financial advisor to the Memorial board of directors in
connection with the proposed merger. The Memorial board of directors selected Morgan Stanley based on
Morgan Stanley’s qualifications, expertise and reputation. At the meeting of the Memorial board of directors
on May 15, 2016, Morgan Stanley rendered its oral opinion, subsequently confirmed in writing, that, as of
such date, based upon and subject to the various assumptions made, procedures followed, matters
considered and qualifications and limitations on the scope of the review undertaken by Morgan Stanley as
set forth in its written opinion, the exchange ratio pursuant to the merger agreement was fair, from a
financial point of view, to the holders of Memorial common stock (other than excluded shares).
The full text of the written opinion of Morgan Stanley, dated as of May 15, 2016, which sets forth, among
other things, the assumptions made, procedures followed, matters considered and qualifications and
limitations on the scope of the review undertaken by Morgan Stanley in rendering its opinion, is attached to
this joint proxy statement/prospectus as Annex D. You are encouraged to read the entire opinion carefully
and in its entirety. Morgan Stanley’s opinion was rendered for the benefit of the Memorial board of directors,
in its capacity as such, and addressed only the fairness from a financial point of view of the exchange ratio
pursuant to the merger agreement to the holders of Memorial common stock (other than excluded shares)
as of the date of the opinion. Morgan Stanley’s opinion does not address any the relative merits of the
transactions contemplated by the merger agreement as compared to other business or financial strategies
that might be available to Memorial, nor does it address the underlying business decision of Memorial to
enter into the merger agreement or proceed with any other transaction contemplated by the merger
agreement. In addition, Morgan Stanley’s opinion does not in any manner address the prices at which
Range common stock will trade following the consummation of the merger or at any time. The opinion was
addressed to, and rendered for the benefit of, the Memorial board of directors and was not intended to, and
does not, constitute advice or a recommendation to any holder of Memorial common stock as to how to
vote or act on any matter with respect to the merger. The summary of Morgan Stanley’s opinion set forth
below is qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the opinion.
Table of Contents
94
In connection with rendering its opinion, Morgan Stanley, among other things:
•   reviewed certain publicly available financial statements and other publicly available business and
financial information of Memorial and Range, respectively;
•   reviewed certain internal financial statements and other internal financial and operating data concerning
Memorial and Range, respectively;
•   reviewed certain financial and operating projections prepared by the managements of Memorial and
Range, respectively (for further information regarding these financial and operating projections, see the
section titled “— Certain Prospective Unaudited Financial and Operating Information of Range and
Memorial” beginning on page 108);
•   discussed the past and current operations and financial condition and the prospects of Memorial, including
information relating to certain strategic, financial and operational benefits anticipated from the merger, with
senior executives of Memorial;
•   discussed the past and current operations and financial condition and the prospects of Range, including
information relating to certain strategic, financial and operational benefits anticipated from the merger, with
senior executives of Range;
•   reviewed the pro forma impact of the merger on certain valuation multiples and financial ratios of Range;
•   reviewed the reported prices and trading activity for Memorial common stock and Range common stock;
•   compared the financial performance of Memorial and Range and the prices and trading activity of
Memorial common stock and Range common stock with that of certain other publicly-traded companies
comparable with Memorial and Range, respectively, and their securities;
•   reviewed the financial terms, to the extent publicly available, of certain comparable acquisition
transactions;
•   participated in discussions among representatives of Memorial and Range and their financial and legal
advisors;
•   reviewed the merger agreement and certain related documents; and
•   performed such other analyses, reviewed such other information and considered such other factors as
Morgan Stanley deemed appropriate.
In arriving at its opinion, Morgan Stanley assumed and relied upon, without independent verification, the
accuracy and completeness of the information that was publicly available or supplied or otherwise made
available to Morgan Stanley by Memorial and Range, and formed a substantial basis for its opinion. With
respect to the financial and operating projections, including information relating to certain strategic,
financial and operational benefits anticipated from the merger, Morgan Stanley assumed that they were
reasonably prepared on bases reflecting the best currently available estimates and judgments of the
respective managements of Memorial and Range of the future financial and operating performance of
Memorial and Range. In addition, Morgan Stanley assumed that the merger would be consummated in
accordance with the terms set forth in the merger agreement without any waiver, amendment or delay of
any terms or conditions, including, among other things, that the merger would be treated as a tax-free
reorganization, pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Morgan Stanley assumed that
in connection with the receipt of all the necessary governmental, regulatory or other approvals and
consents required for the proposed merger, no delays, limitations, conditions or restrictions would be
imposed that would have a material adverse effect on the contemplated benefits expected to be derived in
the proposed merger. Morgan Stanley is not a legal, tax or regulatory advisor. Morgan Stanley is a financial
advisor only and relied upon, without independent verification, the assessment of Range and Memorial and
their legal, tax or regulatory advisors with respect to legal, tax or regulatory matters. Morgan Stanley
Table of Contents
95
expressed no opinion with respect to the fairness of the amount or nature of the compensation to any of
Memorial’s officers, directors or employees, or any class of such persons, relative to the consideration to
be received by the holders of Memorial common stock in the merger. Morgan Stanley did not make any
independent valuation or appraisal of the assets or liabilities of Memorial or Range, nor was it furnished
with any such valuations or appraisals.
Morgan Stanley’s opinion was necessarily based on financial, economic, market and other conditions as in
effect on, and the information made available to Morgan Stanley as of, May 15, 2016. Events occurring after
May 15, 2016 may affect Morgan Stanley’s opinion and the assumptions used in preparing it, and Morgan
Stanley did not assume any obligation to update, revise or reaffirm its opinion. Morgan Stanley’s opinion
was limited to the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the exchange ratio to be received by the holders
of Memorial common stock (other than excluded shares) pursuant to the merger agreement and did not
address the relative merits of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement as compared to
other business or financial strategies that may be available to Memorial, nor did it address the underlying
business decision of Memorial to enter into the merger agreement or proceed with any other transaction
contemplated by the merger agreement.
Summary of Financial Analyses
The following is a brief summary of the material financial analyses performed by Morgan Stanley in
connection with its oral opinion and the preparation of its written opinion dated May 15, 2016. The following
summary is not a complete description of Morgan Stanley’s opinion or the financial analyses performed
and factors considered by Morgan Stanley in connection with rendering its opinion, nor does the order of
analyses described represent the relative importance or weight given to those analyses. In connection with
arriving at its opinion, Morgan Stanley considered all of its analyses as a whole and did not attribute any
particular weight to any analysis described below. Considering any portion of these analyses and factors
considered, without considering all analyses and factors, could create a misleading or incomplete view of
the process underlying Morgan Stanley’s opinion. The various analyses summarized below were based on
a closing price of $13.45 per share of Memorial common stock and of $42.01 per share of Range common
stock as of May 13, 2016, the last full trading day preceding the day of the special meeting of the Memorial
board of directors to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the
holders of Memorial common stock. Some of these summaries of financial analyses include information
presented in tabular format. In order to fully understand the financial analyses used by Morgan Stanley, the
tables must be read together with the text of each summary. The tables alone do not constitute a complete
description of the financial analyses. Furthermore, mathematical analysis (such as determining the average
or median) is not in itself a meaningful method of using the data referred to below.
In performing the financial analyses summarized below and in arriving at its opinion, Morgan Stanley
utilized and relied upon certain financial and operating projections provided by Memorial and Range
managements, which are referred to and described below. For further information regarding the financial
and operating projections, see the section titled “— Certain Prospective Unaudited Financial and Operating
Information of Range and Memorial” beginning on page 108.
On May 15, 2016, Memorial and Range entered into the merger agreement pursuant to which each share of
Memorial common stock (other than excluded shares, other than those held in a fiduciary capacity), will be
converted into the right to receive 0.375 of a share of Range common stock. Based on the closing price of
Range common stock on May 13, 2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the Memorial board of
directors to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the holders of Memorial
common stock), this exchange ratio represented an implied price of $15.75 per share of Memorial common
stock. Based on the
Table of Contents
96
exchange ratio and the pro forma fully diluted shares outstanding, Morgan Stanley calculated that, as a
result of the merger, Memorial’s stockholders would own approximately 31% of the fully diluted shares of
Range common stock.
Net Asset Valuation Analysis
Morgan Stanley estimated the present value of the future after-tax cash flows expected to be generated
from Memorial’s total proved and unproved reserves as of April 1, 2016 and Range’s total proved and
unproved reserves as of April 1, 2016, based on reserve, production and operating and capital cost
estimates provided by the management of Memorial, in addition to the value of non-reserve assets and
liabilities for each company. The present value of the future after-tax cash flows was determined using a
range of discount rates and assuming tax rates of 35% and 25%, which tax rate assumptions were provided
by Memorial management.
Morgan Stanley conducted net asset valuation analyses for each of Memorial and Range based on two
different commodity price assumptions: Strip and NYMEX Consensus. The Strip and NYMEX Consensus
price assumptions were based on NYMEX commodity prices as of May 13, 2016. The resultant realized
commodity price assumptions were as follows:
Henry Hub Price Assumptions
WTI Price Assumptions
Year
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020+
$
   $
   $
   $
   $
($/Mmbtu)
NYMEX
Consensus
Strip
2.32     
2.92     
2.94     
2.96     
3.05
$
$
$
$
$
2.35    
2.90    
3.00    
3.01    
3.25
($/Bbl)
NYMEX
Consensus  
42.32  
52.65  
58.50  
63.00  
63.00
$
$
$
$
$
Strip     
46.06     
49.40     
50.18     
51.14     
52.32
$
$
$
$
$
Based on certain publicly available information, estimates provided by Memorial management, the assumed
commodity prices described above and the assumed tax rates described above, Morgan Stanley calculated
the net asset value of Memorial by adding (i) the present value of the pre-tax cash flows generated by
Memorial management’s estimates of Memorial’s total proved and unproved reserves (discounted by
industry standard discount rates), less (ii) the book value of Memorial debt and certain other non-current
liabilities, plus (v) cash and the book value of other non-current assets, less (vi) the sum of the present
values (discounted by industry standard discount rates) of future general and administrative expenses,
corporate taxes and minimum volume commitments, plus (vii) the present value (discounted by industry
standard discount rates) of existing hedges.
Based on certain publicly available information, estimates provided by Memorial management, the assumed
commodity prices described above and the assumed tax rates described above, Morgan Stanley calculated
the net asset value of Range by adding (i) the present value of the pre-tax cash flows (discounted by
industry standard discount rates) generated by Memorial management’s estimates of Range’s total proved
and unproved reserves in the Marcellus Shale, Utica Shale and other regions, which were based on certain
information provided by Range management to Memorial management, less (ii) the book value of Range
debt and certain other non-current liabilities, less (iii) liabilities resulting from a divestiture of certain assets
in Oklahoma, plus (iv) cash and the book value of other non-current assets, less (v) the sum of the present
values (discounted by industry standard discount rates) of future general and administrative expenses and
corporate taxes, plus (vi) the present value (discounted by industry standard discount rates) of existing
hedges.
Table of Contents
97
These net asset valuation analyses yielded the following per share valuation ranges for Memorial and
Range based on industry standard discount rates and each of the Strip and NYMEX Consensus
commodity price assumptions at each of the 35% and 25% tax rates, as compared to the closing stock
prices of $13.45 per share and $42.01 per share for Memorial common stock and Range common stock,
respectively:
Memorial (Net Asset
Value per share)
Range (Net Asset Value
per share)
Strip at 35%
Strip at 25%
at 35%
at 25%
NYMEX Consensus
NYMEX Consensus
$ 7.38 – $ 10.02     $ 8.65 – $ 11.69     $
9.86 – $ 13.05     $
11.49 – $ 15.17
$21.90 – $31.42     $25.39 – $ 36.01     $
30.99 – $42.57     $
35.73 – $ 48.69
Morgan Stanley used the per share Net Asset Value ranges in the table above to calculate the
corresponding ranges of implied exchange ratios set forth in the table below. Morgan Stanley compared
these exchange ratios against the 0.375 exchange ratio pursuant to the merger agreement and an
exchange ratio of 0.3202, which is based on the respective closing prices of Memorial common stock and
Range common stock as of May 13, 2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the Memorial board
of directors to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the holders of Memorial
common stock).
Implied Exchange Ratio
Strip at 35%
Strip at 25%
NYMEX
Consensus
NYMEX
Consensus
Tax Rate
at 25% Tax Rate  
  
   0.2349x – 0.4575x     0.2402x – 0.4604x     0.2316x – 0.4211x     0.2360x – 0.4246x
at 35% Tax Rate
Tax Rate
Comparable Company Analysis
In order to assess how the public market values shares of similar publicly traded companies, Morgan
Stanley reviewed and compared specific financial and operating data relating to Memorial and Range with
selected companies that Morgan Stanley deemed comparable to Memorial and Range, based on size,
location of assets, expected growth and leverage profile.
With respect to Memorial, the companies used in the comparisons consisted of the following companies:
•   EQT Corporation
•   Antero Resources Corporation
•   Cabot Oil & Gas Corporation
•   Range
•   Rice Energy Inc.
•   Gulfport Energy Corporation
•   PDC Energy, Inc.
With respect to Range, the companies used in the comparisons consisted of the following companies:
•   EQT Corporation
•   Antero Resources Corporation
•   Cabot Oil & Gas Corporation
•   Rice Energy Inc.
•   Gulfport Energy Corporation
Table of Contents
98
Morgan Stanley analyzed, among other things, the following financial metrics of each of the comparable
companies listed above:
•   the ratio of aggregate value to 2015 year-end proved reserves (measured in mcfe) (for purposes of Morgan
Stanley’s analyses, aggregate value is calculated as market capitalization plus debt and the book value of
any preferred equity plus minority interest, where applicable, less cash);
•   the ratio of aggregate value to current production (measured in mcfed);
•   the ratio of aggregate value to 2016 and 2017 EBITDA (defined as consensus median EBITDA estimates
for each company as of May 13, 2016, based on publicly available estimates); and
•   the ratio of share price (as of the close of market on May 13, 2016) to 2016 and 2017 cash flow (defined as
consensus median cash flow per share estimates for each company as of May 13, 2016, based on publicly
available estimates).
Based on the analysis of the relevant metrics for each of the comparable companies, Morgan Stanley
selected a representative range of financial multiples of the comparable companies and applied this range
of multiples to the relevant Memorial and Range financial statistic.
Based on Memorial’s current outstanding shares and options, Morgan Stanley estimated the implied value
per share of Memorial common stock as of May 13, 2016 as follows:
Representative
Comparable
Company Range
Comparable
Company
Median
Implied Value
Per Share Range
for Memorial
Memorial
Aggregate Value to Proved Reserves
($/Mcfe)
Aggregate Value to Current
Production ($/Mcfed)
Aggregate Value to Estimated 2016
EBITDA
Aggregate Value to Estimated 2017
EBITDA
  
Price to Estimated 2016 Cash Flow   
Price to Estimated 2017 Cash Flow
$
$
2.83     $
1.50 – $ 2.50     $
1.48     $
4.58 – $ 11.25
9,286     $ 6,500 – $ 9,500     $
6,061     $
7.78 – $ 13.88
8.3x
10.7x    
6.6x    
8.5x
7.0x – 11.0x
6.5x – 10.5x    
6.5x – 10.5x    
5.5x – 9.5x
11.0x     $ 10.45 – $ 19.53
9.6x     $
6.02 – $ 13.07  
10.9x     $ 13.16 – $ 21.26  
8.7x     $
8.72 – $ 15.06
Based on Range’s current outstanding shares and options, Morgan Stanley estimated the implied value per
share of Range common stock as of May 13, 2016 as follows:
Aggregate Value to Proved Reserves
($/Mcfe)
Aggregate Value to Current Production
($/Mcfed)
Aggregate Value to Estimated 2016
EBITDA
Aggregate Value to Estimated 2017
EBITDA
Price to Estimated 2016 Cash Flow
Price to Estimated 2017 Cash Flow
Representative
Comparable
Range
Company Range
Comparable
Company
Median
Implied Value
Per Share Range
for Range
$ 0.99     $
0.75 – $ 1.50     $
1.48     $ 28.40 – $ 71.72
$7,073     $ 4,500 – $ 7,500     $
4,843     $ 21.31 – $ 45.45
19.7x
16.6x    
  18.8x    
  16.6x
12.0x – 20.0x
9.0x – 17.0x    
11.0x – 19.0x    
8.0x – 16.0x
11.0x     $ 19.73 – $ 42.82
9.6x     $ 15.89 – $ 43.27  
10.9x     $ 24.61 – $ 42.50  
8.7x     $ 20.24 – $ 40.48
No company utilized in the comparable company analysis is identical to Memorial or Range. In evaluating
comparable companies, Morgan Stanley made judgments and assumptions with regard to industry
performance, general business, economic, market and financial conditions and other matters, which are
beyond the control of Memorial and Range. These include, among other things, the impact of competition
on the businesses of Memorial and Range and the industry generally, industry growth, and the absence of
any adverse material change in the financial condition and prospects of Memorial, Range or the industry, or
in the financial markets in general.
99
Table of Contents
Precedent Transactions Analyses
Precedent Transactions Analysis Based on Reserve Locations
Morgan Stanley performed a precedent transactions analysis, which is designed to imply a value of a
company based on publicly available financial terms applicable to selected transactions that share some
characteristics with this merger.
In connection with its analysis, Morgan Stanley compared publicly available statistics for 40 transactions
with exploration and production targets with a transaction value of above $500 million since 2000. Morgan
Stanley deemed these transactions to be comparable based on transaction size and transaction structure.
The following is a list of these transactions:
•   Vanguard Natural Resources LLC / Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P.
•   Noble Energy, Inc. / Rosetta Resources Inc.
•   Vanguard Natural Resources LLC / LRR Energy, L.P.
•   Encana Corporation / Athlon Energy Inc.
•   Whiting Petroleum Corporation / Kodiak Oil & Gas Corp.
•   Baytex Energy Corp. / Aurora Oil & Gas Limited
•   Linn Energy, LLC / Berry Petroleum Company, LLC
•   Freeport-McMoRan Inc. / McMoRan Exploration Co.
•   Freeport-McMoRan Inc. / Plains Exploration & Production Company
•   Halcon Resources Corporation / GeoResources, Inc.
•   Statoil ASA / Brigham Exploration Company
•   BHP Billiton Ltd. / Petrohawk Energy Corporation
•   Chevron Corporation / Atlas Energy, Inc.
•   Apache Corporation / Mariner Energy, Inc.
•   SandRidge Energy, Inc. / Arena Resources Inc.
•   Exxon Mobil Corporation / XTO Energy Incorporated
•   Denbury Resources Inc. / Encore Acquisition, Inc.
•   Stone Energy Corporation / Bois d’Arc Energy, Inc.
•   Plains Exploration & Production Co. / Pogo Producing Company
•   Forest Oil Corporation / The Houston Exploration Company
•   Anadarko Petroleum Corporation / Western Gas Resources Incorporated
•   Anadarko Petroleum Corporation / Kerr-McGee Corp.
•   Petrohawk Energy Corporation / KCS Energy Incorporated
•   ConocoPhillips Co. / Burlington Resources Incorporated
•   Chevron Corporation / Unocal Corporation
•   Petrohawk Energy Corporation / Mission Resources Corporation
•   Cimarex Energy Co. / Magnum Hunter Resources Corporation
Table of Contents
100
•   Noble Energy, Inc. / Patina Oil & Gas Corp.
•   Pioneer Natural Resources Co. / Evergreen Resources, Inc.
•   Encana Corp. / Tom Brown Inc.
•   Kerr-McGee Corp. / Westport Resources Corp.
•   Plains Exploration & Production Co. / Nuevo Energy Co.
•   Devon Energy Corporation / Devon OEI Operating, Inc.
•   Newfield Exploration Company / EEX Corporation
•   Devon Energy Corporation / Mitchell Energy & Development Corp.
•   Westport Resources Corp. / Belco Oil & Gas Corporation
•   Kerr-McGee Corp. / HS Resources Inc.
•   Chevron Corporation / Texaco Inc.
•   Devon Energy Corporation / Santa Fe Snyder Corporation
•   Anadarko Petroleum Corporation / Union Pacific Resources Group Inc.
For purposes of the analysis of the precedent transactions, Morgan Stanley analyzed, among other things,
the following statistics:
•   the ratio of aggregate value to proved reserves (measured in thousand cubic feet equivalent);
•   the ratio of aggregate value to current production (measured in thousand cubic feet equivalent per day);
•   the ratio of aggregate value to FY + 1 EBITDA (based on consensus median EBITDA estimates, with “FY
+ 1” defined as the fiscal year in which the transaction was announced); and
•   the ratio of price to FY + 1 Cash Flow Per Share (defined as the ratio of share price to FY + 1 consensus
median cash flow per share, based on publicly available estimates).
Based on the analysis of the relevant metrics for each of the precedent transactions, Morgan Stanley
selected a representative range of financial multiples of the precedent transactions and applied this range
of multiples to the relevant Memorial statistic. Based on Memorial’s outstanding shares and options,
Morgan Stanley calculated the following ranges of the implied per share value of Memorial common stock.
Aggregate Value to Proved
Reserves ($/Mcfe)
Aggregate Value to Current
Production
($/Mcfed)
Aggregate Value to FY + 1
EBITDA
Price to FY + 1 Cash Flow Per
Share
Representative
Range of Selected
Precedent
Mean of
Selected
Precedent
Median of
Selected
Precedent
Transactions
Transactions
Transactions
Implied Value
Per Share Range
for Memorial
$
2.00 – $ 3.00     $
2.73     $
2.37     $
7.92 – $ 14.59
$ 7,000 – $ 11,000     $
11,063     $
10,822     $
8.80 – $ 16.94
6.5x – 8.5x    
5.5x – 7.5x
8.1x    
6.7x
6.8x     $
9.31 – $ 13.85  
5.4x     $ 11.14 – $ 15.19
No company or transaction utilized in the precedent transaction analysis is identical to Memorial, Range or
the merger. In evaluating the precedent transactions, Morgan Stanley made judgments and assumptions
with regard to general business, market and financial conditions and other matters, which are beyond the
control of Memorial and Range. These include, among other things, the impact of competition on the
business of Memorial,
Table of Contents
101
Range or the industry generally, industry growth and the absence of any adverse material change in the
financial condition of Memorial, Range or the industry or in the financial markets in general, which could
affect the public trading value of the companies and the aggregate value and equity value of the
transactions to which they are being compared.
Premiums Paid Analysis
Morgan Stanley performed a premiums paid transactions analysis, which is designed to imply a value of a
company based on publicly available financial terms and premiums applicable to selected transactions that
share some characteristics with this merger.
In connection with its analysis, Morgan Stanley compared the premiums paid in 40 selected transactions
with U.S. exploration and production targets with transaction values greater than $500 million from
January 1, 2000 to May 13, 2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the Memorial board of
directors to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the holders of Memorial
common stock). The following is a list of these transactions:
•   Vanguard Natural Resources LLC / Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P.
•   Noble Energy, Inc. / Rosetta Resources, L.P.
•   Vanguard Natural Resources LLC / LRR Energy, L.P.
•   Encana Corporation / Athlon Energy Inc.
•   Whiting Petroleum Corporation / Kodiak Oil & Gas Corp.
•   Baytex Energy Corp. / Aurora Oil & Gas Limited
•   Linn Energy, LLC / Berry Petroleum Company, LLC
•   Freeport-McMoRan Inc. / McMoRan Exploration Co.
•   Freeport-McMoRan Inc. / Plains Exploration & Production Company
•   Halcon Resources Corporation / GeoResources, Inc.
•   Statoil ASA / Brigham Exploration Company
•   BHP Billiton Ltd. / Petrohawk Energy Corporation
•   Chevron Corporation / Atlas Energy, Inc.
•   Apache Corporation / Mariner Energy, Inc.
•   SandRidge Energy, Inc. / Arena Resources Inc.
•   Exxon Mobil Corporation / XTO Energy Incorporated
•   Denbury Resources Inc. / Encore Acquisition Inc.
•   Stone Energy Corporation / Bois d’Arc Energy, Inc.
•   Plains Exploration & Production Co. / Pogo Producing Company
•   Forest Oil Corporation / The Houston Exploration Company
•   Anadarko Petroleum Corporation / Western Gas Resources Incorporated
•   Anadarko Petroleum Corporation / Kerr-McGee Corp.
•   Petrohawk Energy Corporation / KCS Energy Incorporated
Table of Contents
102
•   ConocoPhillips Co. / Burlington Resources Incorporated
•   Chevron Corporation / Unocal Corporation
•   Petrohawk Energy Corporation / Mission Resources Corporation
•   Cimarex Energy Co. / Magnum Hunter Resources Corporation
•   Noble Energy, Inc. / Patina Oil & Gas Corp.
•   Pioneer Natural Resources Co. / Evergreen Resources, Inc.
•   Encana Corp. / Tom Brown, Inc.
•   Kerr-McGee Corp. / Westport Resources Corp.
•   Plains Exploration & Production Co. / Nuevo Energy Co.
•   Devon Energy Corporation / Devon OEI Operating Corp.
•   Newfield Exploration Company / EEX Corporation
•   Devon Energy Corporation / Mitchell Energy & Development Corp.
•   Westport Resources Corp. / Belco Oil & Gas Corporation
•   Kerr-McGee Corp. / HS Resources, Inc.
•   Chevron Corporation / Texaco, Inc.
•   Devon Energy Corporation / Santa Fe Snyder Corporation
•   Anadarko Petroleum Corporation / Union Pacific Resources Group Inc.
The following table summarizes Morgan Stanley’s analysis of the premia paid in the precedent transactions
listed above:
Premium to unaffected
spot price
Premium to unaffected
30-day average
Mean of
Premia Paid
in Precedent
Transactions
Median of
Premia Paid
in Precedent
Transactions
Representative
Premia Paid
Range
Implied Value Per Share
Range for Memorial
24.8%
27.1%
22.0%
10.0% – 30.0%     $
14.80 – $ 17.49
25.6%
10.0% – 40.0%     $
14.80 – $ 18.83
No company or transaction utilized in the premiums paid analysis is identical to Memorial, Range or the
merger. In evaluating the precedent transactions, Morgan Stanley made judgments and assumptions with
regard to general business, market and financial conditions and other matters, which are beyond the
control of Memorial and Range. These include, among other things, the impact of competition on the
business of Memorial, Range or the industry generally, industry growth and the absence of any adverse
material change in the financial condition of Memorial, Range or the industry or in the financial markets in
general, which could affect the public trading value of the companies and the aggregate value and equity
value of the transactions to which they are being compared. Mathematical analysis (such as determining
the mean and median) is not in itself a meaningful method of using precedent transaction data.
Summary of Reference Data
In addition to conducting the analyses described above, Morgan Stanley reviewed the following data, which
was used for reference purposes only and was not used in Morgan Stanley’s determination of the fairness,
from a financial point of view, of the exchange ratio to be received by the holders of Memorial common
stock pursuant to the merger agreement.
Table of Contents
Historical Trading Range Data
103
Morgan Stanley reviewed the range of closing prices of Memorial common stock and Range common stock
during the periods beginning on May 14, 2015 and January 1, 2016, respectively, and ending on May 13,
2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the Memorial board of directors to consider, approve
and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby and to
recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the holders of Memorial common stock). For the
periods reviewed, Morgan Stanley observed the following ranges of high and low closing prices:
Period
May 14, 2015—May 13, 2016
January 1, 2016—May 13, 2016
Memorial Common
Stock Range of
Closing Prices     
8.45 – $ 20.24    
8.45 – $ 15.91
$
$
Range Common
Stock Range of
Closing Prices  
$ 20.45 – $ 62.70  
$ 20.45 – $ 44.11
Morgan Stanley noted that, as of May 13, 2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the Memorial
board of directors to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the
holders of Memorial common stock), the closing share price of Memorial common stock was $13.45 and the
closing price of Range common stock was $42.01, and based on the exchange ratio of 0.375 pursuant to
the merger agreement, the implied offer price for Memorial common stock was $15.75 per share.
Equity Research Analysts’ Future Price Targets
Morgan Stanley reviewed and analyzed one-year public market trading price targets for Memorial common
stock and Range common stock prepared and published by selected equity research analysts during the
30 days prior to May 13, 2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the Memorial board of directors
to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the holders of Memorial
common stock). These forward targets reflected each analyst’s estimate of the future public market trading
price of Memorial common stock and Range common stock and do not necessarily reflect current market
trading prices for Memorial common stock or Range common stock, and these estimates are subject to
uncertainties, including the future financial performance of Memorial and Range, and future financial market
conditions.
The range of undiscounted analyst one year price targets for Memorial common stock was $12.00 to $23.00
per share as of May 13, 2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the Memorial board of directors
to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the holders of Memorial
common stock). Morgan Stanley then discounted the range of the analysts’ future share price targets for
Memorial common stock for one year at a rate of 12.3%, which was selected based on Morgan Stanley’s
estimate of Memorial’s cost of equity. This analysis indicated an implied range of equity values for Memorial
common stock of $10.69 to $20.48 per share.
The range of undiscounted analyst one year price targets for Range common stock was $26.00 to $55.00
per share as of May 13, 2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the Memorial board of directors
to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the holders of Memorial
common stock). Morgan Stanley then discounted the range of the analysts’ future share price targets for
Range common stock for one year at a rate of 13.2%, which was selected based on Morgan Stanley’s
estimate of Range’s cost of equity. This analysis indicated an implied range of equity values for Range
common stock of $22.97 to $48.59 per share.
104
Table of Contents
Equity Research Analysts’ NAV Targets
Morgan Stanley also reviewed and analyzed equity research analyst estimates of net asset value per share
of Memorial common stock and Range common stock prepared and published by selected equity research
analysts during the 30 days prior to May 13, 2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the
Memorial board of directors to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and
the transactions contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the
holders of Memorial common stock). These estimates of net asset value per share reflected each analyst’s
estimate of the future net asset value per share of Memorial common stock and Range common stock and
do not necessarily reflect current net asset value per share of Memorial common stock or Range common
stock, and these estimates are subject to uncertainties, including the future financial performance of
Memorial and Range, and future financial market conditions.
The range of analyst estimated net asset value per share for Memorial common stock was $11.00 to $24.00
per share during the 30 days prior to May 13, 2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the
Memorial board of directors to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and
the transactions contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the
holders of Memorial common stock), as compared to the implied offer price of $15.75 per share of Memorial
common stock based on the exchange ratio of 0.375 pursuant to the merger agreement.
The range of analyst estimated net asset value per share for Range common stock was $28.79 to $56.00 per
share during the 30 days prior to May 13, 2016 (the last full trading day prior to the meeting of the Memorial
board of directors to consider, approve and declare the advisability of the merger agreement and the
transactions contemplated thereby and to recommend the adoption of the merger agreement by the
holders of Memorial common stock), as compared to the share price of $42.01 as of May 13, 2016.
Historical Exchange Ratio Data
Morgan Stanley reviewed the range of the ratio of closing prices of Memorial common stock divided by the
corresponding closing prices of Range common stock over various periods ended on May 13, 2016. For
each of the periods reviewed, Morgan Stanley observed the following ranges of exchange ratios.
Period Ending May 13, 2016
Last 30 Trading Days
Last 90 Trading Days
Last 180 Trading Days
Last 365 Trading Days
105
Average Exchange Ratio 
 
0.3274x  
0.3346x  
 
0.4552x  
 
 
0.4083x
Table of Contents
Relative Contribution Analysis
Morgan Stanley compared the respective percentage ownership of Memorial stockholders and Range
stockholders of the combined company to Memorial’s and Range’s respective percentage contribution
(and the implied ownership and the implied exchange ratio based on such contribution) to the combined
company’s Adjusted EBITDA, operating cash flow, production (Mmcfed) and proved reserves, based on
publicly available forecasts, as more fully described under the section titled “—Certain Prospective
Unaudited Financial and Operating Information of Range and Memorial” beginning on page 108. The
following table summarizes Morgan Stanley’s analysis:
Contribution Based on Consensus Projections
Memorial
($ MM)
Memorial
(%)
Range
($ MM)
Range
Debt Adjusted
Contribution1
Implied Equity
Contribution
Memorial
Range
(%)
Combined
(%)
(%)
909     
1,378     
420     
420     
464     
371     
468     
364
416     
418     
327
16   
12   
23   
23   
23   
29   
49   
38
38   
52   
43
4,734   
  9,892   
  1,378   
  1,416   
  1,531   
897   
 
494   
 
 
586
684   
383   
433
84   
88   
77   
77   
77   
71   
51   
62
62   
48   
57
5,642   
11,269   
1,798   
1,835   
1,995   
1,268   
963   
950
1,100   
801   
760
11   
5   
21   
20   
21   
29   
55   
41
38   
52   
43
89  
95  
79  
80  
79  
71  
45  
59
62  
48  
57
Total Proved Reserves (Pre-
Tax PV-10)
Total Proved Reserves (Bcfe)
Current Production (Mmcfed)
2016E Production (Mmcfed)
2017E Production (Mmcfed)
2015A Adjusted EBITDA
2016E EBITDA
2017E EBITDA
2015A Cash Flow
2016E Cash Flow
2017E Cash Flow
1Adjustedfor Memorial’s and Range’s respective net debt.
Morgan Stanley also compared the respective percentage ownership of Memorial stockholders and Range
stockholders of the combined company to Memorial’s and Range’s respective percentage contribution
(and the implied ownership and the implied exchange ratio based on such contribution) to the combined
company’s Adjusted EBITDA, operating cash flow, production (Mmcfed), proved reserves and net asset
value, based on estimates prepared by Memorial management, in the case of Memorial’s contribution, and
estimates prepared by Range management and provided to Morgan Stanley by Memorial, in the case of
Range’s contribution, as more fully described under the section titled “—Certain Prospective Unaudited
Financial and Operating Information of Range and Memorial” beginning on page 108. The following table
summarizes Morgan Stanley’s analysis:
Contribution Based on Memorial Projections
Memorial
(%)
Range
Range
($ MM)   
23      1,378     
23      1,429     
25      1,548     
897     
29     
519     
47     
693     
38     
38     
684     
378     
51     
40     
554
(%)
Combined   
1,798     
1,845     
2,057     
1,268     
978     
1,123     
1,100     
774     
916
77     
77     
75     
71     
53     
62     
62     
49     
60
Debt Adjusted
Contribution1
Implied Equity
Contribution
Memorial
Range
(%)
21     
20     
23     
29     
53     
41     
38     
51     
40
28     
29
(%)
79  
80  
77  
71  
47  
59  
62  
49  
60
72  
71
Memorial
($ MM)    
420     
416     
509     
371     
459     
431     
416     
396     
362
Current Production (Mmcfed)
2016E Production (Mmcfed)
2017E Production (Mmcfed)
2015A Adjusted EBITDA
2016E EBITDA
2017E EBITDA
2015A Cash Flow
2016E Cash Flow
2017E Cash Flow
Net Asset Value
Strip Price at 35% Tax Rate
Strip Price at 25% Tax Rate
NYMEX Consensus Price Deck at
35% Tax Rate
NYMEX Consensus Price Deck at
25% Tax Rate
1,774     
2,073
28      4,496     
29      5,180
72     
71
6,270     
7,253
2,337
27      6,216
73
8,553
27
73
2,720
28      7,136
72
9,856
28
72
1Adjustedfor Memorial’s and Range’s respective net debt.
Table of Contents
General
106
In connection with the review of the merger by the Memorial board of directors, Morgan Stanley performed a
variety of financial and comparative analyses for purposes of rendering its opinion. The preparation of a
financial opinion is a complex process and is not necessarily susceptible to a partial analysis or summary
description. In arriving at its opinion, Morgan Stanley considered the results of all of its analyses as a whole
and did not attribute any particular weight to any analysis or factor that it considered. Morgan Stanley
believes that selecting any portion of its analyses, without considering all of the analyses as a whole, would
create an incomplete view of the process underlying its analyses and opinion. In addition, Morgan Stanley
may have given various analyses and factors more or less weight than other analyses and factors, and may
have deemed various assumptions more or less probable than other assumptions. As a result, the ranges
of valuations resulting from any particular analysis described above should not be taken to be Morgan
Stanley’s view of the actual value of Memorial or Range. In performing its analyses, Morgan Stanley made
judgments and assumptions with regard to industry performance, general business, regulatory, economic,
market and financial conditions and other matters that are beyond the control of Memorial or Range. These
include, among other things, the impact of competition on the businesses of Memorial, Range and the
industry generally, industry growth, and the absence of any material adverse change in the financial
condition and prospects of Memorial, Range and the industry, and in financial markets in general. Any
estimates contained in Morgan Stanley’s analyses are not necessarily indicative of future results or actual
values, which may be significantly more or less favorable than those suggested by such estimates.
Morgan Stanley conducted the analyses described above solely as part of its analysis of the fairness, from
a financial point of view, of the exchange ratio to be received by the holders of Memorial common stock
pursuant to the merger agreement and in connection with the delivery of its opinion, dated May 15, 2016, to
the Memorial board of directors. These analyses do not purport to be appraisals or to reflect the prices at
which shares of Memorial common stock or shares of Range common stock will trade following the
consummation of the merger or at any time.
The exchange ratio to be received by the holders of Memorial common stock pursuant to the merger
agreement was determined by Memorial and Range through arm’s length negotiations between Memorial
and Range and was approved by the Memorial board of directors. Morgan Stanley acted as financial
advisor to the Memorial board of directors during these negotiations but did not recommend any specific
exchange ratio to Memorial or the Memorial board of directors or opine that any specific exchange ratio
constituted the only appropriate exchange ratio for the merger.
Morgan Stanley’s opinion and its presentation to the Memorial board of directors was one of many factors
taken into consideration by the Memorial board of directors in deciding to consider, approve and declare
the advisability of the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby and to recommend the
adoption of the merger agreement by the holders of Memorial common stock. Consequently, the analyses
described above should not be viewed as determinative of the opinion of the Memorial board of directors
with respect to the exchange ratio to be received by the holders of Memorial common stock pursuant to the
merger agreement or of whether the Memorial board of directors would have been willing to agree to a
different exchange ratio. Morgan Stanley’s opinion was approved by a committee of Morgan Stanley
investment banking and other professionals in accordance with Morgan Stanley’s customary practice.
Morgan Stanley’s opinion was not intended to, and does not, constitute advice or a recommendation to any
holder of shares of Memorial common stock as to how to vote or act on any matter with respect to the
merger or related transactions or any other action with respect to the transactions contemplated by the
merger agreement. Morgan Stanley’s opinion did not address any other aspect of the merger or related
transactions, including the prices at which shares of Range common stock would trade following the
consummation of the merger or at any time, or any compensation or compensation agreements arising
from (or relating to) the merger which benefit any officer, director or employee of Memorial, or any class of
such persons.
Table of Contents
107
The Memorial board of directors retained Morgan Stanley based upon Morgan Stanley’s qualifications,
experience and expertise. Morgan Stanley is a global financial services firm engaged in the securities,
investment management and individual wealth management businesses. Its securities business is engaged
in securities underwriting, trading and brokerage activities, foreign exchange, commodities and derivatives
trading, prime brokerage, as well as providing investment banking, financing and financial advisory
services. Morgan Stanley, its affiliates, directors and officers may at any time invest on a principal basis or
manage funds that invest, hold long or short positions, finance positions, and may trade or otherwise
structure and effect transactions, for their own account or for the accounts of their customers, in debt or
equity securities or loans of Memorial and Range or any other company, or any currency or commodity,
that may be involved in the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, or any related derivative
instrument.
Under the terms of its engagement letter, Morgan Stanley provided the Memorial board of directors with
financial advisory services and a financial opinion in connection with the merger, described in this section
and attached to this joint proxy statement/prospectus as Annex D and Memorial has agreed to pay Morgan
Stanley a fee for its services of $12.5 million, of which $1.0 million was payable upon the rendering of
Morgan Stanley’s opinion and the remainder of which is contingent upon completion of the merger.
Memorial has also agreed to reimburse Morgan Stanley for its reasonable expenses, including reasonable
fees of outside counsel and other professional advisors, incurred in connection with its engagement. In
addition, Memorial has agreed to indemnify Morgan Stanley and its affiliates, their respective directors,
officers, agents and employees and each other person, if any, controlling Morgan Stanley or any of its
affiliates against certain liabilities and expenses, including certain liabilities under the federal securities
laws, relating to or arising out of Morgan Stanley’s engagement.
In the two years prior to the date of its opinion, Morgan Stanley and its affiliates have provided financing
services to Memorial and have received aggregate fees of less than $1 million from Memorial in connection
with such services. Morgan Stanley may seek to provide financial advisory and financing services to
Memorial and Range in the future and would expect to receive fees for the rendering of these services.
Certain Prospective Unaudited Financial and Operating Information of Range and Memorial
Neither Range nor Memorial as a matter of course makes public long-term projections as to its future
production, earnings or other results because of, among other reasons, the uncertainty of the underlying
assumptions and estimates. However, Range and Memorial are including the following summary of the
unaudited prospective financial and operating information from Range management’s projections for
Range and Memorial (described below under “—Unaudited Prospective Financial and Operating
Information Provided to the Range Board of Directors and Credit Suisse”) solely because that information
was made available to the Range board of directors and, in the case of the Range Projections for Range for
2016E and 2017E (which Credit Suisse referred to as the “Range Model”), to Credit Suisse. Similarly, the
following summary of the unaudited prospective financial and operating information from Memorial
management’s projections for Range and Memorial (described below under “—Unaudited Prospective
Financial and Operating Information Provided to the Memorial Board of Directors, Barclays and Morgan
Stanley”) are included in this joint proxy statement/prospectus solely because that information was made
available to the Memorial board of directors, Barclays and Morgan Stanley. Credit Suisse was authorized by
Range to rely upon the Range Model for 2016E and 2017E summarized below and the reserves projections
for Memorial underlying the projections referred to by Credit Suisse as the “Range Projections for
Memorial” that were utilized by Credit Suisse for its selected companies analysis using First Call oil and gas
pricing as of May 13, 2016. Credit Suisse was also authorized by Range to rely upon unaudited prospective
financial and operating information from Range’s reserves model for Range (which Credit Suisse referred
to as the Range Reserves Model) and the Range reserves model for Memorial (which Credit Suisse referred
to as the Range Projections for Memorial) that were utilized by Credit Suisse for purposes of its net asset
value and discounted cash flow analyses. The 2016E and 2017E operational assumptions and production
figures shown below for Range and Memorial are substantially similar to those provided to Credit Suisse in
the reserve models for Range and Memorial provided to Credit Suisse, subject to variations resulting
Table of Contents
108
from, among other things, differing risk assumptions. Barclays and Morgan Stanley were each authorized
by Memorial to rely upon the Memorial Projections and the Memorial Projections for Range described below
for purposes of their respective analyses and opinion. The inclusion of the below information should not be
regarded as an indication that any of Range, Memorial, Credit Suisse, Barclays, Morgan Stanley or any
other recipient of this information considered—or now considers—it to be necessarily predictive of actual
future results.
The unaudited prospective financial and operating information prepared by the respective managements of
Range and Memorial was, in general, prepared solely for Range’s and Memorial’s internal use and is
subjective in many respects. As a result, there can be no assurance that the prospective results will be
realized or that actual results will not be significantly higher or lower than estimated. Since the unaudited
prospective financial and operating information covers multiple years, that information by its nature
becomes less predictive with each successive year. Range and Memorial stockholders are urged to review
Range’s and Memorial’s SEC filings for a description of risk factors with respect to Range’s and Memorial’s
respective businesses, as well as the section of this joint proxy statement/prospectus titled “Risk Factors”
beginning on page 33. See also “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” beginning
on page 31 and “Where You Can Find More Information” beginning on page 189.
Unaudited Prospective Financial and Operating Information Provided to the Range Board of Directors and
Credit Suisse
Range’s Pricing Assumptions for Range and Memorial. In preparing the prospective financial and operating
information for Range and Memorial described below, the management team of Range used the following
natural gas and oil prices, based (i) on NYMEX oil and gas pricing as of April 30, 2016, (ii) a lower price
scenario selected by the management team of Range, and (iii) Wall Street analysts’ consensus (as reported
by First Call) as of April 30, 2016 for natural gas and crude oil:
Commodity Prices
Natural Gas ($/Mmbtu)
Crude Oil ($/Bbl)
Commodity Prices
Natural Gas ($/Mmbtu)
Crude Oil ($/Bbl)
Commodity Prices
Natural Gas ($/Mmbtu)
WTI Crude Oil ($/Bbl)
Table of Contents
109
NYMEX
2016E    
  
$ 2.32    
  42.22
2017E    
  
$ 3.01    
  49.00
2018E    
  
$ 3.04    
  50.22
2019E
$ 3.04  
  51.35
Range Management Low Prices
2016E    
  
$ 2.25    
  37.50
2017E    
  
$ 2.50    
  40.00
2018E    
  
$ 2.75    
  45.00
First Call
2016E    
  
$ 2.37    
  41.12
2017E    
  
$ 3.25    
  50.08
2018E    
  
$ 3.25    
  57.50
2019E
$ 3.00  
  50.00
2019E
$ 3.50  
  63.50
Range’s Operating Assumptions for Range and Memorial. In addition to these different pricing scenarios,
the management team of Range used two different sets of operating assumptions for each of Range and
Memorial. Those two cases are referred to as “Case 1” and “Case 2.” The Range management team applied
the NYMEX strip pricing and the First Call pricing to Case 1 for both Range and Memorial. With respect to
Case 2, only the low price scenario was applied.
Case 1
Range
•    Long range plan based on fully developed
resource potential, including Utica, Upper
Devonian and Marcellus
Memorial
•    Full development of the Terryville Upper Red
zone based on current lateral spacing, with
additional risk on one-third of the remaining
drilling locations
Case 2
•    Pipeline takeaway projects come on line as
scheduled, resulting in improved basis
differentials and better net back pricing
•    The same as Case 1, except that the Upper
Devonian was excluded due to timing of
development
•    Pipeline takeaway projects delayed, resulting
in wider basis differentials and lower net back
pricing
•    Pace of capital program slower than Case 1
•    In zone targeting enhancements resulting in
improved well performance and recoveries from
existing actual results
•    Same as Case 1
•    Type curves developed by the Range
management team, based on Memorials’ actual
production history
•    Pace of capital program slower than Case 1
Range Management Projections for Range. The following tables set forth certain summarized prospective
operating and financial information regarding Range for 2016 through 2019—based on the respective
operating and price assumptions indicated below—which information was prepared by Range
management, which are collectively referred to as the “Range Projections for Range.”
Production
Production (Mmcfed)
Financial Results
EBITDAX
Discretionary Cash Flow(1)
Capital Expenditures
Range Case 1 With NYMEX Pricing
2016E    
  
  1,429    
  
$ 517    
  377    
  495
2017E    
  
  1,548    
  
$ 692    
  553    
  486
2018E    
  
  1,623    
  
$ 861    
  717    
  919
2019E
2,087
$1,224  
  1,058  
  1,491
(1) Discretionary Cash Flow is generally defined as cash flow from operations before changes in working capital
and exploration expenditures.
Production
Production (Mmcfed)
Financial Results
EBITDAX
Discretionary Cash Flow(1)
Capital Expenditures
Range Case 1 With First Call Pricing
2016E    
  
  1,429    
  
$ 519    
  379    
  495
2017E    
  
  1,548    
  
$ 774    
  635    
  486
2018E    
  
  1,623    
  
$1,018    
  880    
  919
2019E
2,087
$1,629  
  1,491  
  1,491
(1) Discretionary Cash Flow is generally defined as cash flow from operations before changes in working capital
and exploration expenditures.
Table of Contents
Production
Production (Mmcfed)
110
Range Case 2 With Low Pricing
2016E
2017E
2018E
2019E
Production (Mmcfed)
Financial Results
EBITDAX
Discretionary Cash Flow(1)
Capital Expenditures
1,429    
  
$ 502    
  361    
  495
1,548    
  
$ 408    
  263    
  465
1,562    
  
$ 581    
  423    
  598
1,723  
$ 861  
  692  
  706
(1) Discretionary Cash Flow is generally defined as cash flow from operations before changes in working capital
and exploration expenditures.
Range Management Projections for Memorial. The following tables set forth certain summarized
prospective operating and financial information regarding Memorial for 2016 through 2019—based on the
respective operating and price assumptions indicated below—prepared by Range management, which are
collectively referred to as the “Range Projections for Memorial.”
Production
Production (Mmcfed)
Financial Results
EBITDAX
Discretionary Cash Flow(1)
Capital Expenditures
Memorial Case 1 With NYMEX Pricing
2016E     
  
401    
  
441    
359    
222
$
2017E     
  
432    
  
345    
295    
279
$
2018E     
  
463    
  
336    
284    
293
$
2019E
$
568
467  
407  
288
(1) Discretionary Cash Flow is generally defined as cash flow from operations before changes in working capital
and exploration expenditures.
Production
Production (Mmcfed)
Financial Results
EBITDAX
Discretionary Cash Flow(1)
Capital Expenditures
Memorial Case 1 With First Call Pricing
2016E     
  
401    
  
439    
358    
222
2017E     
  
432    
  
358    
306    
279
2018E     
  
463    
  
383    
331    
293
2019E
568
583  
464  
288
(1) Discretionary Cash Flow is generally defined as cash flow from operations before changes in working capital
and exploration expenditures.
Production
Production (Mmcfed)
Financial Results
EBITDAX
Discretionary Cash Flow(1)
Capital Expenditures
Memorial Case 2 With Low Pricing
2016E     
  
396    
  
435    
355    
222
2017E     
  
416    
  
305    
255    
243
2018E     
  
407    
  
246    
192    
238
2019E
451
346  
287  
305
(1) Discretionary Cash Flow is generally defined as cash flow from operations before changes in working capital
and exploration expenditures.
Table of Contents
111
Unaudited Prospective Financial and Operating Information Provided to the Memorial Board of Directors,
Barclays and Morgan Stanley
In preparing the prospective financial and operating information described below, the management team of
Memorial used the following natural gas and oil prices, based on Wall Street analysts’ consensus as of
May 13, 2016 and Memorial management’s price expectations, which are collectively referred to as the
“Memorial Projections”:
Commodity Prices
Natural Gas ($/Mmbtu)
WTI Crude Oil ($/Bbl)
Wall Street Consensus
2016E    
  
$ 2.35    
  42.32
2017E    
  
$ 2.90    
  52.65
2018E
Memorial Management
2017E
2016E
$ 3.00    
  58.50
$
2.32    
43.50
$
3.01  
49.14
The following tables set forth certain summarized prospective operating and financial information regarding
Memorial for 2016 and 2017 prepared by Memorial management using the above referenced commodity
price assumptions and provided by Memorial’s management to the Memorial board of directors, Barclays
and Morgan Stanley.
Production
Production (Mmcfed)
Financial Results
EBITDAX
Discretionary Cash Flow(1)
Capital Expenditures
420
Wall Street Consensus      Memorial Management  
   2016E     2017E     2018E    
2017E  
  
  
  643    
  
  
  
   $ 471     $ 377     $ 457     $
2016E     
  
416
459      $
 
396     
331
476
418    
  306
338    
  368
401    
  388
509
431  
362  
364
(1) Discretionary Cash Flow is generally defined as cash flow from operations before changes in working capital
and exploration expenditures.
The following tables set forth certain summarized prospective operating and financial information regarding
Range for 2016 and 2017 prepared by Memorial management using the above referenced commodity price
assumptions and provided by Memorial’s management to the Memorial board of directors, Barclays and
Morgan Stanley, which are collectively referred to as the “Memorial Projections for Range.”
Production
Production (Mmcfed)
Financial Results
EBITDAX
Discretionary Cash Flow(1)
Wall Street Consensus
2016E    
  
  1,419    
  
$ 502
2017E    
  
  1,538    
  
$ 559
Memorial Management
2017E
2018E    
  
  1,655    
  
$ 859
2016E        
  
1,429    
  
519
$
$
1,548
693
Discretionary Cash Flow(1)
Capital Expenditures
377    
  495
420    
  549
722    
  810
378    
495
554  
486
(1) Discretionary Cash Flow is generally defined as cash flow from operations before changes in working capital
and exploration expenditures.
Qualifications Regarding Prospective Financial Information of Range and Memorial
The Range and Memorial prospective financial and operating information was prepared by, and is the
responsibility of, the management of Range and Memorial and was not prepared with a view toward public
disclosure, nor was it prepared with a view toward compliance with the published guidelines of the SEC, the
guidelines established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants for the preparation and
Table of Contents
112
presentation of financial forecasts or generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, which
are referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as GAAP. Ernst & Young LLP is the independent
registered public accounting firm for Range and is referred to in this joint proxy statement/prospectus as
EY. KPMG LLP is the independent registered public accounting firm for Memorial and is referred to in this
joint proxy statement/prospectus as KPMG. Neither EY nor KPMG, or any other independent accountants,
has compiled, examined or performed any procedures with respect to Range’s and Memorial’s prospective
financial and operating information contained in this joint proxy statement/prospectus. Furthermore,
neither EY nor KPMG, or any other independent accountants, has expressed any opinion or any other form
of assurance on that information or its achievability. Each of these independent accountants assumes no
responsibility for, and disclaims any association with, the prospective financial and operating information.
The EY and KPMG reports incorporated into this joint proxy statement/prospectus by reference relate to
historical financial information for Range and Memorial, respectively. Those reports do not extend to
Range’s and Memorial’s prospective financial and operating information and should not be read to do so.
The summary of Range’s and Memorial’s prospective financial and operating information is being included
in this joint proxy statement/prospectus—not to influence your decision whether to vote for the merger
proposal—but instead because the prospective financial and operating information was made available to
each of the Range board of directors and the Memorial board of directors and the respective financial
advisors to Range and Memorial in connection with the merger.
While presented in this joint proxy statement/prospectus with numeric specificity, the information set forth
in the summary of Range’s and Memorial’s prospective financial and operating information contained in
this joint proxy statement/prospectus was based on numerous variables and assumptions that are
inherently uncertain and may be beyond the control of Range’s and Memorial’s management, including,
among others, oil and gas activity, commodity prices, demand for natural gas and crude oil and the
availability of financing to fund the exploration and development costs associated with the respective
projected drilling programs. None of this prospective financial and operational information reflects any
impact of the merger. In addition, since Range’s prospective financial and operating information covers
multiple years, that information by its nature becomes less predictive with each successive year. In
addition, the unaudited prospective financial and operating information requires significant estimates and
assumptions that make it inherently less comparable to the similarly-titled GAAP measures in the
respective historical GAAP financial statements of Range and Memorial. Both Range and Memorial believe
the assumptions in the prospective financial and operating information were reasonable at the time the
financial information was prepared, given the information both Range and Memorial had at the time.
However, important factors that may affect actual results and cause the results reflected in Range’s and
Memorial’s prospective financial and operating information not to be achieved include, but are not limited
to, risks and uncertainties relating to their respective businesses, industry performance, the regulatory
environment, general business and economic conditions and other matters described under the section of
this joint proxy statement/prospectus titled “Risk Factors.” See also “Special Note Regarding Forward-
Looking Statements” and “Where You Can Find More Information.” The prospective financial and operating
information also reflects assumptions as to certain business decisions that are subject to change. As a
result, actual results may differ materially from the results reflected in Range’s and Memorial’s prospective
financial and operating information. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that the results reflected in the
prospective financial and operating information will be realized.
The inclusion of Range’s and Memorial’s prospective financial and operating information in this joint proxy
statement/prospectus should not be regarded as an indication that any of Range, Memorial or any of their
respective affiliates, officers, directors, advisors or other representatives considered the prospective
financial and operating information to be material or predictive of actual future events, and the prospective
financial and operating information should not be relied upon as such. None of Range, Memorial or any of
their respective affiliates, officers, directors, advisors or other representatives can give you any assurance
that actual results will not differ from the results reflected in the prospective financial and operating
information. Furthermore, no obligation is undertaken to update or otherwise revise or reconcile the
prospective financial and operating information to reflect circumstances existing after the dates the
prospective financial and operating information was generated or to reflect the occurrence of future events
in the event that any or all of the assumptions
Table of Contents
113
underlying the prospective financial and operating information are shown to be in error. Range and
Memorial do not intend to make publicly available any update or other revision to the prospective financial
and operating information. The prospective financial and operational information for Range and Memorial
does not take into account any circumstances or events occurring after the date that information was
prepared. Readers of this joint proxy statement/prospectus are cautioned not to place undue reliance on
the prospective financial and operating information set forth above. None of Range’s or Memorial’s nor any
of their respective affiliates, officers, directors, advisors or other representatives has made or makes any
representation to any Range stockholder, Memorial stockholder or any other person regarding either
Range’s or Memorial’s ultimate performance compared to the information contained in the prospective
financial and operating information or that financial or operating results will be achieved. Memorial has
made no representation to Range, in the merger agreement or otherwise, concerning the Memorial
prospective financial and operating information. Similarly, Range has made no representation to Memorial,
in the merger agreement or otherwise, concerning the Range prospective financial and operating
information.
RANGE’S AND MEMORIAL’S PROSPECTIVE FINANCIAL INFORMATION DOES NOT REPRESENT
PROJECTIONS, BUT RATHER POTENTIAL SCENARIOS BASED ON VARYING DEGREES OF SUCCESS.
ACCORDINGLY, RESULTS ARE DEPENDENT ON THE OUTCOME OF FUTURE EXPLORATION AND
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY, WHICH IS SUBJECT TO SIGNIFICANT RISK AND UNCERTAINTY. NEITHER
RANGE NOR MEMORIAL INTENDS TO UPDATE OR OTHERWISE REVISE THE PROSPECTIVE FINANCIAL
AND OPERATING INFORMATION TO REFLECT CIRCUMSTANCES EXISTING AFTER THE DATE WHEN
THE INFORMATION WAS GENERATED OR TO REFLECT THE OCCURRENCE OF FUTURE EVENTS, EVEN
IN THE EVENT THAT ANY OR ALL OF THE ASSUMPTIONS UNDERLYING THAT INFORMATION ARE NO
LONGER APPROPRIATE, EXCEPT AS MAY BE REQUIRED BY LAW.
Amended and Restated By-laws of Range
On May 15, 2016, the Range board of directors approved an amendment to Range’s Amended and Restated
By-laws to, among other things, provide that, for a term effective for one year following the date on which
the amendment was adopted, unless a majority of the Range board of directors, acting on behalf of Range,
consents in writing to the selection of an alternative forum, the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware
(or, if the Court of Chancery does not have jurisdiction, another state court located within the State of
Delaware or, if no court located within the State of Delaware has jurisdiction, the federal district court for the
District of Delaware) will be the sole and exclusive forum for:
•   any derivative action or proceeding brought on behalf of Range,
•   any action asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed by any stockholder, director, officer or other
employee of Range to Range or to Range’s stockholders,
•   any action asserting a claim against Range or any of its directors, officers or other employees arising
pursuant to any provision of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware, Range’s certificate of
incorporation or Range’s by-laws, or
•   any action asserting a claim against Range or any of its directors, officers or other employees governed by
the internal affairs doctrine of the State of Delaware
In each of these matters, the exclusive forum designation is subject to the court’s having personal
jurisdiction over all indispensable parties named as defendants.
Interests of Memorial Directors and Executive Officers in the Merger
In considering the recommendation of the Memorial board of directors that the Memorial stockholders vote
to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement,
including the merger, Memorial’s stockholders should be aware that aside from their interests as
stockholders of
Table of Contents
114
Memorial, Memorial’s directors and executive officers have interests in the merger that may be different
from, or in addition to, those of other stockholders of Memorial generally. The members of the Memorial
board of directors were aware of and considered these interests, among other matters, in evaluating and
negotiating the merger agreement and the merger, and in recommending to the stockholders of Memorial
that the merger agreement be approved. See “—Background of the Merger” and “—Memorial’s Reasons for
the Merger; Recommendation of the Memorial Board of Directors.” Memorial’s stockholders should take
these interests into account in deciding whether to vote “FOR” the approval of the merger agreement.
These interests are described in more detail below, and certain of them are quantified in the narrative and
the tables below.
In January 2016, Mr. John A. Weinzierl resigned as Chief Executive Officer and as a director of Memorial.
Also in January 2016, Mr. William J. Scarff resigned as President of Memorial. While they are disclosed as
“named executive officers” in the proxy materials filed in connection with Memorial’s most recent annual
meeting, neither of these men is currently employed by Memorial and will not be included within this section
as part of the disclosures regarding interests of current executive officers.
In addition to the interests described below, upon adoption of the merger agreement by Memorial
stockholders, MRD Holdco LLC is permitted to distribute its shares of Memorial common stock to, among
others, MRD Holdco LLC’s members, including certain Memorial officers and employees. The shares of
Memorial common stock received by those Memorial officers and employees will be entitled to receive the
merger consideration.
Treatment of Memorial LTIP Restricted Stock Awards
Effective immediately prior to the effective time of the merger, each outstanding share of unvested
restricted Memorial common stock granted to any employee or director of Memorial, any of its subsidiaries
or any of its predecessors under the Memorial LTIP will fully vest pursuant to the merger agreement, and
any applicable restrictions will lapse. At the effective time of the merger, each of those shares will be treated
as a share of Memorial common stock, including with respect to the right to receive 0.375 of a fully vested
share of Range common stock. As a result, at the effective time of the merger, each holder of such a share
will participate in the merger consideration on the same terms and conditions as all other Memorial
stockholders generally.
Quantification of Payments for Memorial LTIP Restricted Stock Awards.
The following table sets forth, as of August 10, 2016, for each of Memorial’s directors and executive officers
who hold Memorial LTIP restricted stock awards, the aggregate number of Memorial LTIP restricted stock
awards held by such individuals and the estimated value of shares of Range common stock that each
holder may receive in connection with the merger with respect to such Memorial awards. For purposes of
this table, the per stock value of the merger consideration was estimated to be equal to $14.97, determined
by multiplying the exchange ratio (0.375) by $39.92, the average closing price of Range common stock over
the first five business days following the first public announcement of the merger.
Number of
Shares of
Restricted
Stock to
Accelerate
Value
($)(3)
Position
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
  Senior Vice President and Chief Operating Officer
Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Corporate
 
Secretary
  Senior Vice President, Corporate Development
  Vice President and Chief Accounting Officer
  Director
  Director
  Director
115
(#)(2)
 
238,606     3,571,932  
238,606     3,571,932  
 3,473,250  
232,014
232,014     3,473,250  
75,005     1,122,825  
8,023      120,104  
8,023      120,104  
8,023      120,104
Name(1)
Andrew J. Cozby
Larry R. Forney
Kyle N. Roane
Gregory M. Robbins
Dennis G. Venghaus
Robert A. Innamorati
Carol Lee O’Neill
Pat Wood, III
Table of Contents
(1) This table excludes officers or employees of Memorial and officers or employees of NGP or its affiliates who
also serve as Memorial’s directors, because they do not receive additional compensation for their services as a
director.
(2) The number of Memorial restricted stock awards held by each individual within the table above is subject to
change based upon any vesting or forfeiture event that could occur after August 10, 2016 but prior to the
closing of the merger. Memorial does not expect that any additional awards will be granted pursuant to the
Memorial LTIP prior to the close of the merger.
(3) The value of the Range common stock that is reflected in this table is calculated based upon an average
closing price of the Range common stock over a five trading day period following the public announcement of
the merger. The actual value of the Range common stock received at the time of the merger will depend upon
the price of the Range common stock on the closing date of the merger. The value that each current Memorial
director or executive officer could receive upon a sale or other disposition of any Range common stock to be
received in the merger cannot be determined until such a sale or disposition occurs.
Change in Control Arrangements
Memorial has entered into change in control agreements with each of its executive officers (other than
Mr. Graham). As of August 10, 2016, Memorial expects that each of the current Memorial executive officers
will be terminated without cause in connection with the merger, triggering certain compensation and
benefits to each of those executives pursuant to their change in control agreements, described below.
For purposes of the change in control agreements, the following terms are generally defined as follows:
•   “Qualifying Termination” means, as to any executive, the separation of service on account of (i) an
involuntary termination by Memorial without “cause” or (ii) such executive’s voluntary resignation for “good
reason.” In order for a termination to qualify as a “Qualifying Termination” in connection with a change in
control, the termination must occur within six months prior to, or twenty-four months following, the “change
in control.” In order for an event giving rise to “good reason” to satisfy the requirements for a voluntary
resignation to be a “Qualifying Termination,” the “good reason” must occur within six months prior to, or six
months following, the “change in control.” Memorial expects that each current executive officer will
experience a Qualifying Termination in connection with the merger.
•   “Cause” means, as to any executive, such executive’s (i) commission of, conviction for, plea of guilty or
nolo contendere to a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude; (ii) engaging in conduct that constitutes
fraud, gross negligence or willful misconduct that results or would reasonably be expected to result in
material harm to Memorial or Memorial’s business or reputation; (iii) breach of any material terms of such
executive’s employment, including any of Memorial’s policies or code of conduct; or (iv) failure to perform
such executive’s duties for Memorial.
•   “Good Reason” means, as to any executive, the occurrence of one of the following without an executive’s
express written consent (i) a material reduction of such executive’s duties, position or responsibilities, or
such executive’s removal from such position and responsibilities, unless such executive is offered a
comparable position (i.e., a position of equal or greater organizational level, duties, authority,
compensation, title and status); (ii) a material reduction by Memorial of such executive’s base
compensation (base salary and target bonus) as in effect immediately prior to such reduction; or (iii) such
executive is requested to relocate (except for office relocations that would not increase such executive’s
one way commute by more than 50 miles, but only if that executive has provided Memorial with written
notice of that event no later than 30 days after having knowledge of the initial occurrence of that event and
Memorial has failed to remedy that event within 30 days of that notice).
•   “Change in Control” has the meaning ascribed to such term in the Memorial LTIP, which will be triggered
by the merger.
116
Table of Contents
Under the terms of each change in control agreement, if an executive’s employment is terminated on
account of a Qualifying Termination, then subject to such executive’s signing and not revoking a
separation agreement and release of claims in a form satisfactory to Memorial within 50 days following the
executive’s Qualifying Termination, such executive will be entitled to:
•   receive a lump sum payment on the 60th day following that executive’s Qualifying Termination equal to a
multiple of such executive’s (i) annual base salary and (ii) target bonus, in each case, at the highest rate in
effect during the 12-month period prior to the date on which the Qualifying Termination occurs, with the
multiple for Mr. Venghaus being 1.5x, and the multiple for the remaining executive officers being 2.0x;
•   the vesting of all outstanding unvested awards previously granted to such executive under the Memorial
LTIP (which, as of August 10, 2016, consist solely of the restricted stock awards described above);
•   subject to a timely election of Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (“COBRA”) continuation
coverage, reimbursement for the amount of COBRA continuation premiums (less required co-pay) until the
earlier of (i) 12 months following the Qualifying Termination and (ii) such time as such executive is no
longer eligible for COBRA continuation coverage;
•   financial counseling services for 12 months following the Qualifying Termination, subject to a maximum
benefit of $30,000; and
•   outplacement counseling services for 12 months following the Qualifying Termination, subject to a
maximum value of $30,000.
In the event that the Memorial board of directors determines that payments to be made to an executive
would constitute excess parachute payments subject to excise taxes under Section 4999 of the Code, then
the amount of those payments must either (i) be reduced so that such payments will not be subject to such
excise tax or (ii) paid in full, whichever results in the better net after tax position for the executive. Memorial
does not expect that any potential merger-related payments to its current executives would become subject
to Section 4999 of the Code. However, in no event is Memorial required to provide tax gross-up payments to
any executive.
The amounts set forth below reflect the estimate of the compensation and benefits that certain of the
current Memorial executive officers could receive pursuant to the change in control agreements in
connection with a Qualifying Termination in connection with the merger. Outstanding grants of Memorial
restricted stock are not included in the table below because they vest by virtue of the merger agreement
and pursuant to the terms of the award agreements. If any additional equity award is made to an executive
prior to the effective time of the merger, then that equity award would also vest by virtue of the merger
agreement. Under the terms of the merger agreement, Memorial is not permitted to make any additional
equity awards to Memorial’s officers after the signing of the merger agreement without Range’s prior written
consent.
Potential Cash
Severance
Estimated COBRA
costs
($)(1)
Name
  
Andrew J. Cozby
  
Larry R. Forney
  
Kyle N. Roane
  
Gregory M. Robbins  
Dennis G.
($)
    
1,260,000    
1,260,000    
1,225,000    
1,225,000
Maximum Financial
Counseling and
Outplacement
Services
23,871    
23,871    
23,871    
23,871
($)(2)
60,000    
60,000    
60,000    
60,000
Total
($)(3)
1,343,871  
 1,343,871  
 1,308,871  
 1,308,871
Dennis G.
Venghaus
680,625
23,871
60,000
764,496
(1) Estimated COBRA costs are based upon the costs of Memorial’s benefit plans as of December 31, 2015.
(2) Amounts shown in this table are the maximum amounts that could become payable under the change in
control agreements, but costs actually paid could be less.
Table of Contents
117
(3) The change in control agreements also provide for the acceleration of Memorial LTIP awards, but the
estimated value of the outstanding equity awards held by each of the Memorial executive officers has been
described separately above.
Indemnification and Insurance
The merger agreement provides that, for a period of six years from the effective time, Range shall
indemnify, defend and hold harmless an officer, director or employee of Memorial or any of its subsidiaries
and also—with respect to any such person—in his capacity as a director, officer, employee, member,
trustee or fiduciary of another corporation, foundation, partnership, joint venture, trust, pension or other
employee benefit plan or enterprise (whether or not such other entity or enterprise is affiliated with
Memorial) serving at the request of or on behalf of Memorial or any of its subsidiaries and together with
such person’s heirs, executors or administrators against any cost or expenses (including attorneys’ fees),
judgments, fines, losses, claims, damages or liabilities and amounts paid in settlement in connection with
any actual or threatened claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation, whether civil, criminal,
administrative, investigative or otherwise and whether or not such claim, action, suit, proceeding or
investigation results in a formal civil or criminal litigation or regulatory action. For additional information see
“The Merger Agreement—Indemnification and Insurance” beginning on page 137.
Quantification of Payments and Benefits to Memorial’s Named Executive Officers
Item 402(t) of Regulation S-K requires disclosure of compensation arrangements or understandings with
Memorial’s named executive officers that are based on or otherwise relate to the merger, whether present,
deferred or contingent. The individuals disclosed within this section are Memorial’s current executive
officers that were also deemed to be “named executive officers” within the Summary Compensation Table
of Memorial’s most recently filed definitive proxy statement. John A. Weinzierl, former Chief Executive
Officer and director of Memorial, and William J. Scarff, former President of Memorial, have been excluded
from the following table because they will receive no compensation or severance benefits in connection
with completion of the merger.
The table set forth below details the amount of payments and benefits that each of Memorial’s current
named executive officers could potentially receive in connection with the merger under the Memorial LTIP
and applicable change in control agreements. These payments consist of the payments described above
and are not in addition to those described in previous sections. These payments are specifically identified
in this fashion to allow for a non-binding advisory vote of Memorial’s stockholders regarding these
payments and benefits. For purposes of the table below, the per share value of the merger consideration
was estimated to be equal to $14.97, determined by multiplying the exchange ratio (0.375) by $39.92, the
closing price of the Range common stock over the first five trading days following the first public
announcement of the transaction.
Name
Andrew J. Cozby
Cash
($)(1)
Equity
($)(2)
Other
($)(3)
Total
Andrew J. Cozby
Larry R. Forney
Kyle N. Roane
1,260,000    
 1,260,000    
 1,225,000
3,571,932    
 3,571,932    
 3,473,250
83,871    
 83,871    
 83,871
4,915,803  
 4,915,803  
 4,782,121
(1) The estimated lump sum severance payments in this column would be considered “double-trigger” payments,
meaning that they would become payable only in connection with a Qualifying Termination in connection with
the merger. The severance costs would not be payable unless the named executive officer also executed a
separation agreement and release in favor of Memorial within 50 days of such Qualifying Termination. Subject
to Memorial’s receipt of an executed separation agreement and release of claims, the lump sum severance
payment would become payable on the sixtieth day following the executive’s Qualifying Termination unless, at
the time of the termination, the executive is considered to be a “specified employee” under Section 409A of the
Code and would be subject to a required six-month delay for any payments that are considered to be deferred
compensation payments pursuant to Section 409A of the Code.
Table of Contents
118
(2) The estimated equity values would be considered “single-trigger” payments, because the Memorial restricted
stock awards will become accelerated and settled upon the occurrence of a change in control (such as the
merger), without regard to whether the executive also incurs a termination of employment.
(3) The estimated costs in this column reflect a combination of the maximum financial counseling services
($30,000 per executive) and outplacement services ($30,000 per executive), as well as the estimated
maximum continued COBRA costs ($23,871), that could be provided pursuant to the change in control
agreements in the event that the executive incurs a Qualifying Termination. As noted above, each of these
services or payments could continue for a maximum period of 12 months following a Qualifying Termination,
although the duration of the services or payments could be shorter, in which case the amounts actually paid
could also be lower than costs shown in the table above.
Board of Directors and Executive Management Following the Merger
The merger agreement provides that, upon completion of the merger, Range will increase the size of the
Range board of directors by one member and fill the position created by that increase with one member of
the Memorial board of directors who has been designated by the Memorial board of directors. However, that
designation is subject to the review by, and approval and recommendation of, the Governance and
Nominating Committee of the Range board of directors.
On May 23, 2016, the Memorial board of directors designated Robert A. Innamorati for consideration by the
Governance and Nominating Committee. Mr. Innamorati currently serves as an independent member of the
Memorial board of directors and has indicated his willingness to serve on the Range board of directors. On
June 27, 2016, at a joint meeting of the Range board of directors and its Governance and Nominating
Committee, that committee unanimously recommended the appointment of Mr. Innamorati as a member of
the Range board of directors, subject to completion of the merger. Following receipt of that
recommendation, the Range board of directors, contingent upon the closing of the merger, unanimously
increased the size of the Range board of directors by one director and appointed Mr. Innamorati to fill the
open position on the Range board of directors and to serve thereon as an independent director.
It is anticipated that, following the completion of the merger, the Range board of directors will have ten
members, consisting of Mr. Innamorati and the nine individuals serving on the Range board of directors as
of the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus. If the merger is not consummated, then it is anticipated
that the Range board of directors will have nine members, consisting of the nine individuals serving on the
Range board of directors as of the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus. Pursuant to the
SailingStone Agreement, Range and SailingStone have agreed to cooperate with each other in good faith to
identify one new independent director to be appointed to the Range board of directors who is mutually
agreeable to the Range board of directors and SailingStone. This new independent director would be in
addition to the new director designated by Memorial pursuant to the merger agreement. See “The Range
Special Meeting—SailingStone Voting Support and Nomination Agreement” beginning on page 46 for more
information.
Following the completion of the merger, it is anticipated that each of the Range executive officers will
continue to serve in their current positions and under the same compensation plans and arrangements that
were in place prior to the merger:
•    Jeffery L. Ventura
•    Roger S. Manny
•    Ray N. Walker, Jr.
•    John K. Applegath
•    Alan W. Farquharson
Table of Contents
•    Dori A. Ginn
•    David P. Poole
•    Chad L. Stephens
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
   Executive Vice President—Chief Financial Officer
   Executive Vice President—Chief Operating Officer
Senior Vice President—Northern Marcellus Shale
and Midcontinent Divisions
Senior Vice President—Reservoir Engineering &
Economics
119
Senior Vice President—Controller and Principal
Accounting Officer
Senior Vice President—General Counsel and
Corporate Secretary
Senior Vice President—Corporate Development
Regulatory Clearances Required for the Merger
Consummation of the merger is subject to the expiration or termination of any applicable waiting period
under the U.S. Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 as amended (referred to in this joint
proxy statement/prospectus as the “HSR Act”). On June 6, 2016, Range and Memorial filed Notification and
Report Forms with the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice, which is referred to as the Antitrust
Division, and the Federal Trade Commission, which is referred to as the FTC. On June 17, 2016, Range and
Memorial were notified by U.S. antitrust authorities that the waiting period under the HSR Act had expired.
At any time before or after the effective time, the U.S. antitrust authorities could take action under the
antitrust laws, including seeking to prevent the merger, to rescind the merger or to conditionally approve
the merger upon the divestiture of assets of Range or Memorial or subject to other remedies. In addition,
U.S. state attorneys general could take action under the antitrust laws as they deem necessary or desirable
in the public interest including without limitation seeking to enjoin the completion of the merger or
permitting completion subject to regulatory concessions or conditions. Private parties may also seek to
take legal action under the antitrust laws under some circumstances. There can be no assurance that a
challenge to the merger on antitrust grounds will not be made or, if such a challenge is made, that it would
not be successful.
Pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement, Range and Memorial have agreed to use their respective
reasonable best efforts to obtain all regulatory approvals required to consummate the merger. While
seeking such approvals, Range agreed to take such actions as: (i) divest assets or businesses,
(ii) terminating existing relationships, contractual rights or obligations, (iii) terminate ventures or other
arrangement, (iv) creating relationships, contractual rights or obligations, and (v) effectuating changes or
restructurings of Range or Memorial (the “divestiture actions”). However, notwithstanding the foregoing,
Range and Memorial will not be required to any divestiture action that would have or would be reasonably
likely to have a material adverse effect on either Range or Memorial.
Each of Range, Memorial and Merger Sub has agreed not to take any action that would hinder or delay the
obtaining of clearance or the expiration of the required waiting period under the HSR Act, any competition
law notifications or any other applicable antitrust law; provided, however, that Range may take any
reasonable action to resist or reduce the scope of a divestiture action, even if it delays such expiration to a
later date (except that such date may not be beyond December 15, 2016).
Treatment of Memorial LTIP Restricted Stock Awards
Effective immediately prior to the effective time of the merger, each outstanding share of unvested
restricted Memorial common stock will fully vest and any applicable restrictions will lapse and, at the
effective time of the merger, each such share will be treated as a share of Memorial common stock,
including with respect to the right to receive 0.375 of a fully vested share of Range common stock.
Treatment of Range and Memorial Credit Agreements
Range currently maintains a secured credit facility, as amended, with JPMorgan Chase Bank, as
administrative agent, and the other lenders and financial institutions party thereto (the “Range credit
facility”), which is secured by substantially all of Range’s assets and has a maturity date of October 16,
2019. The Range
Table of Contents
120
credit facility provides for a maximum facility amount of $4.0 billion. The Range credit facility provides for a
borrowing base subject to annual redeterminations (to occur no later than May each year) and for event-
driven unscheduled redeterminations. As part of Range’s annual redetermination completed on March 17,
2016, Range’s borrowing base was reaffirmed at $3.0 billion and Range’s bank commitment was also
reaffirmed at $2.0 billion. As of June 30, 2016, Range’s bank group was composed of 29 financial
institutions, and no single bank held more than 5.8% of the total facility. The borrowing base may be
increased or decreased based on Range’s request and sufficient proved reserves, as determined by the
bank group. The commitment amount may be increased to the borrowing base, subject to payment of a
mutually acceptable commitment fee to those banks agreeing to participate in the facility increase. As of
June 30, 2016, the outstanding balance under the Range credit facility was $3.0 million, before deducting
debt issuance costs. Additionally, Range had $232.1 million of undrawn letters of credit, leaving $1.8 billion
of committed borrowing capacity available under the facility.
During a non-investment grade period, borrowings under the Range credit facility can either be at the
alternate base rate (“ABR,” as defined in the bank credit agreement) plus a spread ranging from 0.25% to
1.25% or LIBOR borrowings at the LIBOR Rate (as defined in the bank credit agreement) plus a spread
ranging from 1.25% to 2.25%. The applicable spread is dependent upon borrowings relative to the
borrowing base. Range may elect, from time to time, to convert all or any part of its LIBOR loans to base rate
loans or to convert all or any of the base rate loans to LIBOR loans. The weighted average interest rate for
the Range credit facility was 2.8% for the three months ended June 30, 2016 compared to 1.7% for the three
months ended June 30, 2015. A commitment fee is paid by Range on the undrawn balance based on an
annual rate of 0.30% to 0.375%. At June 30, 2016, the commitment fee was 0.30% and the interest rate
margin was 1.25% on Range’s LIBOR loans and 0.25% on Range’s base rate loans.
At any time during which Range has an investment grade debt rating from Moody’s Investors Service, Inc.
or Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services and Range has elected, at its discretion, to effect the investment
grade rating period, certain collateral security requirements, including the borrowing base requirement and
restrictive covenants, will cease to apply and an additional financial covenant (as defined in the Range
credit facility) will be imposed. During the investment grade period, borrowings under the Range credit
facility can either be at (i) the ABR plus a spread ranging from 0.125% to 0.75% or (ii) the LIBOR Rate plus a
spread ranging from 1.125% to 1.75% depending on Range’s debt rating. The commitment fee paid on the
undrawn balance would range from 0.15% to 0.30%. Range currently does not have an investment grade
debt rating.
Range anticipates that, at or immediately following the effective time of the merger, Memorial’s credit facility,
as amended, with Bank of America, as administrative agent and collateral agent, and the other lenders and
financial institutions party thereto (the “Memorial credit facility”) will be terminated and any indebtedness
under that facility will be repaid. As of June 30, 2016, Memorial had outstanding borrowings under the
Memorial credit facility in a principal amount of $514.0 million. The prepayment of indebtedness under the
Memorial credit facility may be made without premium or penalty, subject to customary breakage costs.
Range currently plans to fund the repayment of the indebtedness under the Memorial credit facility from
borrowings under the Range credit facility.
Memorial Senior Notes
As of June 30, 2016, Memorial had outstanding $600,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Memorial senior
notes. The indenture governing the Memorial senior notes (referred to in this joint proxy
statement/prospectus as the “Memorial senior indenture”) requires an offer be made to purchase the senior
notes at 101% of their face amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, upon the occurrence of a “change of
control” transaction. The cash tender offers referred to below in “Exchange Offers, Cash Tender Offers and
Consent Solicitations Relating to Memorial Senior Notes and Range Senior Subordinated Notes” are
intended to satisfy this requirement.
Table of Contents
121
Exchange Offers, Cash Tender Offers and Consent Solicitations Relating to Memorial Senior Notes and
Range Senior Subordinated Notes
In connection with the consummation of the merger, on August 3, 2016, Range commenced offers to
eligible holders of Memorial’s 5.875% Senior Notes due 2022 (the “Existing Memorial Notes”) to either
(i) exchange any and all outstanding Existing Memorial Notes for up to $600 million aggregate principal
amount of new senior notes issued by Range (the “Memorial Exchange Offer”); or (ii) purchase for cash any
and all outstanding Existing Memorial Notes (the “Memorial Cash Tender Offer”).
Also on August 3, 2016, Range commenced offers to eligible holders of its existing senior subordinated
notes (the “Existing Range Notes”) to exchange any and all outstanding Existing Range Notes for up to
$1.85 billion aggregate principal amount of new senior notes issued by Range (the “Range Exchange
Offers”). Also in connection with the consummation of the merger, Range commenced a concurrent cash
offer on August 3, 2016 (the “Concurrent Cash Tender Offer”) to those holders of the Existing Memorial
Notes who are not eligible to participate in the Memorial Cash Tender Offer.
The Memorial Exchange Offer, the Memorial Cash Tender Offer and the Range Exchange Offers are referred
to collectively as the “Eligible Holder Offers.” The Existing Memorial Notes and Existing Range Notes are
referred to collectively as the “Existing Notes.” The Eligible Holder Offers and the Concurrent Cash Tender
Offer are referred to collectively as the “Offers.”
The Offers and related consent solicitations will expire at 11:59 p.m. New York City time on August 30, 2016,
subject to extension by Range (the “Expiration Time”). The Offers and related consent solicitations will be
conditioned upon consummation of the merger. The consummation of the merger is not conditioned upon
the completion of the Offers or the consent solicitations.
In connection with the Offers, Range is soliciting consents from the holders of Existing Notes to adopt
certain proposed amendments to the indentures for the Existing Notes to eliminate certain of the
covenants, restrictive provisions and events of default. If consents sufficient to adopt those amendments
are received, the corresponding indenture will be amended accordingly. In order to implement the
amendments to the indenture for a particular series of Existing Notes, the consent of the holders of a
majority of the aggregate principal amount outstanding of that series of Existing Notes must be received.
In connection with the Eligible Holder Offers, the Existing Notes may be exchanged for up to $2.45 billion
aggregate principal amount of new Range notes (the “New Range Notes”), each series of which will have
the same maturity, interest rate and payment dates as the applicable series of Existing Notes. In connection
with the Memorial Cash Tender Offer, the holders of Existing Memorial Notes may elect to tender their
Existing Memorial Notes for all cash consideration instead of New Range Notes. In connection with the
Concurrent Cash Tender Offer, cash consideration is the only consideration that may be received.
The Offers provide for an early tender deadline of 5:00 p.m. New York City time on August 16, 2016 (the
“Early Tender Deadline”). The consideration for each $1,000 principal amount of Existing Notes tendered
for exchange at or before the Early Tender Deadline will equal: (i) in the case of Existing Memorial Notes,
$1,000 principal amount of New Range Notes, plus $12.50 in cash and (ii) in the case of Existing Range
Notes, $1,000 principal amount of New Range Notes. The cash consideration for each $1,000 principal
amount of Existing Memorial Notes tendered for purchase at or before the Early Tender Deadline will equal
$1,012.50.
The consideration for each $1,000 principal amount of Existing Notes tendered for exchange after the Early
Tender Deadline and before the Expiration Time will equal: (i) in the case of Existing Memorial Notes, $950
principal amount of New Range Notes, plus $12.50 in cash and (ii) in the case of Existing Range Notes, $950
principal amount of New Range Notes. The cash consideration for each $1,000 principal amount of Existing
Memorial Notes tendered for purchase after the Early Tender Deadline and before the Expiration Time will
equal $962.50 in cash.
Table of Contents
Dividend Policies
122
Range currently issues a quarterly dividend. On June 1, 2016, Range announced that the Range board of
directors declared a dividend of $0.02 per share of outstanding Range common stock, which was paid on
June 30, 2016 to Range stockholders of record at the close of business on June 15, 2016 and was
consented to by Memorial in accordance with the merger agreement. Any future decisions to pay dividends
on Range common stock will be at the discretion of the Range board of directors and will depend on the
financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements, and other factors that the Range board of
directors may deem relevant. The merger agreement prohibits Range (unless consented to in advance by
Memorial, which consent may not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned) from paying
dividends to holders of Range common stock until the earlier of the effective time of the merger and the
termination of the merger agreement in accordance with its terms.
Since its initial public offering, Memorial has not declared any dividends and does not anticipate declaring
or providing any cash dividends to holders of Memorial common stock in the foreseeable future. The
merger agreement prohibits Memorial (unless consented to in advance by Range, which consent may not
be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned) from paying dividends to holders of Memorial common
stock until the earlier of the effective time of the merger and the termination of the merger agreement in
accordance with its terms.
Listing of Range Common Stock
It is a condition to the completion of the merger that the shares of Range common stock to be issued to
Memorial stockholders pursuant to the merger and such other shares of Range common stock to be
reserved for issuance in connection with the merger be authorized for listing to be traded on the NYSE,
subject to official notice of issuance.
De-Listing and Deregistration of Memorial Stock
Upon completion of the merger, the Memorial common stock currently listed on the NASDAQ will cease to
be listed for trading on the NASDAQ and will subsequently be deregistered under the Exchange Act.
No Appraisal Rights
Under Delaware law, as well as the certificates of incorporation and bylaws of each company, neither the
holders of Range capital stock nor the holders of Memorial capital stock, respectively, are entitled to
appraisal rights in connection with the merger.
Litigation Relating to the Merger
In July 2016, three separate class action lawsuits relating to the merger were filed by alleged stockholders
(“Plaintiffs”) against Memorial and the members of the Memorial board of directors. These lawsuits are
styled (i) Roger Mariani v. Memorial Resource Development Corp., et al., Case No. 4:16-cv-2042, in the
United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas, Houston Division; (ii) Joel Morris v. Memorial
Resource Development Corp., et al., Case No. 4:16-cv-2183, in the United States District Court for the
Southern District of Texas, Houston Division and (iii) Robert Hawkins v. Memorial Resource Development
Corp., et. al., Case No. 4:16-cv-2201, in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas,
Houston Division. The Morris action also names Range and Medina Merger Sub, Inc. as additional
defendants.
Plaintiffs allege that this joint proxy statement/prospectus omits allegedly material information concerning,
in general and among other things, (i) the valuation analyses prepared by Barclays and Morgan Stanley in
connection with their respective fairness opinions, (ii) the financial projections utilized by Barclays and
Morgan Stanley and (iii) the background of the merger. Based on these allegations, Plaintiffs allege that (i)
the defendants have violated Section 14(a) of the Exchange Act and Rule 14a-9 promulgated thereunder
and (ii) members of the Memorial board of directors have violated Section 20(a) of the Exchange Act.
Plaintiffs also allege, in general and among other things, that the terms of the merger are (i) unfair to our
stockholders and (ii) the result of an inadequate process.
Table of Contents
123
Based on these allegations, Plaintiffs seek to enjoin the defendants from proceeding with or consummating
the merger. To the extent that the merger is consummated before injunctive relief is granted, Plaintiffs seek
to have the merger rescinded. Plaintiffs also seek attorneys’ fees.
Plaintiffs have not yet served the defendants, and the defendants’ date to answer, move to dismiss, or
otherwise respond to the lawsuits has not yet been set. The defendants cannot predict the outcome of the
lawsuits or any others that might be filed, nor can the defendants predict the amount of time and expense
that will be required to resolve the lawsuits. The defendants intend to vigorously defend the lawsuits.
Table of Contents
124
THE MERGER AGREEMENT
The following section summarizes material provisions of the merger agreement, which is included in this
joint proxy statement/prospectus as Annex A and is incorporated herein by reference in its entirety. The
rights and obligations of Range and Memorial are governed by the express terms and conditions of the
merger agreement and not by this summary or any other information contained in this joint proxy
statement/prospectus. Range and Memorial stockholders are urged to read the merger agreement carefully
and in its entirety—as well as this joint proxy statement/prospectus—before making any decisions
regarding the merger, including the approval and adoption of the merger agreement, and the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, by the Memorial stockholders and the
approval of the issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders pursuant to the
merger.
The merger agreement is included in this joint proxy statement/prospectus to provide you with information
regarding its terms and is not intended to provide any factual information about Range or Memorial. The
merger agreement contains representations and warranties by each of the parties to the merger agreement.
These representations and warranties have been made solely for the benefit of the other parties to the
merger agreement and:
•   are not necessarily intended as statements of fact, but rather as a way of allocating the risk between the
parties in the event that the statements therein prove to be inaccurate;
•   have been qualified by certain disclosures that were made between the parties in connection with the
negotiation of the merger agreement, which disclosures are not reflected in the merger agreement; and
•   may apply standards of materiality in a way that is different from what may be viewed as material by you or
other investors.
Accordingly, the representations and warranties and other provisions of the merger agreement should not
be read alone, but instead should be read together with the information provided elsewhere in this joint
proxy statement/prospectus and in the documents incorporated by reference into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus. See “Where You Can Find More Information” beginning on page 189.
This summary is qualified in its entirety by reference to the merger agreement.
Terms of the Merger; Merger Consideration
The merger agreement provides that, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the merger
agreement and in accordance with the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (the “DGCL”), at
the effective time of the merger, Merger Sub will merge with and into Memorial. Memorial will be the
surviving corporation in the merger and will become a wholly owned subsidiary of Range. At the effective
time of the merger, each outstanding share of Memorial common stock will be converted into the right to
receive 0.375 of a share of Range common stock. Effective immediately prior to the effective time of the
merger, each outstanding share of unvested restricted Memorial common stock granted to any employee
or director of Memorial, any of its subsidiaries or any of its predecessors under the Memorial LTIP will fully
vest pursuant to the merger agreement, and any applicable restrictions will lapse. At the effective time of the
merger, each of those shares will be treated as a share of Memorial common stock, including with respect
to the right to receive 0.375 of a fully vested share of Range common stock.
Range will not issue fractional shares of Memorial common stock pursuant to the merger agreement.
Instead, each Memorial stockholder who otherwise would have been entitled to receive a fraction of a share
of Range common stock will receive cash (without interest) in lieu thereof, upon surrender of his or her
shares of Memorial common stock. The amount of cash paid for a Memorial stockholder’s fraction of a
share of Range common stock will be calculated by multiplying that fraction by the volume weighted
average price of Range common stock for the five consecutive trading days immediately prior to the
closing date of the merger as reported by Bloomberg, L.P.
125
Table of Contents
The exchange ratio will be adjusted prior to the effective time of the merger accordingly to provide Memorial
common stockholders the same economic effect as contemplated by the merger agreement to account for
any stock split, reverse stock split, stock dividend, subdivision, reclassification, recapitalization,
combination, exchange of shares or the like, that occurs with respect to the shares of either Range
common stock or Memorial common stock outstanding after the date of the merger agreement and prior to
the effective time of the merger.
Completion of the Merger
The closing of the merger will take place two business days following the day on which the last condition to
the completion of the merger has been satisfied or waived or such other date as Range and Memorial may
agree in writing. The merger will become effective at the date and time the parties file the certificate of
merger with the Delaware Secretary of State or at such subsequent time as agreed to in writing by Range
and Memorial and specified in the certificate of merger.
Range and Memorial currently expect the closing of the merger to occur late in the third quarter of 2016.
However, as the merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of other conditions described in the merger
agreement, it is possible that factors outside the control of Range and Memorial could result in the merger
being completed at an earlier time, a later time or not at all.
Exchange of Shares in the Merger
Prior to the effective time of the merger, Range will enter into an agreement with Memorial’s transfer agent
or another entity reasonably acceptable to Memorial to act as agent for the holders of Memorial common
stock in connection with the merger and to receive the merger consideration and cash sufficient to pay
cash (without interest) in lieu of fractional shares to which holders of fractional shares may become entitled.
At the effective time of the merger, each share of Memorial common stock will be converted into the right to
receive 0.375 of a share of Range common stock.
Promptly after the effective time of the merger, but in no event later than three business days after the
closing date of the merger, Range will cause the exchange agent to mail to each holder of one or more
Memorial stock certificates or shares of Memorial common stock represented by book entry, a letter of
transmittal specifying, among other things, that delivery will be effected, and risk of loss and title to any
certificates will pass, only upon proper delivery of such certificates to the exchange agent, or in the case of
book entry shares, upon adherence to the procedures set forth in the letter of transmittal. That letter of
transmittal will also include instructions explaining the procedure for surrendering Memorial stock
certificates or, in the case of book entry shares, the surrender of such shares for payment of the merger
consideration and any cash in lieu of fractional shares of Range common stock.
After the effective time of the merger, shares of Memorial common stock will no longer be outstanding. At
the effective time, those shares will be automatically canceled and will cease to exist, and each certificate or
book entry share, if any, that previously represented shares of Memorial common stock will represent only
the right to receive the merger consideration as described above, any cash (without interest) in lieu of
fractional shares of Range common stock and any dividends or other distributions to which the holders of
the certificates become entitled upon surrender of such certificates or book entry shares. With respect to
those shares of Range common stock deliverable upon the surrender of Memorial stock certificates or
book entry shares, until holders of such Memorial stock certificates or book entry shares have surrendered
those stock certificates or book entry shares to the exchange agent, those holders will not receive
dividends or distributions declared or made with respect to such shares of Range common stock with a
record date after the effective time of the merger.
Table of Contents
126
Representations and Warranties
The merger agreement contains representations and warranties made by each party to the merger
agreement regarding aspects of such party’s business, financial condition, structure and other facts
pertinent to the merger. Each of Range and Memorial has made representations and warranties regarding,
among other things:
•   organization, good standing and power;
•   capital structure;
•   corporate authority with respect to the execution, delivery and performance of the merger agreement, and
the due and valid execution and delivery and enforceability of the merger agreement;
•   absence of conflicts with, or violations of, organizational documents, other contracts, permits and
applicable laws;
•   required regulatory filings and consents and approvals of governmental entities;
•   inapplicability of state takeover statutes;
•   SEC documents and financial statements;
•   absence of untrue statements of a material fact or omissions of any material fact in SEC filings since
January 1, 2015;
•   absence of certain changes and events since the most recent audited balance sheet date;
•   absence of undisclosed liabilities;
•   compliance with laws;
•   absence of certain litigation;
•   compensation and benefits matters;
•   tax matters;
•   oil and gas matters;
•   environmental matters;
•   opinions from financial advisors;
•   brokers’ fees payable in connection with the merger;
•   corporate governance; and
•   regulatory matters and permits.
Memorial has also made additional representations and warranties relating to:
•   ownership of subsidiaries;
•   collective bargaining agreements and other labor matters;
•   intellectual property;
•   title to and leasehold interests in real properties;
•   material contracts;
•   insurance;
•   derivative positions; and
•   absence of undisclosed interested party transactions.
127
Table of Contents
Range and Merger Sub have also made an additional representation and warranty relating to their lack of
ownership of Memorial common stock that would cause either of them to be an “interested stockholder” as
such term is defined in Section 203 of the DGCL.
The merger agreement also contains certain representations and warranties of Range with respect to its
wholly owned subsidiary, Merger Sub, including, without limitation, representations about Merger Sub’s
organization, good standing and power, corporate authority with respect to the execution, delivery and
performance of the merger agreement, absence of conflicts and violations, required consents and
approvals, and absence of business conduct.
Many of the representations and warranties in the merger agreement are qualified by a “materiality” or
“material adverse effect” standard (that is, they will not be deemed to be untrue or incorrect unless their
failure to be true or correct, individually or in the aggregate, would, as the case may be, be material or have
a material adverse effect). For purposes of the merger agreement, a “material adverse effect” means, with
respect to a person, an occurrence, condition, change, event or effect that is materially adverse to the
financial condition, business, or results of operations of that person and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole,
or prevents or materially delays or impairs the ability of that person to complete the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement, but excluding:
•   any occurrence, condition, change, event or effect in general economic or financial market conditions (but
any such occurrence, condition ,change, event or effect will be taken into account to the extent it
disproportionately affects that person compared to other persons in the same industry and in the same
regions and segments);
•   any occurrence, condition, change (including changes in applicable law), event or effect that affects the oil
and gas exploration and production industry generally (but any such occurrence, condition, change, event
or effect will be taken into account to the extent it disproportionately affects that person compared to other
persons in the same industry and in the same regions and segments);
•   the outbreak or escalation of hostilities involving the United States, the declaration by the United States of
a national emergency or war or the occurrence of natural disasters or acts of terrorism (but any such
outbreak, escalation, declaration or occurrence will be taken into account to the extent it disproportionately
affects that person compared to other persons in the same industry and in the same regions and
segments);
•   any failure to meet internal or analysts’ estimates, projections or forecasts;
•   a decline in market price, or a change in trading volume, of that person’s common stock;
•   any occurrence, condition, change event or effect resulting from or relating to the announcement or
pendency of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
•   any change in GAAP, or in the interpretation thereof, as imposed upon that person, its subsidiaries or their
respective businesses or any change in applicable law, or in the interpretation thereof;
•   any occurrence, condition, change, event or effect resulting from compliance by that person with the terms
of the merger agreement and each other agreement executed by that person in connection with the merger
agreement;
•   any litigation arising from any alleged breach of fiduciary duty or other violation of applicable law relating
to the merger agreement or the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement; and
•   any downgrade in rating of any indebtedness or debt securities of that person or any of its subsidiaries.
Conduct of Business
Each of Range and Memorial has agreed to certain covenants in the merger agreement restricting the
conduct of its business between the date of the merger agreement and the effective time of the merger. In
general,
Table of Contents
128
each of Range and Memorial has agreed to conduct its business in the ordinary course consistent with
past practice and to use reasonable best efforts to preserve intact its present business organization, retain
its officers and key employees, and preserve its relationships with its key customers and suppliers, comply
in all material respects with applicable law and not voluntarily relinquish any right as operator of any
material oil and gas properties.
In addition, Memorial has agreed to specific restrictions relating to the conduct of its business between the
date of the merger agreement and the effective time, including, without limitation, to not do any of the
following (subject, in each case, to exceptions specified below and in the merger agreement or previously
disclosed in writing to Memorial as provided in the merger agreement or as consented to in advance by
Range, which consent may not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned (subject to certain
exceptions), or as required by law):
•   declare, set aside or pay dividends on, make any other distributions in respect of, or enter into any
agreement with respect to the voting of, any of its capital stock (other than dividends and distributions by a
direct or indirect wholly-owned subsidiary to Memorial or to another direct or indirect wholly-owned
subsidiary of Memorial);
•   split, combine or reclassify any of its capital stock of, or interest in, Memorial or any of its subsidiaries;
•   purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire any shares of its or its subsidiaries’ capital stock or other equity
interests (except as required by the terms of any capital stock or equity interest of a subsidiary or as
contemplated by any Memorial employee benefit plan in each case existing as of the date of the merger
agreement);
•   offer, issue, deliver, grant or sell any capital stock or other equity interests in Memorial or any securities
convertible into, or any rights, warrants or options to acquire any such shares or equity interests other than:
•
•
•
•
the delivery of Memorial common stock upon the expiration of any restrictions on any restricted stock
granted under the Memorial LTIP;
issuances by a wholly-owned subsidiary of Memorial of such subsidiary’s capital stock or other
equity interests to Memorial or any other wholly-owned subsidiary of Memorial;
issuances of restricted stock granted under the Memorial LTIP to non-officer employees, but only if
the total amount of those restrict stock grants made after the date of the merger agreement is not
greater than $2,500,000; and
withholding of Memorial common stock to satisfy any tax withholding obligations with respect to
awards granted pursuant to the Memorial LTIP;
•   amend its or its subsidiaries’ certificate of incorporation, bylaws or other comparable organizational
documents;
•   merge, consolidate, combine or amalgamate with any person other than another wholly-owned subsidiary
of Memorial;
•   acquire or agree to acquire any business or any entity other than (i) pursuant to an agreement in effect on
the date of the merger agreement, (ii) acquisitions for less than $20,000,000 individually and
$100,000,000 in total and (iii) acquisitions and licenses in the ordinary course of business;
•   make any loans, advances or capital contributions to, or investments in, any person other than Memorial or
any of its subsidiaries except for (i) loans, advances or capital contributions in the form of trade credit
granted in the ordinary course of business consistent with past practices and (ii) capital contributions to, or
investments in, any person not in excess of $10,000,000 individually or $30,000,000 in total;
•   sell, lease or otherwise dispose of any material portion of its assets or properties other than (i) pursuant to
an agreement in effect on the date of the merger agreement or (ii) either in the ordinary course of business
or for which total consideration is less than $20,000,000;
129
Table of Contents
•   adopt or enter into a plan of complete or partial liquidation or dissolution of Memorial or any of its
significant subsidiaries;
•   change in any material respect its accounting methods, principles or practices except as required by
changes in GAAP or regulatory accounting principles;
•   except pursuant to an acquisition permitted by the conduct of business covenants, make, change or
revoke any material tax election, change an annual tax accounting period, settle any material tax claim or
assessment except where the amount of such settlement or compromise does not exceed the greater of
125% of the reserve for such matter on the Memorial financial statements or $1,000,000 or adopt or
change in any material respects any of its methods of reporting income or deductions for income tax
purposes from those employed in the preparation of income tax returns that have been filed for prior
taxable years;
•   other than with respect to Memorial’s change in control plan and the change in control agreements to
which Memorial is a party:
•
•
•
•
grant any increases in the compensation (including bonuses) or benefits payable or to become
payable to any of its directors, officers or employees with an annualized salary of $225,000 or more,
except increases required by applicable law or any Memorial benefit plan;
grant any increases in the compensation (including bonuses) or benefits payable or to become
payable to any Memorial employee with an annualized salary less than $225,000 except in the
ordinary course of business for the purpose of retention or hiring of that individual;
pay or agree to pay to any director, officer or key employee making an annualized salary of $225,000
or more, whether past or present, any material pension, retirement allowance or other employee
benefit not required by any of the existing Memorial benefit plans; or
enter into any new, or materially amend any existing employment, retention, change in control,
severance or termination agreement with any director, officer or key employee with an annualized
salary of $225,000 or more;
•   establish or become obligated under any collective bargaining agreement or any material employee
benefit plan that was not in existence or approved by the Memorial board of directors in the ordinary
course of business prior to the date of the merger agreement, or amend or terminate any such plan or
arrangement that would have the effect of materially enhancing any benefits;
•   fund (or agree to fund) any compensation or benefits under any employee benefit plan except where
required by any existing benefit plan on the date of the merger agreement;
•   hire any new employee or independent contractor or terminate the employment or service relationship of
any employee or independent contractor, other than in the ordinary course of business consistent with past
practice;
•   incur, create or assume any indebtedness for borrowed money, or create any encumbrances on any
property or assets of Memorial or any of Memorial’s subsidiaries in connection with any such
indebtedness, other than:
•
•
•
•
•
under existing credit facilities;
for extensions, renewals or refinancing of existing indebtedness (including related premiums and
expenses);
additional borrowings not to exceed $15,000,000 in the aggregate;
indebtedness by Memorial that is owed to any subsidiary or by any subsidiary of Memorial that is
owed to Memorial or a wholly-owned subsidiary of Memorial; or
the creation of any encumbrances securing indebtedness described by any of the four indebtedness
exceptions listed above;
Table of Contents
130
•   enter into any contract that would be a material contract other than in the ordinary course of business
consistent with past practice, or modify, amend, terminate or assign, waive or assign any material right or
benefit under, any material contract;
•   settle or offer or propose to settle any claims, actions or proceedings, other than those involving solely
monetary damages not in excess of $10,000,000 in the aggregate, but not with respect to those that
(i) involve a material conduct remedy or material injunctive or similar relief, (ii) involve admission of
criminal wrongdoing of Memorial or any of its subsidiaries or (iii) have a restrictive impact on the business
of Memorial or any of its subsidiaries in any material effect;
•   authorize or make capital expenditures that are in the aggregate greater than 125% of the aggregate
amount of capital expenditures scheduled to be made in Memorial’s capital expenditure budget, except for
capital expenditures (i) to repair damage resulting from insured casualty events where there is a
reasonable basis for a claim of insurance or (ii) in response to emergencies;
•   fail to use reasonable best efforts to maintain, with financially responsible insurance companies, insurance
in the amounts presently maintained;
•   take any action that would or would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially delay or materially
impede the consummation of any of the transactions contemplated by the merger;
•   amend or modify the MEMP GP PSA (as defined under “ —MEMP GP Purchase and Sale Agreement”) in
a manner that would impose or leave outstanding any additional material continuing liabilities relating to
or arising out of the ownership of Memorial Production Partners GP LLC on Memorial or any of its
subsidiaries after the effective time of the merger (the transactions contemplated by the MEMP GP PSA
were consummated on June 1, 2016);
•   enter into or amend any related party transaction, other than in the ordinary course of business consistent
with past practice; or
•   commit or agree to take any of the foregoing actions.
In addition, Range has agreed to specific restrictions relating to the conduct of its business between the
date of the merger agreement and the effective time of the merger, including, without limitation, to not do
any of the following (subject, in each case, to exceptions specified below and in the merger agreement or
previously disclosed in writing to the other party as provided in the merger agreement or as consented to in
advance by Memorial, which consent may not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned (subject to
certain exceptions), or as required by law):
•   declare, set aside or pay dividends on, make any other distributions in respect of any of its capital stock
(other than dividends and distributions by a direct or indirect subsidiary to Range or to a direct or indirect
subsidiary of Range);
•   split, combine or reclassify any of its capital stock of, or interest in, Range or any of its subsidiaries;
•   purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire any shares of its or its subsidiaries’ capital stock or other equity
interests (except as required by the terms of any capital stock or equity interest of a subsidiary or as
contemplated by any director compensation plan, employee benefit plan or employment agreement of
Range in each case existing as of the date of the merger agreement);
•   offer, issue, deliver, grant or sell any capital stock or other equity interests in Range or any of its
subsidiaries, or any rights, warrants or options to acquire any such capital stock or equity interests other
than:
•
issuances of Range common stock as consideration for, or to finance or refinance indebtedness
(including in respect of Memorial’s senior notes) incurred to finance, or assumed as a result of,
acquisitions by Range or any of its subsidiaries;
Table of Contents
131
•
•
•
•
•
issuances and sales of Range common stock for cash if the number of shares of Range common
stock issued does not exceed in the aggregate 5% of the issued and outstanding Range common
stock as of the date of the merger agreement;
the delivery of Range common stock upon the expiration of any restrictions on any restricted stock
granted under the Range stock plan;
issuances by a wholly-owned subsidiary of Range of such subsidiary’s equity interests to Range or
any other wholly-owned subsidiary of Range;
issuances of restricted stock granted under the Range stock plan to employees and directors in
amounts consistent with past practice; or
withholding of Range common stock to satisfy any tax withholding obligations with respect to awards
granted pursuant to the Range stock plan;
•   amend its articles of incorporation, bylaws or other comparable organizational documents;
•   adopt or enter into a plan of complete or partial liquidation or dissolution of Range or any of its significant
subsidiaries;
•   change in any material respect its material accounting methods, principles or practices except as required
by changes in GAAP or statutory accounting requirements;
•   take any action, cause any action to be taken, knowingly fail to take any action or knowingly fail to cause
any action to be taken, that would be reasonably expected to prevent the merger from qualifying as a
“reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code;
•   except as would not or would not reasonably be expected to prevent, materially delay or materially impede
Range’s or Merger Sub’s ability to consummate the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement,
enter into, participate or engage in or continue any discussions or negotiations with respect to:
•
•
a merger, consolidation, combination or amalgamation with any person other than another wholly-
owned subsidiary of Range;
an acquisition or agreement to acquire any business or any corporation, partnership, association or
other business organization or division thereof; or
•
entry into any partnership, joint venture or similar arrangement involving a material investment or
expenditure of funds by Range or any of its subsidiaries;
•   take any action that would or would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially delay or materially
impede the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement;
•   commit or agree to take any of the foregoing actions;
•   terminate, modify, assign or waive or assign any rights under any provision of, the voting and support
agreement; or
•   enter into any other agreement with the parties to the voting and support agreement that would have the
effect of a termination, modification, assignment or waiver or assignment of rights under any provision of
the voting and support agreement.
No Solicitation of Competing Proposals
Memorial has agreed that it will, and will cause its subsidiaries and will use reasonable best efforts to cause
its representatives to, from and after the date of the merger agreement, immediately cease and cause to be
terminated any solicitation, encouragement, discussion or negotiation with any person conducted prior to
the date of the merger agreement with respect to competing proposals (as defined below) or any indication
of interest that would or would reasonably be expected to lead to a competing proposal.
Table of Contents
132
A “competing proposal” means any contract, proposal or offer relating to (i) any transaction pursuant to
which any person or group (other than MRD Holdco LLC and its affiliates), directly or indirectly, acquires
business or assets of Memorial that generated 20% or more of Memorial’s and its subsidiaries’ net revenue
or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization for the preceding 12 months, (ii) any
transaction pursuant to which any person or group directly or indirectly acquires 20% or more of the
outstanding shares of Memorial common stock or any tender or exchange offer that if consummated would
result in any person or group (other than MRD Holdco LLC and its affiliates) owning 20% or more of the
outstanding shares of Memorial common stock; or (iii) any merger, consolidation, business combination or
similar transaction involving Memorial (other than the merger) permitting any person or group (other than
MRD Holdco LLC and its affiliates) to acquire 20% or more of Memorial’s and its subsidiaries’ assets or
equity interests.
Subject to certain exceptions described below, Memorial has agreed that it will not, and will cause its
subsidiaries not to and will use reasonable best efforts to cause its representatives not to, directly or
indirectly (the following will be referred to as the “no-shop covenants”):
•   solicit, initiate, knowingly encourage or knowingly facilitate (including by way of furnishing non-public
information) any inquiry, proposal or offer regarding a competing proposal;
•   conduct, participate or engage in any discussions or negotiations regarding a competing proposal;
•   furnish or provide any non-public information regarding Memorial or its subsidiaries, or access to the
properties, assets or employees of Memorial or its subsidiaries, unless to a person in the ordinary course
of business consistent with past practice;
•   enter into any letter of intent or agreement regarding a competing proposal;
•   resolve, agree or publicly propose to, or permit Memorial or Memorial’s subsidiaries or representatives to
agree to or publicly propose to take any actions listed above.
Notwithstanding the no-shop covenants described above, Memorial is permitted, prior to obtaining
Memorial stockholder approval of the merger, to engage in the activities prohibited by the no-shop
covenants with any person who has made a bona fide competing proposal that did not result from a
material breach of the no-shop covenants if both (A) Memorial has first received an executed confidentiality
and standstill agreement that is no less favorable, in the aggregate, to Memorial than the existing
confidentiality agreement between Memorial and Range and that otherwise complies with the no-shop
covenants and (B) the Memorial board of directors or any committee thereof determines in good faith (after
consultation with outside legal counsel and its financial advisors) that such competing proposal is, or
would or would reasonably be expected to lead to, a Memorial superior proposal (as defined below).
A “Memorial superior proposal” means a bona fide written proposal by any person for (i) business or
assets of Memorial or its subsidiaries that generated 50% or more of Memorial’s and its subsidiaries net
revenue or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization for the preceding 12 months or
(ii) more than 50% of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock, in each case that the Memorial
board of directors or any committee thereof determines in good faith, after consultation with its financial
advisors and outside legal counsel, and after taking into account relevant legal, financial, regulatory,
estimated timing of consummation and other aspects of such proposal and the person making the
proposal, would, if consummated in accordance with its terms, result in a transaction more favorable to
Memorial’s stockholders than the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
Memorial has also agreed to advise Range as promptly as practicable (but in no event more than 48 hours
after receipt) of any competing proposal or any request for non-public information made by any person that
has made or informs Memorial that it is considering making a competing proposal or any request for
discussions or negotiations relating to a competing proposal. Any such notice will include either (x) a copy
of such competing proposal or request or (y) a written summary of the material terms of such competing
proposal (including the
Table of Contents
133
identity of the person making such competing proposal). Additionally, Memorial has agreed to keep Range
reasonably informed of the status of any such competing proposal or request—including regarding
material modifications—and to provide Range as promptly as practicable (but in no event more than 24
hours after receipt) with copies of all material correspondence and, with respect to material oral
communications, a written summary of such communications sent or received in connection with that
competing proposal or request. Memorial has also agreed to refrain from releasing, amending or waiving
any “standstill” or similar agreements and will use reasonable best efforts to enforce such agreements.
Changes in Board Recommendations
Subject to certain exceptions, the merger agreement generally provides that:
•   Memorial may not change its recommendation that Memorial stockholders approve and adopt the merger
agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger; and
•   Range may not change its recommendation that Range stockholders approve the issuance of Range
common stock in the merger.
However, notwithstanding the foregoing, the merger agreement provides that, prior to obtaining Memorial
stockholder approval of the merger, Memorial—in response to a bona fide competing proposal that did not
result from a material breach of the no-shop covenants and certain other related covenants—may effect a
change of recommendation, or terminate the merger agreement (subject to Memorial’s obligation to pay the
termination fee as described below in “—Effect of Termination”), after satisfaction of all of the following:
•   the Memorial board of directors or a committee thereof has determined in good faith in accordance with the
merger agreement that the competing proposal is a Memorial superior proposal and that the failure to
effect a change of recommendation would be inconsistent with its duties under applicable law;
•   Memorial has given Range at least three business days’ prior written notice, which notice will include the
material terms and conditions of the competing proposal (including complete copies of negotiated
documents), the identity of the person making the competing proposal, and a statement that Memorial
intends to change its recommendation at the end of such three business day period (the “negotiation
period”);
•   during the negotiation period, Memorial shall have, and shall have caused its representatives to have,
(i) negotiated with Range and its representatives in good faith, to the extent Range wishes to negotiate
and so long as Range and its representatives negotiate in good faith, to modify the merger agreement so
that such Memorial superior proposal ceases to constitute a Memorial superior proposal and (ii) kept
Range and its representatives reasonably informed of the status and changes in the material terms and
conditions of such competing proposal or other change in circumstances related to the competing
proposal; provided, however, that, with respect to each material modification to the financial terms of a
competing proposal determined to be a Memorial superior proposal, the negotiation period will be
extended for 24 hours after Range’s receipt of written notification of such modifications; and
•   the Memorial board of directors has considered all revisions to the terms of the merger agreement
irrevocably offered in writing by Range and, at the end of the negotiation period, the Memorial board of
directors shall have determined in good faith in accordance with the merger agreement that the competing
proposal continues to constitute a Memorial superior proposal even if such revisions were to be given
effect and that failure to effect a change of recommendation would be inconsistent with its duties under
applicable law.
In addition to the provisions in the merger agreement described above that permit the Memorial board of
directors to either terminate the merger agreement or effect a change of recommendation in connection
with a superior proposal, the merger agreement also permits the Memorial board of directors to effect a
change of
134
Table of Contents
recommendation—but not terminate the merger agreement—prior to obtaining Memorial stockholder
approval of the merger and in response to an intervening event (as defined below) with respect to Memorial
after satisfaction of all of the following conditions:
•   the Memorial board of directors or a committee thereof has determined in good faith, after consulting with
outside legal counsel and financial advisors, that the failure to take such action would be inconsistent with
its duties under applicable law;
•   Memorial has given Range at least three business days’ prior written notice, which notice will include the
reasons for the change of recommendation and a statement that the Memorial board of directors intends to
effect such change of recommendation at the end of such three business day period;
•   during such three business day period, Memorial shall have, and shall have caused its representatives to
have, negotiated with Range and its representatives in good faith, to the extent Range wishes to negotiate
and so long as Range and its representatives negotiate in good faith, to modify the merger agreement in
such a manner that would obviate the need for such change of recommendation; and
•   the Memorial board of directors has considered all revisions to the terms of the merger agreement
irrevocably offered in writing by Range and, at the end of the negotiation period, the Memorial board of
directors shall have determined in good faith that such intervening event remains in effect and the failure to
effect such change of recommendation in response to such intervening event would be inconsistent with
its duties under applicable law, even if such revisions were to be given effect.
Subject to certain exceptions, an “intervening event”—with respect to either Memorial or Range—means
any material event, fact, circumstance, development or occurrence that is not known by the applicable
party’s board of directors as of the date of the merger agreement (or if known, the magnitude or material
consequences of which were not known), that becomes known (or the magnitude or material
consequences thereof become known) to or by that party’s board of directors prior to obtaining
stockholder approval of the proposed issuance of Range common stock in the merger (if that party is
Range) or the merger (if that party is Memorial).
The merger agreement also provides that, prior to obtaining Range stockholder approval of the proposed
issuance of Range common stock in the merger and in response to an intervening event with respect to
Range, the Range board of directors or any committee thereof may effect a change of recommendation
after satisfaction of all of the following conditions:
•   the Range board of directors or a committee thereof has reasonably determined in good faith, after
consulting with outside legal counsel and financial advisors, that the failure to effect such change of
recommendation would be inconsistent with its duties under applicable law;
•   Range has given Memorial at least three business days’ prior written notice, which notice will include the
reasons for the change of recommendation and a statement that the Range board of directors intends to
effect such change of recommendation at the end of such three business day period;
•   Range has negotiated in good faith with Memorial for such three business day period to enable Memorial
to revise the terms of the merger agreement in such a manner that would obviate the need for such change
of recommendation; and
•   at the end of such three business day period, the Range board of directors shall have determined in good
faith, after taking into account all proposed changes to the merger agreement with Memorial, that such
intervening event remains in effect and that the failure to effect a change of recommendation in response
to such intervening event would be inconsistent with its duties under applicable law.
If the intervening event relates to an alternative proposal that the Range board of directors determines in
good faith in accordance with the merger agreement constitutes a Range superior proposal, the Range
board of directors may—in addition to its right to effect a change of recommendation—have the right to
terminate the
Table of Contents
135
merger agreement (subject to Range’s obligation to pay the termination fee as described below in “—Effect
of Termination”). For a description of this termination right, see “—Termination of the Merger Agreement”
beginning on page 139 and “—Effect of Termination” beginning on page 140.
Efforts to Obtain Required Stockholder Votes
Range has agreed to take all action necessary in accordance with applicable laws and its organizational
documents to hold a stockholders meeting as promptly as reasonably practicable after this Form S-4 is
declared effective for purposes of obtaining Range stockholder approval of the issuance of Range
common stock pursuant to the merger agreement.
Memorial has also agreed to take all action necessary in accordance with applicable laws and its
organizational documents to hold a stockholders meeting as promptly as reasonably practicable after this
Form S-4 is declared effective for purposes of obtaining Memorial stockholder approval of the adoption of
the merger agreement, the merger and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement.
Efforts to Complete the Merger
Range and Memorial have each agreed to use their reasonable best efforts to take, or cause to be taken, all
actions necessary, proper or advisable, and to assist and cooperate with the other party, to consummate
and make effective, in the most expeditious manner practicable, the merger and the other transactions
contemplated by the merger.
In addition, Range and Memorial have each agreed not to take any action that would cause the transactions
contemplated by the merger to be subject to requirements imposed by “moratorium,” “control share,” “fair
price,” “interested stockholder,” “business combination” or similar anti-takeover laws.
Employee Benefits Matters
Range and Memorial have agreed that:
•   with respect to each Memorial employee as of the closing date of the merger who remains an employee of
Range or any of its subsidiaries following the merger, that employee will receive, for a period of one year
following the closing date of the merger, a base salary or hourly rate of pay and annual incentive
compensation opportunities, as applicable, at a rate no less favorable than received by similarly-situated
employees of Range or its subsidiaries;
•   with respect to each Memorial employee who becomes an employee of Range or its subsidiaries as of the
closing date of the merger, Range will take all actions necessary or appropriate to permit that employee to
either continue to participate following the closing date of the merger in Memorial’s benefit plans or to be
eligible to participate in Range’s benefit plans;
•   with respect to each Memorial employee as of the closing date of the merger who becomes eligible to
participate in Range benefit plans that are group health plans, Range will credit that employee—for the
year during which coverage under such group health plans begin—with any deductibles and copayments
already incurred during such year under the comparable plan of Memorial;
•   with respect to each Memorial employee as of the closing date of the merger who becomes eligible to
participate in Range benefit plans, Range will waive any preexisting condition exclusion or restriction with
respect to participation and coverage requirements applicable to that employee to the extent such
exclusion or restriction did not apply with respect to that employee under the corresponding plan of
Memorial;
•   with respect to each Memorial employee as of the closing date of the merger who becomes an employee
of Range or its subsidiaries immediately following the effective time of the merger, Range, the surviving
corporation, their affiliates and the Range benefit plans will recognize years of service
Table of Contents
136
and level of seniority with Memorial and its subsidiaries (including service with any other employer that
was recognized by Memorial or its subsidiary) for purposes of terms of employment and eligibility, vesting
and benefit determination (but not for purposes of benefit accruals under any defined benefit or retiree
welfare arrangement);
•   Range will cause the surviving corporation and its subsidiaries to assume, adopt and continue the
Memorial 401(k) plan in effect as of immediately prior to the closing date;
•   Range will cause the surviving corporation and its subsidiaries to honor their respective obligations under
all employment, severance, change in control and other agreements; and
•   with respect to each Memorial employees as of the closing date of the merger who becomes an employee
of Range or its subsidiaries immediately following the effective time of the merger, Range and its affiliates
will assume and honor all vacation and other paid time off days accrued or earned but not yet taken as of
the closing date of the merger.
Treatment of Memorial LTIP Restricted Stock Awards
Effective immediately prior to the effective time of the merger, each outstanding share of unvested
restricted Memorial common stock granted to any employee or director of Memorial, any of its subsidiaries
or any of its predecessors under the Memorial LTIP will fully vest pursuant to the merger agreement, and
any applicable restrictions will lapse. At the effective time of the merger, each of those shares will be treated
as a share of Memorial common stock, including with respect to the right to receive 0.375 of a fully vested
share of Range common stock. As a result, at the effective time of the merger, each holder of such a share
will participate in the merger consideration on the same terms and conditions as all other Memorial
stockholders generally.
Indemnification and Insurance
The merger agreement provides that, for a period of six years from the effective time, Range and the
surviving entity in the merger shall jointly and severally indemnify, defend and hold harmless each person
who was on the date of the merger agreement, or had been prior to the date of the merger agreement, or
became prior to the effective time of the merger, a director, officer or employee of Memorial or any of its
subsidiaries and also—with respect to any such person—in his capacity as a director, officer, employee,
member, trustee or fiduciary of another corporation, foundation, partnership, joint venture, trust, pension or
other employee benefit plan or enterprise (whether or not such other entity or enterprise is affiliated with
Memorial) serving at the request of or on behalf of Memorial or any of its subsidiaries and together with
such person’s heirs, executors or administrators against any cost or expenses (including attorneys’ fees),
judgments, fines, losses, claims, damages or liabilities and amounts paid in settlement in connection with
any actual or threatened claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation, whether civil, criminal,
administrative, investigative or otherwise and whether or not such claim, action, suit, proceeding or
investigation results in a formal civil or criminal litigation or regulatory action. In addition, Range has agreed
to maintain officers’ and directors’ liability insurance, for six years following the effective time of the merger,
for each person who is now, or has been at any time prior to the date of the merger agreement or who
becomes prior to the effective time of the merger, a director, officer or employee of Memorial, and, who is
currently covered by the liability insurance coverage that is currently maintained by Memorial, on terms
substantially no less advantageous to the indemnified parties than Memorial’s existing insurance. However,
Range will not be required to pay more than 300% per year of coverage of the amount currently expended
by Memorial per year of coverage as of the date of the merger agreement.
Other Covenants and Agreements
The merger agreement contains certain other covenants and agreements, including covenants relating to:
•   cooperation between Range and Memorial in the preparation of this joint proxy statement/prospectus and
obtaining clearance under the HSR Act;
•   confidentiality and access by each party to certain information about the other party;
Table of Contents
137
•   application for listing on the NYSE of the shares of Range common stock to be issued in the merger; and
•   reporting the merger as a reorganization within the meaning of Section  368 of the Code.
Conditions to Completion of the Merger
The obligations of Range, Memorial and Merger Sub to complete the merger are subject to the satisfaction
or waiver of the following conditions on or prior to the closing date:
•   adoption of the merger agreement by the affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the outstanding shares
of Memorial common stock;
•   approval of the issuance of Range common stock pursuant to the merger agreement by the affirmative vote
of holders of a majority of the shares present in person or represented by proxy and entitled to vote on that
proposal;
•   expiration or termination of any waiting periods under the HSR Act and the receipt of any consent required
to be obtained for the consummation of the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement (on June 17, 2016, Range and Memorial were notified by U.S. antitrust authorities that the
waiting period under the HSR Act had expired);
•   absence of any laws, temporary restraining orders, preliminary or permanent injunctions or other orders
that have the effect of making the merger illegal or otherwise prohibiting consummation of the merger;
•   effectiveness of the registration statement on Form S-4 of which this joint proxy statement/prospectus
forms a part and the absence of a stop order or proceedings pending before the SEC for that purpose; and
•   authorization for the listing on the NYSE of the shares of Range common stock to be issued in connection
with the merger, subject to official notice of issuance.
In addition, Range’s and Merger Sub’s obligations to effect the merger are subject to the satisfaction or
waiver of the following additional conditions:
•   each of the representations and warranties of Memorial set forth in the merger agreement being true and
correct as of the date of the merger agreement and as of the closing date as though made on and as of the
closing date, unless otherwise specified, except where such failures to be true and correct (without regard
to qualification or exceptions contained therein as to “materiality” or “material adverse effect”) would not be
reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a material adverse effect; provided, however,
that the foregoing clause does not apply (a) in respect of the representations and warranties contained in
Memorial’s capital structure representation, which must be true and correct as of the date of the merger
agreement and as of the closing date as though made on and as of the closing date, except for any de
minimis inaccuracies, and (b) in respect of Memorial’s representations and warranties contained in the
representation regarding absence of certain changes since December 31, 2015, which must be true and
correct as of the date of the merger agreement and as of the closing date as though made on and as of the
closing date;
•   performance of, or compliance with, in all material respects, all obligations required to be performed or
complied with by Memorial under the merger agreement on or prior to the effective time;
•   receipt by Range of a certificate executed by an executive officer of Memorial, dated the closing date,
confirming the satisfaction of the conditions described in the preceding two bullets;
•   receipt by Range of a tax opinion from counsel including an opinion that (i) the merger will be treated as a
“reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code and (ii) Memorial, Range and Merger
Sub will each be a “party to the reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368 of the Code; and
138
Table of Contents
•   the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the MEMP GP PSA (which transactions
contemplated by the MEMP GP PSA were consummated on June 1, 2016).
In addition, Memorial’s obligations to effect the merger are subject to the satisfaction or waiver of the
following additional conditions:
•   each of the representations and warranties of Range set forth in the merger agreement being true and
correct as of the date of the merger agreement and as of the closing date as though made on and as of the
closing date, unless otherwise specified, except where such failures to be true and correct (without regard
to qualification or exceptions contained therein as to “materiality” or “material adverse effect”) would not be
reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a material adverse effect; provided, however,
that the foregoing clause does not apply, (a) in respect of the representations and warranties contained in
Range’s capital structure representation, which must be true and correct as of the date of the merger
agreement and as of the closing date as though made on and as of the closing date, except for any de
minimis inaccuracies, and (b) in respect of Range’s representations and warranties contained in the
representation regarding absence of certain changes since December 31, 2015, which must be true and
correct as of the date of the merger agreement and as of the closing date as though made on and as of the
closing date;
•   performance of, or compliance with, in all material respects all agreements and covenants required to be
performed or complied with by Range and Merger Sub under the merger agreement on or prior to the
effective time;
•   receipt by Memorial of a certificate executed by an executive officer of Range, dated the closing date,
confirming the satisfaction of the conditions described in the preceding two bullets; and
•   receipt by Memorial of a tax opinion from counsel including an opinion that (i) the merger will be treated as
a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code and (ii) Memorial, Range and Merger
Sub will each be a “party to the reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368 of the Code.
Termination of the Merger Agreement
The merger agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the effective time of the merger, whether
before or after the receipt of the required stockholder approvals, under the following circumstances:
•   by mutual written consent of Range and Memorial;
•   by either Range or Memorial:
•
•
•
if any governmental entity denies a required approval and such denial has become final and
nonappealable, or issues a final and nonappealable order permanently enjoining or otherwise
prohibiting the completion of the merger, unless such terminating party’s failure to comply with any
material covenant or agreement under the merger agreement has been the cause of or resulted in
such denial;
if the merger is not consummated on or before 5:00 p.m. Houston time on December 15, 2016,
unless the failure to close by such date is due to the failure of the terminating party to perform any of
its material covenants or agreements under the merger agreement;
upon a breach of any covenant or agreement or any representation or warranty on the part of the
other party, which breach, if occurring or continuing on the closing date, would result in the failure of
certain conditions to the non-breaching party’s obligations to complete the merger and such breach
is not curable or, if curable, is not cured within 30 days after written notice to the breaching party (a
“terminable breach”) (however, the terminating party will have no right to terminate the merger
agreement under this provision if the terminating party has committed a terminable breach of any of
its representations, warranties or covenants in the merger agreement);
Table of Contents
139
•
•
if the Range stockholders fail to approve the issuance of Range common stock pursuant to the
merger agreement at the Range special meeting; or
if the Memorial stockholders fail to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger, at the Memorial special meeting;
•   by Range:
•
•
•
prior to obtaining approval of the Memorial stockholders, if the Memorial board of directors makes a
change of recommendation;
prior to obtaining approval of the Memorial stockholders, if Memorial is in violation in any material
respect of the covenants in the merger agreement relating to the filing of this joint proxy
statement/prospectus or the obligation to hold the Memorial stockholder meeting;
prior to obtaining approval of the proposed issuance of Range common stock, in order to enter into a
definitive agreement with respect to a Range alternative proposal (as defined below), if the Range
board of directors determines in good faith in accordance with the merger agreement that such
proposal is a Range superior proposal (as defined below), and that the failure to terminate the
merger agreement would be inconsistent with its duties under applicable law (provided that Range
contemporaneously pays the applicable termination fee described below);
•   by Memorial:
•
•
prior to obtaining the approval of the Memorial stockholders, in order to enter into a definitive
agreement with respect to a Memorial superior proposal in a manner allowed by exceptions to the
no-shop covenants (provided that Memorial contemporaneously pays the applicable termination fee
described below);
prior to obtaining approval of the proposed issuance of Range common stock, if Range or Merger
Sub is in violation in any material respect of the covenants in the merger agreement relating to the
filing of this joint proxy statement/prospectus or the obligation to hold the Range stockholder
meeting; or
•
if the Range board of directors or any committee thereof has made a change of recommendation.
An “alternative proposal” means, with respect to Range, any contract, proposal, offer or indication of
interest relating to any transaction or series of transactions involving (i) any merger, consolidation, or
dissolution, (ii) any direct or indirect acquisition by any person or group of business or assets of Range or
its subsidiaries generating more than 20% of Range’s consolidated net revenue or earnings before interest,
taxes, depreciation and amortization for the preceding 12 months, or (iii) any direct or indirect acquisition
by any person or group of more than 20% of the voting stock of Range.
A “Range superior proposal” means, with respect to Range, a bona fide written alternative proposal (except
that the references to 20% in the definition of alternative proposal shall instead be to 50%) that in the good
faith determination of the Range board of directors or any committee thereof, after consultation with its
financial advisors and after taking into account relevant legal, financial, regulatory, estimated timing of
consummation and other aspects of such proposal and the person making such proposal, would, if
consummated, result in a transaction more favorable to Range’s stockholders than the transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement.
Effect of Termination
If the merger agreement is terminated by either party in accordance with its terms, the merger agreement
(except for the confidentiality agreement between Range and Memorial and certain provisions expressly
listed in the merger agreement, which will survive such termination) will become void, there will be no rights
or obligations of any party, except: (a) with respect to any applicable termination fees; (b) for intentional and
material breach of a covenant, agreement or obligation of the merger agreement; (c) for intentional fraud; or
(d) for breaches of the confidentiality agreement. In the case of clauses (b) and (c), the aggrieved party will
be
Table of Contents
140
entitled to all rights and remedies available at law or equity. See “— Third Party Beneficiaries” beginning on
page 142. In the case of clause (d), the aggrieved party will be entitled to all rights and remedies provided in
the confidentiality agreement.
Termination Fees and Expenses
In the event the merger agreement is terminated by either Range or Memorial because of the failure to
obtain Memorial stockholder approval, then Memorial will pay Range a no vote expense payment equal to
$25,000,000. In the event the merger agreement is terminated by either Range or Memorial because of the
failure to obtain Range stockholder approval, then Range will pay to Memorial a no vote expense payment
equal to $25,000,000. The amount of the no vote expense payment is fixed at $25,000,000, and the payee is
not required to demonstrate that it has incurred out-of-pocket expenses equal to that fixed amount.
The merger agreement provides that Memorial will be obligated to pay Range a termination fee of
$75,000,000 (less any no vote expense payment previously paid) in the following circumstances:
•   if Memorial terminates the merger agreement prior to the receipt of the Memorial stockholder approval with
respect to the merger, in order to enter into a definitive agreement with respect to a Memorial superior
proposal in a manner permitted by the merger agreement;
•   if Range terminates the merger agreement because the Memorial board of directors makes a change of
recommendation or Memorial breaches the covenants in the merger agreement relating to the filing of this
joint proxy statement/prospectus or the obligation to hold the Memorial stockholder meeting;
•   if:
•
•
•
the merger agreement is terminated by either Memorial or Range because Memorial’s stockholders
did not adopt the merger agreement, or by Range because Memorial commits a terminable breach;
on or before the date of any such termination a competing proposal shall have been announced,
disclosed or otherwise communicated to the Memorial board of directors; and
within 12 months of any such termination, Memorial enters into a definitive agreement with respect to
a competing proposal or consummates a competing proposal.
For purposes of these termination fee provisions, any reference in the definition of “competing proposal”
to “20% or more” will be deemed to be a reference to “more than 50%.”
The merger agreement provides that Range will be obligated to pay Memorial a termination fee of
$125,000,000 if Memorial terminates the merger agreement because the Range board of directors makes a
change of recommendation or Range breaches the covenants in the merger agreement relating to the filing
of this joint proxy statement/prospectus or the obligation to hold the Range stockholder meeting;
The merger agreement provides that Range will be obligated to pay Memorial a termination fee of
$300,000,000 (less any no vote expense payment or termination fee payment previously paid) in the
following circumstances:
•   if Range terminates the merger agreement prior to the receipt of the Range stockholder approval with
respect to issuance of Range shares in connection the merger, in order to enter into a definitive agreement
with respect to an alternative proposal if the Range board of directors determines in good faith in
accordance with the merger agreement that such alternative proposal is a Range superior proposal and
that the failure to terminate the merger agreement would be inconsistent with its duties under applicable
law;
Table of Contents
141
•   if:
•
•
•
the merger agreement is terminated either (x) by Memorial because Range commits a terminable
breach, the Range board of directors makes a change of recommendation or Range breaches the
covenants in the merger agreement relating to the filing of this joint proxy statement/prospectus or
the obligation to hold the Range stockholder meeting or (y) by either Memorial or Range due to the
failure of Range stockholders to approve the issuance of Range shares in connection with the
merger;
on or before the date of any such termination an alternative proposal shall have been announced,
disclosed or otherwise communicated to the Range board of directors; and
within 12 months after the date of such termination, Range enters into a definitive agreement with
respect to an alternative proposal or consummates an alternative proposal.
For purposes of these termination fee provisions, any reference in the definition of “alternative proposal” to
“20%” will be deemed to be a reference to “50%.”
Amendments, Extensions and Waivers
The merger agreement may be amended by the parties, by action taken or authorized by the board of
directors of Range and Memorial, at any time before or after adoption of the merger agreement by the
stockholders of Memorial. However, after any such adoption, there may not be, without further approval of
Memorial stockholders, any amendment of the merger agreement, which by law would require the further
approval by such stockholders. The merger agreement may be amended only in a writing signed on behalf
of Range, Memorial and Merger Sub.
At any time prior to the effective time of the merger, any party may, by action taken or authorized by the
board of directors of Range and Memorial, to the extent legally allowed: (i) extend the time for performance
of any obligations or acts of the other party, (ii) waive any inaccuracies in the representations and
warranties of the other party contained in the merger agreement or any document delivered pursuant to the
merger agreement and (iii) waive compliance by the other party with any of the agreements or conditions
contained in the merger agreement. No failure or delay by Range or Memorial in exercising a right of
extension or waiver operates as a waiver thereof. No single or partial exercise of an extension or waiver
precludes any other or further exercise of any other right of extension or waiver. An extension or waiver
shall be valid only if it is in writing and signed by Range and Memorial.
Third Party Beneficiaries
While the merger agreement is generally not intended to confer upon any stockholder or any person other
than Range, Memorial and Merger Sub any rights or remedies, it provides limited exceptions. Memorial’s
directors and officers will continue to have indemnification and liability insurance coverage after the
completion of the merger and these rights may be enforced by such officers and directors, as more fully
described in “The Merger Agreement—Indemnification and Insurance” beginning on page 137.
Furthermore, Memorial will have the right, on behalf of its stockholders, to pursue damages and other relief,
including equitable relief, for Range’s or Merger Sub’s intentional and material breach of a covenant,
agreement or obligation of the merger agreement or intentional fraud, in each case as a result of which
damages would be payable pursuant to certain provisions of the merger agreement. However, this right is
enforceable on behalf of Memorial stockholders only by Memorial in its sole discretion, and any and all
interests in any claims related to such right shall attach to shares of Memorial common stock and
subsequently trade and transfer with those shares and any damages, settlements or other amounts
recovered by Memorial with respect to any such claims may, in Memorial’s sole discretion, be (i) distributed,
in whole or in part, by Memorial to the holders of shares of Memorial common stock of record as of any date
determined by Memorial or (ii) retained by Memorial for the use and benefit of Memorial on behalf of its
stockholders in any manner Memorial deems fit.
Table of Contents
Specific Performance
142
Range and Memorial agreed under the merger agreement that irreparable damage would occur in the event
that any of the provisions of the merger agreement were not performed in accordance with the terms of the
merger agreement or were otherwise breached and that monetary damages, even if available, would not be
an adequate remedy. In addition, the parties agreed that, prior to a termination of the merger agreement in
accordance with its terms, they will be entitled to an injunction or injunctions, or any other appropriate form
of specific performance or equitable relief, to prevent breaches of the merger agreement or to enforce
specifically the performance of terms and provisions of the merger agreement. The parties further agreed
not to raise any objections to the availability of the equitable remedy of specific performance to prevent or
restrain breaches or threatened breaches of, or to enforce compliance with, the covenants and obligations
of such party under the merger agreement. Range and Memorial further agreed that no other party or any
other person will be required to obtain, furnish or post any bond or similar instrument in connection with or
as a condition to obtaining any remedy relating to specific performance, and each party irrevocably waived
any right it may have to require the obtaining, furnishing or posting of any such bond or similar instrument.
Voting and Support Agreement
In connection with the execution of the merger agreement, MRD Holdco LLC, Jay Graham (Memorial’s chief
executive officer), Anthony Bahr and WHR Incentive LLC (a limited liability company controlled by
Mr. Graham and Mr. Bahr) entered into the voting and support agreement with Range. The Memorial
stockholders that executed the voting and support agreement have agreed to vote all of the Memorial
shares held by them in favor of the adoption of the merger. As of the date of this joint proxy
statement/prospectus, those stockholders hold and are entitled to vote in the aggregate approximately
47.7% of the issued and outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled to vote at the Memorial
special meeting. MRD Holdco LLC is owned by certain private equity funds affiliated with Natural Gas
Partners.
The Memorial stockholders who are parties to the voting and support agreement have also agreed to
certain standstill provisions for the benefit of Range and the combined company. These standstill
provisions would be in effect until the first anniversary of the effective time of the merger. During this
standstill period, these provisions place restrictions on those Memorial stockholder parties’ ability to
acquire additional shares of Range common stock, propose certain transactions involving Range or the
combined company and take certain actions to influence the management of Range or the combined
company, subject in each case to exceptions specified in the voting and support agreement. The voting
and support agreement also prohibits certain sales, transfers and dispositions of Range common stock
received by those Memorial stockholders as merger consideration for 90 days following the effective time of
the merger.
The voting and support agreement restricts the Memorial stockholder parties to that agreement from selling
shares of Memorial common stock owned by them until the termination of the merger agreement or the
effective time of the merger, whichever is earlier. However, if the Memorial stockholders adopt the merger
agreement and the merger, the voting and support agreement permits MRD Holdco LLC—after such
adoption—to distribute its shares of Memorial common stock to the private equity funds that own MRD
Holdco LLC, as well as to MRD Holdco LLC’s members (which include certain Memorial executive officers
and employees). Those private equity funds are then permitted to distribute those shares to their respective
limited partners and general partners.
After the distributions described above, the voting and support agreement (including the transfer
restrictions and standstill provisions) will no longer apply to any Memorial common stock distributed to any
person pursuant to those distributions, other than Mr. Graham, Mr. Bahr, WHR Incentive LLC and any
person that received distributions solely in its capacity as a general partner of one of the private equity
funds.
Table of Contents
143
The voting and support agreement will terminate upon the earliest to occur of:
•   the consummation of the merger,
•   the termination of the merger agreement in compliance with its terms, and
•   a change of recommendation by the Memorial board of directors in accordance with the merger
agreement.
However, the standstill covenant and certain other covenants would survive the consummation of the
merger and remain in full force and effect until the Memorial stockholders who continue to be subject to the
voting and support agreement have fully performed or fully satisfied their respective obligations under
those covenants or those covenants have otherwise been terminated in accordance with their terms.
Pursuant to the voting and support agreement, MRD Holdco LLC has waived the provisions of the existing
voting agreement to the extent necessary to allow Mr. Graham, Mr. Bahr and WHR Incentive LLC to enter
into and comply with their respective obligations under the voting and support agreement.
MEMP GP Purchase and Sale Agreement
On April 27, 2016, Memorial entered into the MEMP GP PSA with MEMP. Pursuant to that agreement, MEMP
agreed to acquire, among other things, all of the equity interests in the general partner of MEMP from
Memorial for a cash payment of $750,000.
The closing of the MEMP GP PSA is a condition to Range’s obligations to complete the merger. That sale
was completed on June 1, 2016, so that closing condition has been satisfied. MEMP is a publicly traded
limited partnership (NASDAQ: MEMP) in which Memorial’s only economic interest prior to that sale was its
ownership of MEMP GP, which at the time of the sale owned an approximate 0.1% general partner interest in
MEMP and 50% of the incentive distribution rights in MEMP. As a result of the completion of the sale, the
MEMP general partner is now a wholly owned subsidiary of MEMP.
Table of Contents
144
PROPOSALS FOR THE RANGE SPECIAL MEETING
Range Proposal 1 — Issuance of Shares of Range Common Stock
For a summary and detailed information regarding this proposal, see the information about the merger and
issuance of Range common shares in connection with the merger contained throughout this joint proxy
statement/prospectus, including the information set forth in the sections titled “The Merger” beginning on
page 53.
A copy of the merger agreement is attached to this joint proxy statement/prospectus as Annex A.
Under the merger agreement, approval of this proposal is a condition to the completion of the merger. If the
proposal is not approved, the transactions will not be completed even if the other proposals related to the
transactions are approved.
Under the NYSE rules, the issuance of Range common stock pursuant to the merger agreement requires
the affirmative vote of holders of a majority of the outstanding Range common shares voted at the Range
special meeting. Under the Range by-laws, the proposed issuance of Range common stock requires the
affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Range common stock, present in person or represented by
proxy at the Range special meeting and entitled to vote thereon, assuming a quorum is present.
The Range board of directors has approved the merger and the merger agreement and recommends that
Range stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve the issuance of shares of Range common stock
to Memorial stockholders in connection with the merger.
Range Proposal 2 — Possible Adjournment of the Range Special Meeting
If Range fails to receive a sufficient number of votes to approve Range Proposal 1, Range may propose to
adjourn the special meeting, even if a quorum is present, for the purpose of soliciting additional proxies to
approve Range Proposal 1. Range currently does not intend to propose adjournment of the Range special
meeting if there are sufficient votes to approve Range Proposal 1.
The proposal to adjourn the Range special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies
requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of Range common stock, present in person or
represented by proxy at the Range special meeting and entitled to vote on the proposal, regardless of
whether there is a quorum.
The Range board of directors unanimously recommends that Range’s stockholders vote “FOR” the
proposal to adjourn the special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies.
Table of Contents
145
PROPOSALS FOR THE MEMORIAL SPECIAL MEETING
Memorial Proposal 1 — Merger Agreement
For a summary and detailed information regarding this proposal, see the information about the merger
agreement, the merger and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement throughout this joint
proxy statement/prospectus, including the information set forth in sections titled “The Merger Agreement”
beginning on page 125. A copy of the merger agreement is attached as Annex A to this joint proxy
statement/prospectus.
Under the merger agreement, approval of this proposal is a condition to the completion of the merger. If the
proposal is not approved, the merger with Range and the transactions will not be completed even if the
other proposals related to the transactions are approved.
Adoption of the merger agreement, the merger and the other transactions contemplated by the merger
agreement and approval of the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement requires the affirmative
vote of a majority of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock entitled to vote thereon.
The Memorial board of directors unanimously determined that the merger and the other transactions
contemplated by the merger agreement are fair to, and in the best interests of Memorial stockholders, and
approved, adopted and declared advisable the merger agreement and the transactions contemplated by
the merger agreement, including the merger. The Memorial board of directors unanimously recommends
that Memorial stockholders vote “FOR” the proposal to approve and approve and adopt the merger
agreement and the transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, including the merger.
Memorial Proposal 2 — Advisory (Non-Binding) Vote on Compensation
Section 14A of the Exchange Act, which was enacted as part of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act of 2010, requires that Memorial provide its stockholders with the opportunity to
vote to approve, on a non-binding, advisory basis, the compensation that may be paid or become payable
to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger, as disclosed in this joint proxy
statement/prospectus, including the compensation table and the related narrative named executive officer
compensation disclosures set forth in “The Merger—Interests of Memorial’s Directors and Executive
Officers in the Merger” beginning on page 114. This vote is commonly referred to as a “golden parachute
say on pay” vote. Accordingly, Memorial’s stockholders are being provided with the opportunity to cast an
advisory vote on those change of control payments.
Accordingly, Memorial is seeking approval of the following resolution at the special meeting:
“RESOLVED, that Memorial’s stockholders approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation
of Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger, as disclosed pursuant to Item 402(t)
of Regulation S-K under the heading “The Merger—Interests of Memorial’s Directors and Executive Officers
in the Merger” (which disclosure includes the compensation table and related narrative named executive
officer compensation disclosures required pursuant to Item 402(t) of Regulation S-K).”
Approval, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, of the compensation that may be paid or become payable to
Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger requires the affirmative vote of a
majority of the voting power of the outstanding shares present in person or represented by proxy at the
meeting and entitled to vote thereon, assuming a quorum is present.
The proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, the compensation that may be paid or
become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger is a vote separate
and apart from the vote on the proposal to approve and adopt the merger agreement and the transactions
contemplated by the
Table of Contents
146
merger agreement, including the merger. Accordingly, a Memorial stockholder may vote to approve one
proposal and not the other. Because the vote on the proposal to approve, on an advisory (non-binding)
basis, the compensation that may be paid or become payable to Memorial’s named executive officers in
connection with the merger is advisory in nature only, it will not be binding on Memorial or Range, and the
approval of that proposal is not a condition to the completion of the merger.
The Memorial board of directors unanimously recommends that Memorial’s stockholders vote “FOR” the
approval, on an advisory (non-binding) basis, of the compensation that may be paid or become payable to
Memorial’s named executive officers in connection with the merger.
Memorial Proposal 3 — Possible Adjournment of the Memorial Special Meeting
If Memorial fails to receive a sufficient number of votes to approve Memorial Proposal 1, Memorial may
propose to adjourn the special meeting, even if a quorum is present, for the purpose of soliciting additional
proxies to approve Memorial Proposal 1. Memorial currently does not intend to propose adjournment of the
Memorial special meeting if there are sufficient votes to approve Memorial Proposal 1.
The proposal to adjourn the Memorial special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional
proxies requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the voting power of the outstanding shares present in
person or represented by proxy at the meeting and entitled to vote thereon, regardless of whether there is a
quorum.
The Memorial board of directors unanimously recommends that Memorial’s stockholders vote “FOR” the
proposal to adjourn the special meeting, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit additional proxies.
Table of Contents
147
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
The following discussion addresses the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger to
holders of Memorial common stock who exchange their shares of Memorial common stock for shares of
Range common stock in the merger.
This discussion is addressed only to holders of Memorial common stock who are “United States persons”
and hold their stock as a “capital asset,” each as defined for U.S. federal income tax purposes. For these
purposes, a “United States person” or “U.S. person” is:
•   an individual citizen or resident of the United States (as determined for U.S. federal income tax purposes);
•   a corporation (or any other entity treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes) created or
organized in or under the laws of the United States, any state thereof or the District of Columbia;
•   an estate the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or
•   a trust that (i) is subject to the primary supervision of a court within the United States and one or more U.S.
persons have the authority to control all substantial decisions of the trust or (ii) has a valid election in effect
under applicable U.S. Treasury regulations to be treated as a U.S. person.
This discussion does not address any U.S. federal taxes other than U.S. federal income taxes (and thus
does not address the unearned income Medicare contribution tax enacted under the Health Care and
Education Reconciliation Act of 2010) or any U.S. state or local or non-U.S. tax consequences of the
merger. This discussion does not address all aspects of U.S. federal income taxation that may be relevant
to a holder of Memorial common stock in light of that holder’s particular circumstances or to a holder
subject to special rules (such as, for example, dealers or brokers in securities, commodities or foreign
currencies, traders in securities that elect to apply a mark-to-market method of accounting, banks and
certain other financial institutions, insurance companies, mutual funds, tax-exempt organizations, holders
subject to the alternative minimum tax provisions of the Code, partnerships, S corporations or other pass-
through entities or investors in partnerships, S corporations or such other pass-through entities, regulated
investment companies, real estate investment trusts, holders whose functional currency is not the U.S.
dollar, holders who hold shares of Memorial common stock as part of a hedge, straddle, constructive sale
or conversion transaction or other integrated investment, holders who acquired Memorial common stock
pursuant to the exercise of employee stock options, through a tax qualified retirement plan or otherwise as
compensation or holders who actually or constructively own more than 5% of Memorial common stock).
This discussion assumes the merger will be completed in accordance with the merger agreement and as
further described in this joint proxy statement/prospectus. This discussion is based on the Code,
applicable Treasury regulations, administrative interpretations and court decisions, each as in effect as of
the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus and all of which are subject to change, possibly with
retroactive effect, and any such change could affect the accuracy of the statements and conclusions set
forth in this discussion.
If a partnership (or an entity or arrangement treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes)
holds Memorial common stock, the tax treatment of a partner will generally depend on the status of the
partner and the activities of the partnership. Partners of partnerships holding Memorial common stock
should consult their own tax advisors.
This discussion of material U.S. federal income tax consequences is for general information purposes only
and is not intended to be, and should not be construed as, tax advice. Holders of Memorial common stock
are urged to consult their independent tax advisors with respect to the application of U.S. federal income
tax laws to their particular situations as well as any other tax consequences arising under U.S. federal tax
law (including estate or gift tax rules), or under the laws of any U.S. state or local or non-U.S. taxing
jurisdiction or under any applicable tax treaty.
Table of Contents
148
Tax Consequences of the Merger Generally
Memorial and Range intend for the merger to qualify as a “reorganization” for U.S. federal income tax
purposes within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. It is a condition to the obligation of Memorial to
complete the merger that Memorial receive an opinion from counsel, dated as of the closing date of the
merger and to the effect that the merger will be treated as a reorganization” within the meaning of
Section 368(a) of the Code. It is a condition to the obligation of Range to complete the merger that Range
receive an opinion from counsel, dated as of the closing date of the merger and to the effect that the merger
will be treated as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. The opinions
regarding the merger will not address any U.S. federal tax consequences other than U.S. federal income tax
consequences, and will not address any U.S. state or local or non-U.S. tax consequences of the merger.
These opinions will be based on facts and representations contained in representation letters provided by
Memorial and Range and on customary factual assumptions, as well as on certain covenants and
undertakings by Range and Memorial. Neither of the opinions described above will be binding on the IRS or
any court. Memorial and Range have not sought and will not seek any ruling from the IRS regarding any
matters relating to the merger, and as a result, there can be no assurance that the IRS will not assert, or that
a court would not sustain, a position contrary to any of the conclusions set forth below. In addition, if any of
the representations, assumptions, covenants or undertakings upon which those opinions are based are
inconsistent with the actual facts, the U.S. federal income tax consequences of the merger could be
different than set forth in the opinions. Neither Memorial nor Range is aware of any facts or circumstances
that would cause any of these representations, assumptions, covenants or undertakings to be incorrect,
incomplete, inaccurate or violated in any respect. The following discussion assumes the merger qualifies
as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code.
Receipt of Range Common Stock
Each holder of Memorial common stock who exchanges such holder’s Memorial common stock for Range
common stock generally will not recognize gain or loss, except with respect to cash received instead of
fractional shares of Range common stock (as discussed below). The aggregate tax basis of the Range
common stock each holder receives in the merger (including any fractional shares deemed received and
redeemed for cash as described below) will equal the aggregate adjusted tax basis in the shares of
Memorial common stock such holder surrenders in the merger. The holding period for the shares of Range
common stock received in the merger (including any fractional shares deemed received and redeemed for
cash as described below) will include the holding period of the shares of Memorial common stock
surrendered in the merger. If a holder acquired different blocks of Memorial common stock at different times
or at different prices, the Range common stock such holder receives will be allocated pro rata to each block
of Memorial common stock, and the basis and holding period of each block of Range common stock
received will be determined on a block-for-block basis depending on the basis and holding period of the
blocks of Memorial common stock exchanged for such block of Range common stock.
Receipt of Cash for Fractional Shares
Each holder of Memorial common stock who receives cash (without interest) in lieu of a fractional share of
Range common stock will be treated as having received such fractional share of Range common stock
pursuant to the merger and then having sold such fractional share of Range common stock for cash. As a
result, such holder of Memorial common stock will recognize gain or loss equal to the difference between
the amount of cash received and the basis in the holder’s fractional share of Range common stock as set
forth above. Such gain or loss generally will be capital gain or loss and will be long-term capital gain or loss
if, as of the effective date of the merger, the holding period for such fractional share (including the holding
period of shares of Memorial common stock surrendered therefor) exceeds one year. Long-term capital
gains of individuals are generally eligible for reduced rates of taxation. The deductibility of capital losses is
subject to limitations.
Backup Withholding and Reporting Requirements
Payments of cash to a holder of Memorial common stock pursuant to the merger may, under certain
circumstances, be subject to information reporting and backup withholding (currently at a rate of 28%)
unless the
Table of Contents
149
holder provides proof of an applicable exemption or, in the case of backup withholding, furnishes its
correct taxpayer identification number and otherwise complies with all applicable requirements of the
backup withholding rules. Backup withholding does not constitute an additional tax, but is merely an
advance payment that may be refunded or credited against a holder’s U.S. federal income tax liability if the
required information is timely supplied to the IRS.
A holder of Memorial common stock, as a result of having received Range common stock in the merger, will
be required to retain records pertaining to the merger pursuant to Treasury regulation Section 1.368-3(d). In
addition, each holder of Memorial common stock who is a “significant holder” will be required to file a
statement with such holder’s U.S. federal income tax return in accordance with Treasury regulation
Section 1.368-3(b) setting forth such holder’s basis, determined immediately before the effective time of the
merger, in, and the fair market value, determined immediately before the effective time of the merger, of, the
Memorial common stock surrendered in the merger, the date of the merger and the name and employer
identification number of Range, Memorial and Merger Sub. A “significant holder” is a holder of Memorial
common stock who, immediately before the merger, owned at least 5% (by vote or value) of the outstanding
stock of Memorial or securities of Memorial with a basis for U.S. federal income tax purposes of at least $1
million.
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences to Range, Memorial and Merger Sub
Assuming the merger qualifies as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code,
none of Range, Memorial or Merger Sub will recognize any gain or loss for U.S. federal income tax purposes
as a result of the merger.
Table of Contents
150
ACCOUNTING TREATMENT
Range prepares its financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The merger will be accounted for using
the acquisition method of accounting with Range being considered the acquirer of Memorial for accounting
purposes. This means that Range will allocate the purchase price to the fair value of Memorial’s tangible
and intangible assets and liabilities at the acquisition date, with the excess purchase price being recorded
as goodwill. Under the acquisition method of accounting, goodwill is not amortized but is tested for
impairment at least annually.
Table of Contents
151
UNAUDITED PRO FORMA CONDENSED COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The following unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements give effect to the proposed
business combination of Range and Memorial. The merger will be accounted for using the acquisition
method of accounting with Range identified as the acquirer. Under the acquisition method of accounting,
Range will record all assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their respective acquisition date fair values
at the effective time of the merger.
The following unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial information is based on the historical
consolidated financial statements of Range and Memorial, adjusted to reflect the proposed acquisition of
Memorial by Range and the related financing transactions. Range’s historical consolidated financial
statements have also been adjusted to give effect to the disposal in December 2015 of its Virginia/West
Virginia natural gas assets as presented in Note 4 to the unaudited pro forma combined financial
information as if it had occurred on January 1, 2015.
The unaudited pro forma combined balance sheet gives effect to the merger and the related financing
transactions, as if they had occurred on June 30, 2016. The unaudited pro forma combined statements of
operations combine the results of operations of Range and Memorial for the year ended December 31, 2015
and the six months ended June 30, 2016. The unaudited pro forma combined statements of operations give
effect to the following events as if they had occurred on January 1, 2015. The unaudited pro forma
combined financial statements reflect the following merger-related pro forma adjustments, based on
available information and certain assumptions Range believes are reasonable:
•   The merger, including the issuance of Range common stock, will be accounted for using the acquisition
method of accounting, with Range identified as the acquirer;
•   All of the Existing Memorial Notes are exchanged at closing for new senior notes of Range with the same
maturities and interest rates (i.e., none of Memorial’s existing outstanding senior notes are tendered in the
Memorial Cash Tender Offer or the Concurrent Cash Tender Offer);
•   All of the Existing Range Notes are exchanged for new senior notes with the same maturities and interest
rates;
•   All of the Existing Memorial Notes are validly tendered and not withdrawn prior to the Early Tender
Deadline;
•   Adjustments to conform the classification of expenses in Memorial’s historical statements of operations to
Range’s classification of similar expenses;
•   Estimated tax impact of pro forma adjustments; and
•   Assumption of liabilities for transaction-related expenses.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements are provided for illustrative purposes
only and are not intended to represent or be indicative of the results of operations or financial position of
the combined company that would have been recorded had the merger been completed as of the dates
presented and should not be taken as representative of future results of operations or financial position of
the combined company. The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements do not reflect
the impacts of any potential operational efficiencies, asset dispositions, cost savings or economies of scale
that the combined company may achieve with respect to the combined operations. The incentive unit
compensation included in Memorial’s historical statements of operations consists of incentive units issued
by MRD Holdco LLC. Because MRD Holdco LLC will not own any equity interest in Memorial following the
consummation of the merger, all costs related to these incentive units will be discontinued. Additionally, the
pro forma statements of operations do not include non-recurring charges or credits and the related tax
effects which result directly from the merger.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements should be read in conjunction with the
historical consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes contained in Range’s and Memorial’s
Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, and Memorial’s Current Report on Form 8-
K filed on July 28, 2016, which are incorporated in this joint proxy statement/prospectus by reference. See
“Where You Can Find More Information” beginning on page 189.
Table of Contents
Assets
Current
assets:
Cash and
cash
152
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined
Balance Sheet as of June 30, 2016
Pro Forma Adjustments
Pro Forma
Reclassification
Adjustment
(Note 2)
Acquisition
Adjustments
(Note 2)
Financing and
Transaction
Adjustments
(Note 2)
Range
Historical
Memorial 
Historical
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
equivalents
Accounts
receivable,
less allowance
for doubtful
accounts
Derivative
assets
Other financial
instruments
Inventory and
other
Total current
assets
81,418
62,174
43,250
98,594
—
27,253
20,662
3,381
145,712     191,412
813    
—
36,514    
—
Derivative
assets
Goodwill
Natural gas
and oil
properties,
successful
efforts method    9,005,011     2,409,611    
Accumulated
depletion and
depreciation
(559,930)   
   (2,864,358)   
    
    
      
   6,140,653     1,849,681
111,095
12,256
Other property
and equipment  
Accumulated
depreciation
and
amortization
Other assets
(94,606)   
      
16,489    
76,512
—      
    
12,256    
10,833   
    
Total assets  $ 6,380,179   $2,100,696   $
—
—
—
—
—
—    
—
—
—
—
(606)(f)
(606)
—
1,455,120(f)
—
—
—
—
—
—    
—
143,592
141,844
27,253
23,437
336,518
37,327  
   1,455,120
—
890,389(f)
—
12,305,011
5,941(a)
553,989(g)
5,941
1,444,378
—    
 
—
(2,864,358) 
    
 
   9,440,653
(5,941)(a)
—
—
117,410
—    
 
(5,941)
—
(10,833)(f)
—    
 
—
$ 2,888,059
$
—    
 
—    
—    
 
—
(94,606) 
  
 
    
22,804  
  
76,512  
  
    
 
 $11,368,934
$
382   $
10   $
—
$
—
$
—
$
392
Liabilities
Current
liabilities:
Accounts
payable
Accounts
payable-
affiliate
Asset
retirement
obligations
Revenues
payable
Accrued
liabilities
$
92,081   $
25,697   $
8,062(b)   $
40,158(h)   $
—
$
165,998
—
8,062
(8,062)(b)
—
15,071
—
—
—
34,117
(34,117)(c)
179,812
72,064
34,117(c)
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
15,071
—
268,333
32,000
20,649
—
—
339,613     139,940    
    
—       514,000    
738,616     589,902
1,828,345
—
606,482     149,355
19,243
—
(17,660)(d)  
17,660(d)
—
—    
 
—    
—
—
—
—
—
—
40,158  
 
—
10,098(f)
—
570,708(f)
—
—
—
49,660
20,649
—
15,250(k)
519,711  
 
529,250  
1,828,345(k)     3,157,561
(9,400)(k)
(1,828,345)(k)
—
—
1,326,545
—
19,243
—
—
127,090
—
Accrued
interest
Derivative
liabilities
Total current
liabilities
Bank debt
Senior notes
Senior
subordinated
notes
Deferred tax
liabilities
Derivative
liabilities
Deferred
compensation
liabilities
Asset
retirement
obligations
Asset
retirement
obligations
and other
liabilities
127,090
—
—
—
—
10,779
(10,779)(e)
—
3,083    
    
Total liabilities    3,915,252     1,407,059
255,863
10,779(e)
—
—    
 
620,964
—    
 
5,850
269,725  
  
    
 
   5,949,125
Commitments
and
contingencies  
Stockholders’
Equity
 
Preferred
stock, $1 par,
10,000,000
shares
authorized,
none issued
and
outstanding
Common
stock, $0.01
par,
475,000,000
shares
authorized,
170,081,406
issued at June
30, 2016
Common stock
—
—
—
—
—
—
1,701
2,060
—
(2,060)(j)
773(i)
—    
—
2,474
Common stock
held in
treasury,
45,511 shares
at June 30,
2016
Additional
paid-in capital    2,470,814     1,627,780
(1,733)
—
Retained
earnings
(deficit)
Total
stockholders’
equity
Total
liabilities and
stockholders’
equity
(5,855)
(936,203)
2,464,927     693,637
$ 6,380,179   $2,100,696   $
—
—
(1,733)
(1,627,780)(j)    
3,000,117(i)
—
5,470,931
—    
—
936,203(j) 
(40,158)(h)
(5,850)(k)
(51,863)
—
2,267,095
(5,850)
5,419,809
—
$ 2,888,059
$
—
$11,368,934
153
Table of Contents
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined
Statement of Operations for the Six Months Ended June 30, 2016
Revenues and other
income:
Natural gas, NGLs and oil
sales
Derivative fair value loss
Brokered natural gas,
marketing and other
Oil and natural gas sales
Total revenues and other
income
Costs and expenses:
Direct operating
Transportation, gathering and
compression
Range
Historical
Memorial
Historical
Pro Forma
Reclassification
Adjustments
Pro Forma
Adjustments
(Note 3)
(Note 3)
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
$ 434,093    $
(75,890)
—      $
 
—
180,064(a)    $
 
(54,175)(b)
75,007   
—
—     
  180,064
433,210
180,064
44,725
262,107
—
—
7(c)   
(180,064)(a)
(54,168)
14,903(d)
45,294(e)   
27,643(e)
—    
—
—    
—
—
—
—
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
$ 614,157  
(130,065)
75,014  
—
559,106
59,628
335,044
Production and ad valorem
taxes
Brokered natural gas and
marketing
Exploration
Abandonment and impairment
of unproved properties
General and administrative
Memorial merger expenses
Termination costs
    
Deferred compensation plan     
    
Interest
Depletion, depreciation and
amortization
Impairment of proved
properties and other assets
Loss on the sale of assets
Lease operating
Gathering, processing and
transportation
Gathering, processing and
    
transportation-affiliate
    
Taxes other than income
Incentive unit compensation     
Accretion
    
Loss on commodity derivative
instruments
Total costs and expenses
—     
    
      
   
     923,382
(Loss) before income taxes
and interest
Other income (expense):
Interest expense, net
Other
(490,172)  
 
  
    
—     
—     
    
   
      
Total other income (expense)     
—     
   
      
(Loss) before income taxes      (490,172)  
 
Income tax (benefit) expense:   
Current
—     
    
     (173,526)  
Deferred
      
   
     (173,526)
Net (loss) income from
continuing operations
Net loss per common share:  
Basic
Diluted
Dividends paid per common
$(316,646)   $(190,116)   $
(1.90)  
   
(1.90)
$
      
   $
11,936
77,483   
11,698
242,951
17,687   
86,721   
 
2,621   
167   
41,802   
75,497
43,040   
4,947   
—
—
—     
—     
—     
—
—
—     
7,058
—     
35,154   
 
—     
—     
—     
—
125,357
—     
50   
14,903
45,294
27,643   
5,855   
52,569   
295
54,175   
 
   
   
  368,353
(188,289)  
 
(24,124)  
 
(108)  
 
   
   
(24,232)  
 
   
   
  (212,521)  
 
21,896   
(44,301)  
   
(22,405)
5,855(f)
—    
(236)(g)
236(g)   
115(c)   
(4,281)(h)  
4,281(h)
—    
—
24,124(i)
295(j)
—    
—
(14,903)(d)
(45,294)(e)
(27,643)(e)  
(5,855)(f)   
—    
 
(295)(j)
(54,175)(b)
(29,936)
(24,232)
24,124(i)
24,232  
 
—
108(c)
—    
—    
 
—
—
—    
—
17,791
77,483  
18,520
17,923  
  117,709
6,902  
167  
41,802  
97,217
—    
—
(3,771)(k)  
(777)(l)   
2,144(m)
—    
—    
—
(34,108)(n)
334,495
—    
—    
—
—
—    
—    
—    
—
—    
 
(36,512)
36,512
—    
—    
 
—    
 
36,512
(44,831)(o)
(44,831)
—
43,040  
4,997  
—
—
—    
—    
52,569  
—
—    
 
   
 
  1,225,287
(666,181)
—    
—    
 
—    
 
(666,181)
21,896  
(262,658) 
 
(240,762)
81,343
—
$
$ (425,419) 
 
 
 
  $
 
   
  $
(1.74) 
 
(1.74)
Dividends paid per common
share
Weighted average common
shares outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
$
0.04
166,964   
     166,964
$
0.04
77,263(p)   
77,263(p)
244,227  
  244,227
154
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
$1,347,917  
 
  697,613
79,783  
—
2,125,313
141,273
486,834
41,734
85,902  
29,247
47,858  
  231,325  
 
9,392
(77,627) 
  180,419
—    
—
—    
—
—
—
—
—
—    
—
—    
—    
—
—
2,387(k)   
(1,261)(l)   
5,358(m)
Loss on early
extinguishment of debt
22,495
—
—
—
22,495
Table of Contents
Revenues and other
income:
Natural gas, NGLs and oil
sales
Derivative fair value income  
Brokered natural gas,
marketing and other
Oil and natural gas sales
Total revenues and other
income
Costs and expenses:
Direct operating
Transportation, gathering
and compression
Production and ad valorem
taxes
Brokered natural gas and
marketing
Exploration
Abandonment and
impairment of unproved
properties
  
General and administrative   
Termination costs
  
Deferred compensation
plan
Interest
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined
Statement of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2015
Range
Pro Forma
(Note 4)
Memorial 
Historical
Pro Forma
Reclassification
Adjustments
Pro Forma
Adjustments
(Note 3)
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
(Note 3)
$ 973,875    $
416,364
—      $
—
374,042(a)    $
281,249(b)
79,774   
—
—     
  374,042
1,470,013   
   
   
 
  116,370
374,042   
   
   
 
—
388,877
26,838
85,902   
20,363
47,773   
  184,006   
 
9,392
(77,627)  
  134,539
—
—
—     
8,969
—     
46,288   
—
—     
—
9(c)   
(374,042)(a)
281,258
24,903(d)
72,554(e)   
25,403(e)
14,896(f)
—    
(85)(g)
85(g)   
1,031(c)
—
—
39,396(h)
Depletion, depreciation and
amortization
Impairment of proved
properties and other assets   
(Gain) on the sale of assets   
Lease operating
  
Gathering, processing,
transportation
Gathering, processing,
transportation affiliate
Taxes other than income
Incentive Unit
Compensation Expense
Accretion
(Gain) loss on commodity
derivative instruments
Total costs and expenses
(Loss) income before
income taxes and interest  
  
Other income (expense):
Interest expense, net
  
  
Other, net
Total other income
(expense)
(Loss) income before
income taxes
Income tax (benefit)
expense:
Current
Deferred
Net (loss) income from
continuing operations
Net loss per common
share:
Basic
Diluted
Dividends paid per
common share
Weighted average
common shares
outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
527,842
188,742
590,174   
(842)  
 
 
—
—
—     
—
—     
—
—     
(47)  
24,903
72,554
25,403   
14,896
35,142   
417
—     
 
   
   
  2,076,102
(281,249)  
   
   
  136,018
(606,089)  
 
—     
—
238,024   
 
(39,396)  
(1,022)
—
(40,418)
(606,089)
197,606
29   
(164,660)  
   
(164,631)
10,070   
 
89,935   
 
   
   
  100,005
$ (441,458)   $ 97,601    $
$
   $
$
(2.65)  
(2.65)
0.16
166,389   
  166,389
155
(43,531)(n)
673,470
—    
—    
—
—
—    
—
—    
—
—    
 
(37,047)
37,047
—    
—
—
37,047
—    
(7,973) 
 
(7,973)
590,174  
(889) 
 
 
—
—
—    
—
35,142  
—
—    
 
   
 
  2,496,749
(371,436)
—    
—
—
(371,436)
10,099  
(82,698) 
 
(72,599)
417(i)
—    
—
(24,903)(d)
(72,554)(e)
(25,403)(e)  
(14,896)(f)
—    
 
(417)(i)
281,249(b)
321,676
(40,418)
39,396(h)   
1,022(c)
40,418
—
—    
—    
 
—
—
$
45,020
$ (298,837)
$
  $
$
(1.23) 
(1.23)
0.16
77,263(p)   
77,263(p)
243,652  
  243,652
Table of Contents
NOTES TO UNAUDITED PRO FORMA COMBINED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Note 1 — Basis of Presentations
On May 15, 2016, Range, Merger Sub, a wholly owned subsidiary of Range, and Memorial entered into the
merger agreement, which contemplates the merger of Merger Sub with and into Memorial. As a result,
Memorial would become a wholly owned subsidiary of Range at the effective time of the merger. Under the
merger agreement, Memorial stockholders will receive 0.375 of a share of Range common stock for each
share of Memorial common stock that they hold immediately prior to the effective time of the merger.
The unaudited pro forma combined financial information has been derived from the historical consolidated
financial statements of Range and Memorial. Certain of Memorial’s historical amounts have been
reclassified to conform to Range’s financial statement presentation. The unaudited pro forma condensed
combined balance sheets as of June 30, 2016 give effect to the merger and the related financing
transactions as if they had occurred on June 30, 2016. The unaudited pro forma combined statements of
operations for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and the year ended December 31, 2015 give effect to the
merger and the related financing transactions as if they had occurred on January 1, 2015.
The unaudited pro forma condensed combined financial statements reflect pro forma adjustments that are
described in the accompanying notes and are based on available and certain assumptions that Range
believes are reasonable. However, actual results may differ from those reflected in these statements. In our
opinion, all adjustments that are necessary to present fairly the pro forma information have been made. The
following unaudited pro forma combined statements do not purport to represent what the financial position
or results of operations would have been if the transaction had actually occurred on the dates indicated
above, nor are they indicative of Range’s future financial position or results of operations. These unaudited
pro forma combined financial statements should be read in conjunction with the historical consolidated
financial statements and related notes of Range and Memorial for the periods presented.
Note 2 — Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Combined Balance Sheet
The merger will be accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations.
The allocation of the preliminary estimated purchase price is based upon management’s estimates of and
assumptions related to the fair value of assets to be acquired and liabilities to be assumed as of June 30,
2016, using currently available information. Because the unaudited pro forma combined financial
information has been prepared based on these preliminary estimates, the final purchase price allocation
and the resulting effect on financial position and results of operations may differ significantly from the pro
forma amounts included in this joint proxy statement/prospectus. Range expects to finalize its allocation of
the purchase consideration as soon as practicable after completion of the proposed transaction.
The preliminary purchase price allocation is subject to change as a result of several factors, including but
not limited to:
•   changes in the estimated fair value of the shares of Range common stock issued as merger consideration
to the Memorial stockholders, based on Range’s share price at the effective time of the merger;
•   changes in Range’s preliminary decision to exchange the Existing Memorial Notes for Range senior notes
with the same maturity and interest rate;
•   changes in Range’s preliminary decision to exchange the Existing Range Notes for new senior notes with
the same maturities and interest rates;
•   changes in the estimated fair value of Memorial’s assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the date of
the transaction, which could result from changes in future natural gas, NGLs and crude oil commodity
prices, reserve estimates, interest rates, and other factors;
•   the tax basis of Memorial’s assets and liabilities as of the effective time of the merger; and
•   the risk factors described in “Risk Factors” beginning on page 33.
Table of Contents
156
The preliminary merger consideration to be transferred, fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed
and resulting goodwill were calculated as follows (in thousands):
Consideration:
Fair value of Range common stock to be issued(1)
Total consideration
Fair value of liabilities assumed:
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Long-term debt
Deferred tax liabilities
Long-term liabilities
Amount attributable to liabilities assumed
Fair value of assets acquired
Cash and cash equivalents
Current derivative assets
Other current assets
Oil and natural gas properties
Other plant, property and equipment
Long-term derivative assets
Amount attributable to assets acquired
Goodwill as of June 30, 2016
Preliminary
Purchase Price
Allocation
(in thousands)
$
$
3,000,890  
 
3,000,890
139,940  
1,114,000  
720,063  
13,862  
 
1,987,865
10  
125,847  
64,949  
3,300,000  
6,315  
36,514  
 
3,533,635  
 
1,455,120
(1) Based on 77,262,874 shares of Range common stock at $38.84 per share (closing price as of August 9, 2016).
Pursuant to the merger agreement, Range will issue 0.375 of a share of Range common stock for each
share of Memorial common stock outstanding at the effective time of the merger, including Memorial’s
outstanding restricted stock, which would result in the issuance by Range of approximately $3.0 billion of
shares of Range common stock (based on the closing price as of August 9, 2016). Goodwill recognized is
attributable to the asset recorded to offset net deferred tax liabilities arising from differences between the
purchase price allocated to Memorial’s assets and liabilities based on fair value and the tax basis of these
assets and liabilities. In addition, the total consideration for the merger included a control premium, which
resulted in a higher value compared to the fair value of the net assets acquired. The goodwill is also
attributable to Range’s qualitative assumptions of long-term factors that the merger creates for Range
stockholders including additional potential for exploration and development opportunities, additional scale
and efficiencies in other basins in which Range currently operates and substantial operating and
administrative synergies. Because the merger is intended to be treated for U.S. federal income tax
purposes as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code, Memorial’s tax basis in its
assets and liabilities will carry over to Range.
From May 13, 2016, the last trading date prior to the transaction’s initial announcement, to August 9, 2016,
the preliminary value of Range’s purchase consideration to be transferred had decreased by approximately
$249 million, as a result of the decrease in the share price for Range common stock from $42.01 to $38.84.
The final value of total merger consideration paid by Range will be determined based on the actual number
of Range shares issued and the market price of Range’s common stock at the effective time of the merger.
A ten percent increase or decrease in the closing price of Range common stock, as compared to the
August 9, 2016 closing price of $38.84, would increase or decrease the total merger consideration by
approximately $300 million, assuming all other factors are held constant.
Table of Contents
157
The following adjustments have been made to the accompanying unaudited pro forma combined balance
sheet as of June 30, 2016:
(a) Represents reclassification of Memorial’s accumulated depreciation related to other assets to conform to
Range’s presentation and to reflect these assets at fair value.
(b) Reflects the reclassification of Memorial’s accounts payable-affiliate to conform to Range’s presentation.
(c) Represents the reclassification of Memorial’s revenue payable to conform to Range’s presentation.
(d) Reflects the reclassification of Memorial’s accrued interest to conform to Range’s presentation.
(e) Reflects the reclassification of Memorial’s asset retirement obligation to conform to Range’s presentation.
(f) The allocation of the estimated fair value of merger consideration transferred (based on the closing price of
Range common stock as of August 9, 2016) to the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and
liabilities assumed resulted in the following purchase price allocation adjustments:
•
a $606,000 decrease in inventory valuation to reflect inventory at fair value;
•
•
•
•
$1.5 billion in goodwill associated with the transaction;
a $890.4 million increase in Memorial’s gross book basis of natural gas and oil properties to reflect
them at fair value;
a $10.8 million decrease to Memorial other assets to reflect their fair value, including expensing of
Memorial’s credit facility deferred financing costs;
a $10.1 million increase to reflect the expensing of Memorial’s senior note deferred financing costs;
and
•
a net $570.7 million increase in deferred tax liabilities associated with the transaction.
(g) Reflects the elimination of Memorial’s historical accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
(“DD&A”) balances.
(h) Reflects the impact of estimated transaction costs of $40.2 million expected to be incurred by Range and
Memorial in connection with the merger, including estimated underwriting, banking, legal and accounting
fees that are not capitalized as part of the transaction. These costs are not reflected in the historical June
30, 2016 balance sheets of Range and Memorial, but are reflected in the unaudited pro forma balance
sheet as an increase to liabilities and a reduction of equity as they will be expensed by Range and
Memorial as incurred. These amounts and their corresponding tax effect have not been reflected in the pro
forma statements of operations due to their nonrecurring nature.
(i) Reflects the estimated increase in Range’s common stock and additional paid-in capital resulting from the
issuance of shares of Range common stock to Memorial stockholders to effect the transaction as follows
(in thousands, except per share and per share amounts):
Shares of Range common stock to be issued
Closing price per share of Range common stock on August 9, 2016
Total fair value of shares of Range common stock to be issued
Increase in Range common stock ($0.01 par value per share) as of June 30, 2016
Increase in Range additional paid-in capital as of June 30, 2016
77,262,874  
$
38.84  
$ 3,000,890  
$
773  
   
 
$ 3,000,117
(j) Reflects the elimination of Memorial’s historical equity balances in accordance with the acquisition
method of accounting.
158
Table of Contents
(k) Reflects the exchange of Existing Notes for new Range senior notes with the same maturities and interest
rates. The exchange resulted in the following adjustments:
•
•
$15.2 million increase in the amount drawn on Range’s credit facility for payment of estimated costs
for the debt exchange. This includes an estimated $9.4 million of deferred financing costs associated
with the Memorial exchange, and an estimated $5.8 million of fees to be recorded as interest
expense for the exchange of Existing Range Notes for Range senior notes; and
$1.8 billion reduction in Range senior subordinated notes and increase of $1.8 billion in senior notes
to reflect the debt modification.
Note 3 — Unaudited Pro forma Condensed Combined Statements of Operations
Adjustments (a) – (j) to the Statement of Operations for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and the year
ended December 31, 2015 include reclassifications required to conform Memorial’s revenue and expense
items to Range’s presentation as follows:
(a) Represents the reclassification of Memorial’s oil and natural gas product sales to conform to Range’s
presentation.
(b) Represents the reclassification of Memorial’s commodity derivative instruments to conform to Range’s
presentation.
(c) Represents the reclassification of Memorial’s other income to conform to Range’s presentation.
(d) Represents the reclassification of Memorial’s lease operating expense to conform to Range’s
presentation.
(e) Represents the reclassification of Memorial’s gathering, processing and transportation expense to conform
to Range’s presentation, including the reclassification of affiliate costs.
(f) Represents the reclassification of Memorial’s taxes other than income to conform to Range’s presentation.
(g) Represents the reclassification of Memorial’s abandonment and impairment of unproved properties to
conform to Range’s presentation.
(h) Represents the reclassification of Memorial’s expenses associated with the Range and Memorial merger
to conform to Range’s presentation.
(i) Represents the reclassification of Memorial’s interest expense to conform to Range’s presentation.
(j) Represents the reclassification of accretion expense on Memorial asset retirement obligations to conform
to Range’s presentation.
Adjustments (k)-(p) to the Statements of Operations for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and the year
ended December 31, 2015 include the following pro forma adjustments to reflect the merger:
(k) Represents the adjustments to historical interest expense on Memorial’s credit facility to be retired with
availability under the existing Range credit facility.
(l) Represents adjustments to interest expense for amortization of deferred financing costs resulting from the
exchange of Memorial’s 5.875% senior unsecured notes due 2022 for Range senior notes and the
repayment and cancellation of Memorial’s credit facility.
(m) Represents adjustment to interest expense for Memorial’s capitalized interest to conform to Range’s
capitalized interest accounting policy.
Table of Contents
159
(n) Represents the change in depreciation, depletion and amortization primarily resulting from the pro forma
calculation of the combined company’s depletion expense under the successful efforts method of
accounting for oil and natural gas properties.
(o) Represents the income tax effect of pro forma adjustments (k) – (n) and Memorial’s historical results at
Range’s estimated combined statutory tax rate of 38.2% for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and
39.2% for the year ended December 31, 2015. The effective tax rate of the combined company could be
significantly different (either higher or lower) depending on post-merger activities.
(p) Reflects the number of shares of Range common stock estimated to be issued to Memorial stockholders
pursuant to the merger.
160
Table of Contents
Note 4 — Range’s Unaudited Pro forma Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations
Range’s unaudited pro forma condensed consolidated statement of operations for the year ended
December 31, 2015 included in the unaudited pro forma condensed combined statement of operations
gives effect to the sale in December 2015 of Range’s producing properties and gathering assets in Virginia
and West Virginia for cash proceeds of $876.0 million, before closing adjustments. Range’s unaudited pro
forma condensed consolidated statement of operations gives effect of that sale as if it occurred in
January 1, 2015:
Unaudited Pro Forma Condensed Consolidated
Statement of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2015
Revenues and other income:
Natural gas, NGLs and oil sales
Derivative fair value income
Brokered natural gas, marketing and other
Total revenues and other income
Costs and expenses:
Direct operating
Transportation, gathering and compression
Production and ad valorem taxes
Brokered natural gas and marketing
Exploration
Abandonment and impairment of unproved properties
General and administrative
Termination costs
Deferred compensation plan
Interest
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
Depletion, depreciation and amortization
Impairment of proved properties and other assets
Loss (gain) on the sale of assets
Total costs and expenses
Loss before income taxes
Income tax (benefit) expense:
Current
Deferred
Net loss
Net loss per common share:
Basic
Diluted
Dividends paid per common share
Weighted average common shares outstanding:
Basic
Diluted
Range
Pro Forma
Adjustments
Pro Forma 
Historical    
(In thousands, except per share amounts)
Range
(115,769)   $ 973,875  
  416,364  
 
79,774  
   
 
  1,470,013
—     
(12,286)  
   
(128,055)  
   
 
(19,993)  
(7,862)  
(7,022)  
(29,964)  
(1,043)  
154   
(10,009)  
(5,678)  
—     
(31,900)  
—     
(53,313)  
—     
(407,698)  
   
(574,328)  
   
446,273   
 
—     
174,046   
   
174,046
416,364   
 
92,060   
 
   
   
  1,598,068   
   
   
 
 
136,363   
 
396,739   
 
33,860   
 
115,866   
 
21,406   
 
47,619   
 
194,015   
 
15,070   
 
(77,627)  
 
166,439   
 
22,495   
 
581,155   
 
590,174   
 
406,856   
   
   
  2,650,430   
   
   
  (1,052,362)  
 
29   
(338,706)  
   
(338,677)
$ 1,089,644    $
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
  
   
   $ (713,685)   $
  
   
  
   $
  
   
   $
  
   
   $
(4.29)  
   
(4.29)  
   
0.16   
   
 
166,389   
166,389
116,370  
  388,877  
26,838  
 
 
85,902  
20,363  
 
 
47,773  
  184,006  
9,392  
 
 
(77,627) 
  134,539  
 
22,495  
  527,842  
  590,174  
 
(842) 
   
 
  2,076,102  
   
 
(606,089)
29  
(164,660) 
 
(164,631) 
 
272,227    $ (441,458)
$
 
   
  $
 
   
  $
(2.65) 
 
(2.65) 
 
0.16
166,389  
  166,389
161
Table of Contents
Note 5 — Supplemental Pro Forma Natural Gas, NGLs and Crude Oil Reserves Information
The following tables present the estimated pro forma combined net proved developed and undeveloped,
natural gas, NGLs and crude oil reserves as of December 31, 2015, along with a summary of changes in
quantities of net remaining proved reserves during the year ended December 31, 2015. The pro forma
reserve information set forth below gives effect to the merger as if the transaction had occurred on
January 1, 2015. The Range pro forma reserve information excludes the 2015 sale of the Virginia and West
Virginia properties.
Natural Gas (Mmcf)
Range
Range
Memorial
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
Total
Historical
Pro Forma
Historical(a)
6,922,836      5,940,310      1,013,340      6,953,650  
(340,232)    
     (340,286)    
(310,068) 
30,164     
50,343      1,063,274  
    1,017,956      1,012,931     
17,508     
—       
    
—       
17,508  
(51,117) 
(39,272)    
(11,845)    
     (960,122)    
     (362,687)    
(323,467)    
(98,269)    
(421,736) 
     
 
      
      
      
973,814      7,251,511  
    6,277,697      6,277,697     
      
     
 
  
 
    3,583,051      2,802,334     
     
      
    3,376,165      3,376,165     
      
     
  
 
    3,339,785      3,137,976     
     
      
    2,901,533      2,901,533
355,331      3,157,665  
 
443,983      3,820,148
658,009      3,795,985  
 
529,831      3,431,364
Balance—December 31, 2014
Revisions of previous estimates
Extensions, discoveries and other additions
Purchase of minerals in place
Property sales
Production
Balance—December 31, 2015
Proved developed reserves as of
December 31, 2014
December 31, 2015
Proved undeveloped reserves as of
December 31, 2014
December 31, 2015
Balance, December 31, 2014
Revisions of previous estimates
Extensions, discoveries and other additions
Purchases of minerals in place
Property sales
Production
Balance, December 31, 2015
Proved developed reserves as of
December 31, 2014
NGLs (Mbbls)
Range
Historical    
  515,907    
 
17,717    
36,308    
 
—      
 
 
(441)   
(20,356)   
 
  
    
  549,135
Memorial
Historical(a)    
53,033    
 
 
1,024    
2,741    
 
969    
 
 
(358)   
(3,249)   
 
    
  
54,160
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
Total
568,940  
 
18,741  
39,049  
 
969  
 
 
(799) 
(23,605) 
 
  
 
  603,295
December 31, 2014
December 31, 2015
Proved undeveloped reserves of
December 31, 2014
December 31, 2015
270,271    
  
    
  309,306    
    
  
  
  245,636    
  
    
  239,828
18,203    
    
24,583    
    
  
34,830    
    
29,577
288,474  
  
 
  333,889
280,466  
  
 
  269,405
Table of Contents
162
Crude Oil and Condensate (Mbbls)
Balance, December 31, 2015
Balance, December 31, 2014
  
Revisions of previous estimates
  
Extensions, discoveries and other additions   
  
Purchases of minerals in place
  
Property sales
Production
Proved developed reserves as of
December 31, 2014
Proved undeveloped reserves of
December 31, 2014
December 31, 2015
December 31, 2015
Range
Memorial
Historical    
48,658    
 
 
3,804    
4,924    
 
—      
 
(109)   
 
 
(4,084)   
    
  
53,193    
 
  
    
  
24,180    
    
31,679    
    
  
24,478    
    
21,514
Historical(a)    
11,915    
 
 
1,331    
1,111    
 
535    
 
(407)   
 
 
(1,331)   
    
  
13,154    
 
  
    
  
3,708    
    
6,101    
    
  
8,207    
    
7,053
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
Total
 
60,573  
5,135  
6,035  
535  
(516) 
(5,415) 
 
66,347
27,888  
 
37,780
32,685  
 
28,567
(a) Excludes amounts attributable to discontinued operations.
The pro forma standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved natural gas,
NGLs and crude oil reserves as of December 31, 2015 is as follows (in thousands):
Balance, December 31, 2015
Future cash flows
Future production costs
Future development costs
Future income tax expense
Range
Memorial
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
Historical
Historical(a)
$ 21,290,873    $ 4,008,764    $ 25,299,637  
  
  (11,849,891) 
(2,997,585)
(10,411,360)  
(2,213,582)
(1,438,531)  
(784,003)
Total
(2,007,794)  
   
6,658,137   
(3,932,274)
(88,723)  
 
  
   
   
  
  1,697,507   
(877,647)  
  
 
  
   
   
   $ 2,725,863    $
(2,096,517) 
 
8,355,644  
(4,809,921) 
 
819,860    $ 3,545,723
Future income tax expense
Future net cash flows
10% annual discount for estimated timing of cash flows
Standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows
(a) Excludes amounts attributable to discontinued operations.
Table of Contents
163
The changes in the pro forma standardized measure of discounted future net cash flows relating to proved
oil, natural gas and NGL reserves for the year ended December 31, 2015 are as follows (in thousands):
Range
Range
Memorial
Range
Pro Forma
Combined
Revisions of previous estimates:
Changes in prices and production costs
Revisions in quantities
Changes in future development and
abandonment costs
Net change in income taxes
Accretion of discount
Purchases of reserves in place
Additions to proved reserves from extensions,
discoveries and improved recovery
Natural gas, NGLs and oil sales, net of
production costs
Development costs incurred during the period
Sales of reserves in place
Timing and other
Net change for the year
Beginning of year
End of year
Historical
$(7,231,629)   $(7,181,713)   $ (2,284,279)   $(9,465,992) 
  
(817,431)
Historical(a)
Pro Forma
(868,886)
(868,886)
51,455
Total
359,540   
  2,173,904   
  1,007,027   
 
—
261,881   
  1,906,539   
912,425   
 
 
—
486,478
486,478
190,403   
882,942   
244,123   
53,597
452,284  
  2,789,481  
  1,156,548  
 
53,597
30,006
516,484
(522,682)  
  1,033,539   
  (1,050,237)  
 
(254,218)  
   
   
  (4,867,164)  
  7,593,027
(240,244)  
 
  
294,617   
 
  
(41,543)  
 
  
(171,372)  
 
  
   
   
  
 
(990,295)  
  1,810,155   
  
  
   
   
   $ 2,725,863    $ 2,725,863    $
(441,789)  
 
991,506   
 
(16,040)  
 
(238,910)  
 
   
   
  (4,188,509)  
  6,914,372
(682,033) 
  1,286,123  
(57,583) 
 
 
(410,282) 
   
 
  (5,178,804) 
  8,724,527  
   
 
819,860    $ 3,545,723
(a) Excludes amounts attributable to discontinued operations.
Table of Contents
164
COMPARATIVE STOCK PRICE DATA AND DIVIDENDS
Stock Prices
Shares of Range common stock are listed for trading on the NYSE under the symbol “RRC.” Shares of
Memorial common stock are listed for trading on the NASDAQ under the symbol “MRD.” The following
table sets forth the closing sales prices per share of Range common stock and Memorial common stock on
an actual and equivalent per share basis, on the NYSE and NASDAQ, respectively, on the following dates:
•   May 13, 2016, the last full trading day prior to the public announcement of the merger, and
•   August 9, 2016, the last trading day for which this information could be calculated prior to the date of this
joint proxy statement/prospectus.
Range
Memorial Common
May 13, 2016
August 9, 2016
Common Stock    
42.01    
$
$
38.84
$
$
Stock
13.45    
14.51
Per Share(1)
Memorial Equivalent
 
15.75  
14.57
$
$
(1) The equivalent per share data for Memorial common stock has been determined by multiplying the market
price of one share of Range common stock on each of the dates by the exchange ratio of 0.375.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the high and low sales prices per share of Range
common stock and Memorial common stock on the NYSE and NASDAQ composite transaction reporting
system, respectively. For current price information, you should consult publicly available sources.
Calendar Period
Year ended December 31, 2014
First Quarter
Second Quarter(1)
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Year ended December 31, 2015
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Year ending December 31, 2016
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter (through August 9, 2016)
Range
High
Low
Memorial
Low
High
25.90    
  30.32    
  28.44
82.63    
  66.98    
  51.83
95.41    
  87.37    
  74.64
$90.76     $79.28     $ —       $ —    
  19.00  
  
  22.50  
  
  
  15.30  
  
   $55.74     $43.88     $21.57     $15.87  
  16.92  
  
  14.61  
  
  
  13.37  
  
   $36.86     $19.21     $16.64     $ 8.30  
  
  9.39  
  14.20
65.53    
  49.40    
  37.73
48.46    
  30.33    
  20.79
20.98    
  20.55    
  20.14
46.96    
  45.76
31.11    
  38.29
17.30    
  16.89
(1) With respect to Memorial, beginning June 13, 2014, the date of Memorial’s initial public offering. The low price
shown for Memorial common stock in this quarter is the initial public offering price.
Dividends
Range currently issues a quarterly dividend. On June 1, 2016, Range announced that the Range board of
directors declared a dividend of $0.02 per share of outstanding Range common stock, which was paid on
June 30, 2016 to Range stockholders of record at the close of business on June 15, 2016 and was
consented to by Memorial in accordance with the merger agreement. Any future decisions to pay dividends
on Range common stock will be at the discretion of the Range board of directors and will depend on the
financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements, and other factors that the Range board of
directors may deem relevant. The merger agreement prohibits Range (unless consented to in advance by
Memorial, which consent may not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned) from paying
dividends to holders of Range common stock until the earlier of the effective time of the merger and the
termination of the merger agreement in accordance with its terms.
Table of Contents
165
Since its initial public offering, Memorial has not declared any dividends and does not anticipate declaring
or providing any cash dividends to holders of Memorial common stock in the foreseeable future. The
merger agreement prohibits Memorial (unless consented to in advance by Range, which consent may not
be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned) from paying dividends to holders of Memorial common
stock until the earlier of the effective time of the merger and the termination of the merger agreement in
accordance with its terms.
Table of Contents
166
COMPARISON OF RIGHTS OF RANGE
STOCKHOLDERS AND MEMORIAL STOCKHOLDERS
MRD Holdco LLC, Jay Graham, Anthony Bahr and certain other holders of Memorial common stock are
parties to the existing voting agreement. The parties to the existing voting agreement beneficially own a
majority of the outstanding shares of Memorial common stock. Pursuant to the existing voting agreement,
MRD Holdco LLC has the right to direct how each of the shares subject to the existing voting agreement is
voted as long as that agreement is in effect. The existing voting agreement also provides MRD Holdco LLC
with the right to designate a certain number of nominees to the Memorial board of directors, subject to the
limitations and conditions set forth therein, including the ownership of a specified percentage of the
outstanding shares of common stock. As a result, Memorial’s Amended and Restated Certificate of
Incorporation, dated as of June 10, 2014 (its “certificate of incorporation”) and Amended and Restated
Bylaws, dated as of June 10, 2014 (its “bylaws”) contain several provisions that change automatically upon
the occurrence of a “trigger date.” Memorial’s trigger date would occur if MRD Holdco LLC, the private
equity funds that control MRD Holdco LLC and their affiliates no longer beneficially own (or otherwise have
the right to vote or direct the vote of) more than 50% of the outstanding shares of the Memorial common
stock.
The following description summarizes the rights of Range stockholders and Memorial stockholders but
does not purport to be a complete statement of all such rights or a complete description of the specific
provisions referred to in this summary. The identification of specific differences is not intended to indicate
that other equally significant or more significant differences do not exist. You should read carefully the
relevant provisions of (i) the Range Amended and Restated Bylaws, dated as of May 15, 2016 (its “by-laws”)
and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, dated as of May 5, 2004, as amended by the First Amendment,
dated as of May 18, 2005, and the Second Amendment, dated as of May 20, 2008 (its “certificate of
incorporation”) and (ii) the Memorial bylaws and certificate of incorporation. Copies of the documents
referred to in this summary may be obtained as described under “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Authorized Capital
Table of Contents
Preferred Stock
Voting Rights
Dividends
Memorial
Memorial has authority to issue
600,000,000 shares of common stock, par
value $0.01 per share, and 50,000,000
shares of preferred stock, par value $0.01
per share.
As of the close of business on August 10,
2016, Memorial had 206,034,330 shares of
common stock and no shares of preferred
stock issued and outstanding.
167
Memorial
The Memorial board of directors is
authorized, subject to the limitations
prescribed by law and the provisions of the
Memorial certificate of incorporation, to
provide for the issuance of shares of
preferred stock, in one or more series, to
establish from time to time the number of
shares to be included in the series and to
fix the powers, preferences, designations,
voting powers, rights, qualifications,
limitations or restrictions of the shares of the
preferred stock of each such series.
Each holder of Memorial common stock will
have one vote for each share of Memorial
common stock held by such holder on all
matters voted upon by the stockholders of
Memorial.
Memorial’s bylaws provide that the
Memorial board of directors may from time
to time declare dividends on its outstanding
shares, subject to applicable law and
Memorial’s certificate of incorporation.
Under the DGCL, the directors of a
corporation may declare and pay dividends
Range
Range has authority to issue 475,000,000
shares of common stock, par value $0.01
per share, and 10,000,000 shares of
preferred stock, par value $1.00 per share.
As of the close of business on August 10,
2016, Range had 170,090,361 shares of
common stock and no shares of preferred
stock issued and outstanding.
Range currently expects to issue up to
approximately 77.263 million shares of
Range common stock to Memorial
stockholders pursuant to the merger
agreement, assuming a maximum of
206,034,330 shares of Memorial common
stock that will be exchanged, based on the
exchange ratio provided for in the merger
agreement.
Range
The Range board of directors is
authorized to provide for the issuance of
shares of preferred stock, in one or more
series, to establish from time to time the
number of shares to be included in each
such series and, to the extent authorized
by the Range certificate of incorporation,
to fix the designation, powers,
preferences, and relative, participating,
optional and other special rights, if any, of
each such series, and the qualifications,
limitations and restrictions thereof.
Each holder of Range common stock will
have one vote for each share of Range
common stock held by such holder on all
matters voted upon by the stockholders of
Range.
Under the DGCL, the directors of a
corporation may declare and pay
dividends upon the shares of its capital
stock either out of its surplus or, if there is
no such surplus, out of its net profits for the
fiscal year in which the dividend is
declared and/or the preceding fiscal year.
Range’s by-laws provide that there will be
no less than three and no more than
fifteen members of the Range board of
directors, the exact number of which is
fixed from time to time by the Range board
of directors.
Range currently has nine directors. The
merger agreement provides that, upon
completion of the merger, Range will
increase the size of the Range board of
directors by one member and the
Memorial board of directors will designate
one of its members, subject to consent by
the Governance and Nominating
Committee of the Range board of
directors, to fill the new Range
directorship created by that increase. In
Range
addition, Range has recently entered into
a voting support and nomination
agreement with SailingStone, in which
Range and SailingStone have agreed to
cooperate with each other in good faith to
identify one new independent director to
be appointed to the Range board of
directors.
Under Delaware law, directors need not
be stockholders of Range or residents of
Delaware.
Number and
Qualification of
Directors
Table of Contents
upon the shares of its capital stock either
out of its surplus or, if there is no such
surplus, out of its net profits for the fiscal
year in which the dividend is declared
and/or the preceding fiscal year.
Memorial’s certificate of incorporation
provides that the number of directors at any
one time is set by resolution of the majority
of the total number of authorized directors.
The Memorial board of directors currently
has seven directors.
168
Memorial
Under Delaware law, directors need not be
stockholders of Memorial or residents of
Delaware.
Before the trigger date:
Memorial’s certificate of incorporation
provides for the annual election of directors.
Memorial’s directors will consist (other than
any directors who may be elected by the
holders of any series of preferred stock that
may be issued, as specified in the related
preferred stock designation) of a single
class, and each director will hold office until
his successor is duly elected and qualified,
subject to such director’s death resignation,
disqualification or removal. At each annual
meeting of stockholders, directors elected
to succeed directors whose terms expire
will be elected for a term of office that will
expire at the next annual meeting of
stockholders.
From and after the trigger date:
Memorial’s certificate of incorporation
provides that the directors will be divided
(other than any directors who may be
elected by the holders of any series of
preferred stock that may be issued, as
specified in the related preferred stock
designation), with respect to the time for
which they hold office, into three classes,
serving staggered three-year terms, with the
initial term of office of the first class to
expire at the first annual meeting of
stockholders following the trigger date, the
initial term of office of the second class to
expire at the second annual meeting of
stockholders following the trigger date and
the initial term of office of the third class to
expire at the third annual meeting of
stockholders following the trigger date, with
each director to hold office until his
successor will have
169
Memorial
been duly elected and qualified, subject to
such director’s earlier death, resignation,
disqualification or removal and the
Memorial board of directors will be
authorized to assign members of the
Memorial board of directors to such classes
at the time such classification becomes
effective. At each annual meeting of
stockholders following the trigger date,
directors elected to succeed those directors
whose terms then expire will be elected for
a term of office to expire at the third
succeeding annual meeting of stockholders
after their election, with each director to
hold office until his successor will have
been duly elected and qualified.
Table of Contents
Range
Election of Directors
Memorial’s bylaws provide that directors
are elected by a plurality of the votes validly
cast in such election.
Removal of Directors
Before the trigger date:
Subject to the rights of the holders of any
series of preferred stock pursuant to
Memorial’s certificate of incorporation
(including any preferred stock designation)
and the then-applicable terms of the
existing voting agreement, Memorial’s
directors may be removed, with or without
cause, upon the affirmative vote of the
holders of a majority of the voting power of
the outstanding shares of stock entitled to
vote generally for the election of directors,
voting together as a single class.
170
Memorial
From and after the trigger date:
Subject to the rights of the holders of any
series of preferred stock pursuant to
Memorial’s certificate of incorporation
(including any preferred stock designation)
and the then-applicable terms of the
existing voting agreement, any director may
be removed only for cause, upon the
affirmative vote of the holders of at least
75% of the voting power of the outstanding
shares of stock of Memorial entitled to vote
generally for the election of directors, voting
together as a single class and acting at a
meeting of the stockholders.
Memorial’s certificate of incorporation
Table of Contents
Vacancies on the
Range’s by-laws provide that directors are
elected by a majority of the votes cast at
any meeting for the election of directors at
which a quorum is present, provided that if
the Range board of directors determines
that the number of nominees exceeds the
number of directors to be elected at such
meeting, and the Range board of directors
has not rescinded such determination by
ten days prior to the record date for
determining the stockholders entitled to
receive notice of the meeting, then the
directors will be elected by a plurality of
votes cast by those present in person or
by proxy and entitled to vote.
Under the DGCL, any director or the entire
Range board of directors may be
removed, with or without cause, by the
holders of a majority of the shares then
entitled to vote at an election of directors.
Range
Range’s by-laws provide that any vacancy
Board of Directors
Action by Written
Consent
Table of Contents
Advance Notice
Requirements for
Stockholder
Nominations and
provides that, subject to the rights of
holders of any series of preferred stock then
outstanding and the then-applicable terms
of the existing voting agreement, any
vacancy occurring in the board of directors
created on account of death, resignation,
disqualification, removal or other causes, or
resulting from an increase in the authorized
number of directors, will be filled solely by a
vote of the majority of the directors then in
office, even if less than a quorum, or by a
sole remaining director, and the directors so
chosen will hold office for the remainder of
the full term of such directorship and until
his or her successor has been elected and
qualified, subject, however, to such
director’s earlier death, resignation,
retirement, disqualification or removal.
Before the trigger date:
Under Memorial’s certificate of
incorporation, any action required or
permitted to be taken at any annual meeting
or special meeting of the stockholders may
be taken without a meeting, without prior
notice and without a vote of the
stockholders, if a consent in writing setting
forth the action to be taken is signed by the
holders of outstanding stock having not less
than the minimum number of votes that
would be necessary to authorize the action
at a meeting at which all shares entitled to
vote were present and voted.
171
Memorial
From and after the trigger date:
occurring in the Range board of directors
created on account of death, resignation,
retirement, disqualification, removal or
other causes, if a nominee for the vacant
director is not elected and the nominee
was not an incumbent director or if any
new directorship is created by an increase
in the authorized number of directors, a
majority of the directors then in office may
choose a successor or fill the newly
created directorship and such chosen
director will hold office until such chosen
director’s successor is duly elected and
qualified.
Range’s by-laws provide that any action
required or permitted to be taken at an
annual or special meeting may be taken
without a meeting, without prior notice and
without a vote, if a consent in writing is
signed by holders of record of the stock
issued and outstanding and entitled to
vote having the number of votes
necessary to authorize such action at a
meeting at which all shares were present
and voted.
Range
Any action required or permitted to be taken
by the stockholders of Memorial must be
taken at a duly held annual or special
meeting of stockholders and may not be
taken by any consent in writing of such
stockholders.
Annual Meetings
Annual Meetings
Memorial’s bylaws provide that for a
Range’s by-laws provide that for a
Other Proposals
Table of Contents
stockholder proposal (for either a
nomination of a person to the Memorial
board of directors or for the submission of
business) to be properly brought before an
annual meeting by a stockholder, the
secretary of Memorial must receive notice
of the stockholder’s proposal at Memorial’s
principal executive offices not later than the
close of business on the 90th day prior to
the first anniversary of the preceding year’s
annual meeting nor earlier than the close of
business on the 120th day before the first
anniversary of the preceding year’s annual
meeting; provided, however, that in the
event that the annual meeting is called for a
date that is more than 30 days before or
more than 60 days after such anniversary
date, notice by the stockholder to be timely
must be received no earlier than the close
of business on the 120th day before the
date of such annual meeting and not later
than the close of business on the 90th day
before such annual meeting or the 10th day
following the day Memorial publicly
announces the date of the annual meeting,
whichever is later.
Such notice with respect to any business
(other than nominations) must set forth as to
each such matter such stockholder
proposes to bring before the annual
meeting (A) a brief description of the
business desired to be brought before the
annual meeting, the reasons for conducting
such business at the annual meeting and
any material interest of such stockholder
and “stockholder associated person” (as
defined directly below) in
172
Memorial
such business, (B) a description of all
agreements, arrangements and
understandings between such stockholder
and stockholder associated person, and
any other entities in connection with the
proposal of such business.
stockholder proposal to be properly
brought before an annual meeting by a
stockholder (including nominations for the
Range board of directors), the stockholder
must deliver notice to the secretary of
Range at Range’s principal office not less
than 90 days nor more than 120 days prior
to the first anniversary of the date of the
previous year’s annual meeting. However,
if Range did not hold an annual meeting
the previous year, or if the date of the
current year’s annual meeting is more
than 30 days before or more than 60 days
after such anniversary date, the required
timing for submitting the notice by the
stockholder would instead be the close of
business on the 120th day prior to the date
of such annual meeting and no later than
the close of business on the 90th day prior
to the date of such annual meeting.
Furthermore, if the first public
announcement of the date of the annual
meeting is less than 100 days prior to the
date of the annual meeting, the deadline
for submitting the stockholder notice will
instead be the close of business on the
tenth day following the day on which
Range first publicly announces the date of
annual meeting.
Such stockholder notice with respect to
any business (other than nominations)
must set forth (i) the nature of the
proposed business and reasons for
conducting that business; (ii) any interest
of such proposing person in the proposed
business and a description of all
agreements; (iii) the name and address of
such proposing person; (iv) the class,
series and number of Range shares that
are, directly or indirectly, owned
Range
beneficially or of record by such proposing
person; (v) any option, convertible
security, or similar right with an exercise or
conversion privilege or a settlement
payment or mechanism at a price related
to any class or series of Range stock or
with a value derived in whole or in part
from the value of any class or series of
A “stockholder associated person” means
any (i) person or entity directly or indirectly
controlling or acting in concert with a
stockholder, (ii) any beneficial owner of
shares of stock of Memorial owned or
beneficially owned by such stockholder, or
(iii) any person or entity controlling,
controlled by or under common control with
any person referred to in (i) or (ii).
Table of Contents
173
Memorial
Range stock; (vi) any transaction in, or
arrangement, agreement or understanding
with respect to the rights set forth in clause
(v); (vii) any transaction that includes an
opportunity for the proposing person to
profit in any increase or decrease in the
value of any security of Range, (viii) any
transaction to mitigate any loss or manage
any risk associated with the increase or
decrease in value of any security of
Range, (ix) any transaction to increase or
decrease the number of securities of
Range that such proposing person was, is
or will be entitled to vote; (x) any proxy,
contract, arrangement, understanding or
relationship, whether written or oral,
pursuant to which such proposing person
has a right to vote any shares of any
security of Range; (xi) any rights to
dividends on the shares of Range owned
beneficially by such proposing person that
are separated or separable from the
underlying shares of Range; (xii) any
proportionate interest in shares of Range
or derivative instruments held, directly or
indirectly, by a general or limited
partnership in which such proposing
person is a general partner or, directly or
indirectly, beneficially owns an interest in
a general partner; (xiii) any fees (other
than an asset-based fee) that such
proposing person is entitled to be paid or
receive based on any increase or
decrease in the value of shares of Range
or derivative instruments; (xiv) any
arrangements or rights listed in (i)-(xiii)
described above held by any members of
such proposing person’s immediate family
sharing a household; (xv) any other
information relating to such proposing
person that would be required to be
disclosed in a proxy statement or other
filings required to be made in
Range
connection with solicitations of proxies for,
as applicable, the proposal and/or for the
election of directors in a contested
election pursuant to Section 14 of the
Exchange Act; (xvi) a representation as to
whether the proposing person intends, or
Such notice with respect to nominations of
directors and other proposals at the annual
meeting must set forth as to the stockholder
giving the notice and the beneficial owner,
if any (such stockholder and beneficial
owner, if any, the “person”), on whose
behalf the nomination is made: (i) the name,
and address of the person, (ii) (A) the class
or series and number of shares of capital
stock of Memorial that are owned
beneficially or of record by the person, (B)
any option, warrant, convertible security,
stock appreciation right, or similar right with
an exercise or conversion privilege or
settlement payment or mechanism at a
price related to any shares of Memorial, or
with a derivative value from any shares of
Memorial, (C) a description of any proxy,
contract, arrangement, understanding or
relationship pursuant to which such person
or stockholder associated person has a
right to vote the shares of Memorial, (D) any
short interest in Memorial held by such
person or stockholder associated person,
(E) any rights to dividends on the shares of
Memorial owned beneficially by such
person or stockholder associated person
that are separated or separable from the
underlying shares of Memorial, (F) any
proportionate interest in shares of Memorial
or derivative instruments held by a general
or limited partnership in which such
stockholder or stockholder associated
person is a general partner or
Table of Contents
174
Memorial
is part of a group that intends, to (1) deliver
a proxy statement and/or form of proxy to
holders of at least the percentage of
Range’s outstanding stock required to
approve or adopt the proposal or
(2) otherwise solicit proxies or votes from
stockholders in support of such proposal.
If a stockholder desires to nominate a
person to serve on the Range board of
directors, the stockholder’s notice must
include: (i) the name and address of the
proposed nominee, (ii) with respect to the
proposed nominee and any associated
person, the information described above
that would be required if the proposed
nominee or associate were submitting a
proposal for action to be taken at an
annual meeting, (iii) any interest of the
proposing stockholder, the proposing
stockholder’s affiliates and associates or
others acting in concert with the entity, in
any nominations and a description of such
interests, and (iv) if known by the
proposing stockholder, the name and
address of any other stockholder who
owns, beneficially or of record, any Range
stock and who supports any nominee
proposed by the proposing stockholder.
Such notice as to each person whom the
proposing stockholder proposes to
nominate for election as a director must
include (i) all information relating to such
person that would be required to be
disclosed in a proxy statement or other
filings required to be made in connection
with solicitations of proxies for elections of
directors in a contested election pursuant
to Section 14 of the Exchange Act and (ii)
a description of all direct and indirect
compensation and other material
monetary agreements, and
understandings during the past three
Range
in a general partner, (G) any performance-
related fees (other than an asset-based fee)
that such person or any stockholder
associated person is entitled to based on
years, and any other material
relationships, between or among such
stockholder and associated person, if any,
and their respective affiliates and
any increase or decrease in the value of
shares of Memorial or the derivative
instruments, as of the date of notice,
including any interests held by members of
such person’s or stockholder associated
person’s immediate family
sharing the same household, (iii) any other
information relating to the person and
stockholder associated person that would
be required to be disclosed in a proxy
statement or other filings required to be
made in connection with solicitations of
proxies for the proposal or election of
directors pursuant to Section 14 of the
Exchange Act and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, (iv) a
representation that such person is a holder
of record of stock of Memorial entitled to
vote at such meeting and intends to appear
in person or by proxy to bring such
nomination or other business, and (v) a
representation as to whether the person or
its associated person will deliver a proxy
statement or form of proxy to holders of at
least the percentage of the voting power of
Memorial’s outstanding stock required to
adopt the proposal, or, in the case of
nominations, at least the percentage of
voting power of Memorial’s outstanding
stock reasonably believed to be sufficient to
elect such nominee.
Such notice as to each person whom the
stockholder proposes to nominate for
election as a director must include (i) all
information relating to such person that
would be required to be disclosed in a
proxy statement or other filings required to
be made in connection with solicitations of
proxies for elections of directors in a
contested election pursuant to Section 14 of
the Exchange Act and (ii) a description of
all direct and indirect compensation and
other material monetary agreements,
arrangements and understandings during
the past three years, and any other material
175
Table of Contents
associates, or others acting in concert
therewith, on the one hand, and each
proposed nominee, and each proposed
nominee’s respective affiliates and
associates, or others acting in concert
therewith, on the other hand, including,
without limitation all information that would
be required to be disclosed pursuant to
Rule 404 promulgated under Regulation
S-K (and all other federal and state
securities laws) if the stockholder making
the nomination and any beneficial owner
on whose behalf the nomination is made,
if any, or any affiliate or associate thereof
or person acting in concert therewith, were
the “registrant” for purposes of such rule
and the nominee were a director or
executive officer of such registrant.
Such notice must include, with respect to
each nominee for election, a completed
and signed questionnaire, representation,
agreement and conditional resignation in
a form provided by Range. Range may
also require any proposed nominee to
furnish such other information as may be
reasonably required to determine the
eligibility of the proposed nominee to
serve as an independent director or that
could be material to a reasonable
stockholder’s understanding of the
independence of the nominee.
Even though Range’s stockholders are,
subject to compliance with applicable by-
law requirements, permitted to propose
nominees for directors, Range is not
required to include those nominees in
Range’s proxy statement unless the proxy
access requirements contained in its by-
laws are also met. If an eligible
stockholder proposed to have its director
nominee included in Range’s proxy
materials, such proposing person must,
among other things (i) meet certain notice
requirements, (ii) comply with certain
requirements with regard to the maximum
number of nominees to be
Memorial
Range
relationships, between or among such
stockholder and stockholder associated
person, if any, and their respective affiliates
and associates, or others acting in concert
therewith, on the one hand, and each
proposed nominee, and his respective
affiliates and associates, or others acting in
concert therewith, on the other hand,
including, without limitation all information
that would be required to be disclosed
pursuant to Rule 404 promulgated under
Regulation S-K if the stockholder making
the nomination and any beneficial owner on
whose behalf the nomination is made, if
any, or any affiliate or associate thereof or
person acting in concert therewith, were the
“registrant” for purposes of such rule and
the nominee were a director or executive
officer of such registrant.
Such notice must include, with respect to
each nominee for election, a completed and
signed questionnaire, representation and
agreement in a form provided by Memorial.
Memorial may also require any proposed
nominee to furnish such other information
as may be reasonably required to
determine the eligibility of the proposed
nominee to serve as an independent
director or that could be material to a
reasonable stockholder’s understanding of
the independence of the nominee.
Even though Memorial’s stockholders are,
subject to compliance with applicable
bylaw requirements, permitted to propose
nominees for directors, Memorial is not
required to include those nominees in
Memorial’s proxy statement
Special Meetings
Before the trigger date:
Special meetings of the Memorial
stockholders may be called only by the
Memorial board of directors pursuant to a
resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of
a majority of the total number of authorized
directors. Special meetings of the
stockholders of Memorial may also be
included in Range’s proxy materials, (iii)
meet certain common stock ownership
thresholds for certain periods of time, and
(iv) make certain disclosures regarding its
ownership of Range common stock,
intentions and compliance with law. The
proxy access requirements apply only to
annual meetings. Those requirements do
not apply to any special meeting, even if
directors are to be elected at that special
meeting. Those requirements are
summarized in “Future Stockholder
Proposals—Range—Proxy Access”
beginning on page 186.
Special Meetings
Except as described in the next sentence,
special meetings of the Range
stockholders may be called only by
Range’s chairman of the board, chief
executive officer or lead independent
director, as well as at the direction of the
Range board of directors. Special
meetings of Range’s stockholders may
also be called upon the request of Range
stockholders holding at least a majority
Table of Contents
called by the secretary of Memorial at the
request of the holders of record of a
176
Memorial
majority of the outstanding shares of
common stock. The authorized person or
persons calling a special meeting may fix
the time and place of such special meeting.
From and after the trigger date:
The stockholders do not have the power to
call or request a special meeting of the
stockholders of Memorial. The only
business that may be conducted at a
special meeting of the stockholders is
business that is brought before the meeting
by or at the direction of the Memorial board
of directors. Nominations of persons for
election to the Memorial board of directors
may be made at a special meeting of
stockholders at which directors are to be
elected pursuant to a notice of meeting (a)
by the Memorial board of directors or any
committee of the Memorial board of
directors or (b) provided that the Memorial
board of directors has determined that
directors will be elected at such meeting, by
any stockholder who (i) is a stockholder of
record at the time of giving notice and at the
time of the special meeting, (ii) is entitled to
vote at the meeting, and (iii) complies with
the notice procedures set forth in the
bylaws. In the event a special meeting of
stockholders is called to elect one or more
directors to the Memorial board of directors,
any stockholder may nominate a person for
election to the positions specified in the
notice. Such notice, which must contain the
same information as a stockholder notice
required to propose nominations or other
business at an annual meeting of
stockholders, will be delivered to the
secretary of Memorial at the principal
executive offices of Memorial not earlier
than the close of business on the 120th day
prior to such special meeting and not later
Range
in voting power of Range stock issued and
outstanding and entitled to vote on the
matters for which that special meeting is
called. Any request for a special meeting
by stockholders must state the nature of
the proposed business to be conducted at
the special meeting with reasonable
particularity, including the exact text of any
proposal to be presented for adoption. The
only matters that may be considered at a
special meeting are those specified in the
notice of such special meeting, although
the Range board of directors is permitted
to submit matters at any special meeting
called by the stockholders in accordance
with the by-laws.
If directors are to be elected at the special
meeting, a stockholder may nominate a
person to serve on the Range board of
directors by complying with the
nomination procedures described above
for annual meetings. However, the notice
deadline for a special meeting is different
than the deadline for an annual meeting.
In the case of a special meeting, the
deadline for submitting the stockholder
notice of nomination would instead be the
close of business on the tenth day
following the day on which Range first
publicly announces the date of the special
meeting.
than the close of business on the later of
the 90th day prior to such special meeting
or the 10th day following the day on which
public announcement is first made of the
date of the special meeting and of the
nominees proposed by the Memorial board
of directors to be elected at such meeting.
177
Memorial
Memorial has the right to amend its
certificate of incorporation in any manner.
Before the trigger date:
The affirmative vote of the holders of a
majority in voting power of the outstanding
shares of stock of Memorial entitled to vote
thereon, voting together as single class is
required to amend, alter or repeal any
provision of the certificate of incorporation.
Such an amendment will also require the
approval of a majority of the outstanding
stock of each class of stock entitled to vote
on such amendment as a separate class.
From and after the trigger date:
The affirmative vote of the holders of at
least 66 2⁄3% in voting power of the outstanding
shares of stock of Memorial entitled to vote on an
amendment to the certificate of incorporation, voting
together as a single class, will be required to amend,
alter or repeal any provision of the certificate of
incorporation; provided, however, that the
amendment, alteration or repeal of the authorized
number of shares will only require the affirmative
vote of the holders of a majority in voting power of
the outstanding shares of stock of Memorial entitled
to vote, voting together as a single class.
The Memorial board of directors is
expressly authorized to adopt, amend or
repeal the bylaws with the approval of a
majority of the total number of authorized
directors.
Table of Contents
Amendments to the
Certificate of
Incorporation
Amendments to
Bylaws
Range
Pursuant to §242 of the DGCL, the Range
board of directors must adopt a resolution
setting forth a proposed amendment to
Range’s certificate of incorporation. The
proposed amendment must be approved
by the vote of the Range stockholders at
any special meeting or at the next annual
meeting. The amendment must be
approved by holders of a majority of the
outstanding Range stock entitled to vote
on the amendment, as a single class.
Under certain circumstances, §242(b)(2)
of the DGCL entitles the holders of the
outstanding shares of each class to vote
as a class on a proposed amendment,
regardless of whether entitled to vote
thereon by the certificate of incorporation.
The by-laws may be altered, amended or
repealed by the Range board of directors
at any regular meeting of the Range board
of directors without prior notice, or at any
special meeting of the Range board of
directors if notice of such alteration,
amendment or repeal is contained in the
Stockholders will have the power to adopt,
amend or repeal the bylaws, provided that
in addition to any vote of the holders of any
class or series of stock of Memorial
required by law or by the certificate of
incorporation, the bylaws of Memorial will
not be adopted, altered, amended or
repealed by the stockholders.
(i) Before the trigger date:
except by the affirmative vote of holders of
not less than 50% in voting power of the
then-outstanding shares of stock entitled to
vote thereon, voting together as a single
class; and
178
Memorial
(ii) From and after the Trigger Date:
notice of such special meeting. The
stockholders will also have power to
adopt, amend or repeal the by-laws. The
affirmative vote of the holders of a majority
of the voting power of the shares present
at a meeting and entitled to vote on such a
by-law amendment is required for the
Range stockholders to approve such an
amendment.
Range
Table of Contents
Quorum
Limitation of
Personal Liability of
except by the affirmative vote of holders of
not less than 66 2/3% in voting power of the
then-outstanding shares of stock entitled to
vote thereon, voting together as a single
class.
Memorial’s bylaws provide that, except as
otherwise required by law or by Memorial’s
certificate of incorporation, the holders of
shares of Memorial’s outstanding capital
stock representing a majority of the voting
power of all outstanding shares of capital
stock entitled to vote at such meeting will
constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business at such meeting, except that when
specified business is to be voted on by a
class or series of stock voting as a class,
the holders of shares representing a
majority of the voting power of the
outstanding shares of such class or series
will constitute a quorum of such class or
series for the transaction of such business.   
No director of Memorial will be liable to
Memorial for monetary damages for breach
Range’s by-laws provide that the holders
of a majority of the voting power of
Range’s outstanding shares entitled to
vote generally at a meeting of
stockholders, represented in person or by
proxy, will constitute a quorum at a
meeting of stockholders.
Range’s certificate of incorporation
provides that no director will be personally
Directors
Indemnification of
Directors and
Officers
Table of Contents
of fiduciary duty as a director, except to the
extent such exemption from liability or
limitation thereof is not permitted by the
DGCL as the same exists or may be
amended in the future. If the DGCL is
amended to authorize corporate action
further limiting or eliminating the liability of
directors, then the liability of a director or its
stockholders will be limited or eliminated to
the fullest extent permitted by the DGCL, as
so amended.
Memorial’s bylaws provide that Memorial
will indemnify and hold harmless, to the
fullest extent authorized or permitted by
applicable law as it presently exists or may
be amended, any person who was or is
made a party to or
179
Memorial
is threatened to be made a party to, or is
otherwise involved in, any pending or
completed action, suit or proceeding by
reason of the fact that he or she, or a person
for whom he or she is the legal
representative, is or was an officer or
director of Memorial or, while an officer or
director of Memorial, is or was serving at
the request of Memorial as a director,
officer, employee, or agent of another
corporation or of a partnership, joint
venture, trust, or other enterprise, including
service with respect to an employee benefit
plan (“covered person”), whether the basis
of such proceeding is alleged action in an
official capacity serving as a director,
officer, employee, trustee or agent, or in any
other capacity while serving as such,
against all expense, liability and loss
(including attorneys’ fees, judgments, fines,
ERISA excise taxes and penalties and
amounts paid in settlement) reasonably
incurred or suffered by such covered
person in connection with the proceeding;
provided, however, that except as to
proceedings to enforce rights to
liable to Range or its stockholders for
monetary damages for breach of fiduciary
duty as a director, except for liability (i) for
any breach of the director’s duty of loyalty
to Range or its stockholders, (ii) for acts or
omissions not in good faith or which
involve intentional misconduct or a
knowing violation of law, (iii) under
Section 174 of the DGCL, or (iv) for any
transaction from which the director derived
an improper personal benefit. If the DGCL
is amended to authorize corporate action
further eliminating or limiting the personal
liability of directors, then the liability of a
director will be eliminated or limited to the
fullest extent permitted by the DGCL as so
amended.
Range’s by-laws provide that Range will
indemnify and hold harmless, to the fullest
extent authorized or permitted by
applicable law as it presently exists or
may be amended, any person who was or
is made a party to or is threatened to be
Range
made a party to, or is otherwise involved
in, any pending or completed action, suit
or proceeding by reason of the fact that he
or she is or was a legal representative or
officer or director of Range or, while a
director or officer of Range, is or was
serving at the request of Range as a
director, officer, partner, venture,
proprietor, trustee, employee, agent or
similar functionary of another foreign or
domestic corporation or of a partnership,
joint venture, sole proprietorship, trust,
employee benefit plan or other enterprise,
including service with respect to an
employee benefit plan, whether the basis
of such proceeding is alleged action in an
official capacity serving as a director,
officer, employee, or in any other capacity
while serving as such, against all
expense, liability and loss (including
attorneys’ fees, judgments, fines, ERISA
excise taxes and penalties and amounts
paid in settlement) actually and
reasonably incurred or suffered by such
covered person in connection with the
proceeding.
indemnification and advancement of
expenses, Memorial will indemnify such
person in connection with a proceeding
initiated by such covered person only if
such proceeding was authorized by the
Memorial board of directors.
Memorial will pay the expenses (including
attorneys’ fees) incurred by such covered
person in defending any such proceeding
in advance of its final disposition; provided,
however, that if the DGCL or applicable law
requires an advancement of expenses
incurred by such person in his or her
capacity as a director or officer of Memorial,
that advancement will be made only upon
Memorial’s receipt of an undertaking by or
on behalf of such person to repay all
amounts advanced if it will ultimately be
determined by final judicial decision that
such person is not entitled to
indemnification.
Range will pay the expenses (including
attorneys’ fees) incurred by such covered
person in defending any such proceeding
in advance of its final disposition;
provided, however, that if the DGCL or
applicable law requires the payment of
such expenses incurred by such person in
his or her capacity as a director or officer
of Range in advance, that advancement
will be made only upon Range’s receipt of
an undertaking by or on behalf of such
person to repay all amounts advanced if it
will ultimately be determined by final
judicial decision that such person is not
entitled to indemnification.
The rights to indemnification and
advancement of expenses will continue
The rights to indemnification and
advancement of expenses will continue as
to a person who has ceased to be a
180
Memorial
Range
as to a covered person who has ceased to
be a director, officer, employee or agent
and will continue to the benefit of his or her
heirs, executors and administrators.
director, officer, employee or agent and
will continue to the benefit of his or her
heirs, executors and administrators.
If a claim for indemnification or payment of
expenses is not paid in full within 60 days,
or, in the case of claims for advancement of
expenses, 30 days, after Memorial has
received a written claim or statement
therefor, such covered person may file suit
to recover the unpaid amount of the claim
and, if successful in whole or in part, will be
entitled to be paid the expense of
prosecuting such claim. In any suit brought
to enforce a right to indemnification or
advancement of expenses, Memorial will
have the burden of proving that such
covered person is not entitled to be
indemnified or to be advanced expenses.
If a claim for indemnification or payment of
expenses is not paid in full within 60 days
after Range has received a written claim
or statement therefor, such covered
person may file suit to recover the unpaid
amount of the claim and, if successful in
whole or in part, will be entitled to be paid
the expense of prosecuting such claim.
The rights conferred on any such person
by the foregoing indemnification
provisions are not exclusive of any other
rights which such person may have or
acquire.
Table of Contents
The rights conferred on any such person by
the indemnification provisions of the
certificate of incorporation or the bylaws are
not exclusive of any other rights which such
person may have or acquire.
Memorial agrees that (i) it is the indemnitor
of first resort, (ii) it will be primarily liable for
all obligations and any indemnification, (iii)
any obligation of any persons with whom a
covered person may be associated to
indemnify such covered person in respect
of any proceeding will be secondary to the
obligations of Memorial, (iv) Memorial will
be required to indemnify each covered
person to the fullest extent without regard to
any rights such covered person may have
against any other person with whom such
covered person is associated, and (v)
Memorial irrevocably waives, relinquishes
and releases any other person with whom
or which a covered person may be
associated from any claim of contribution,
subrogation or any other recovery of any
kind in respect of amounts paid by
Memorial hereunder.
Under §203 of the DGCL, a corporation is
generally prohibited for a three- year period
following the time a stockholder becomes
an “interested stockholder”
181
Memorial
Certain Business
Combination
Restrictions
Table of Contents
Under §203 of the DGCL, a corporation is
generally prohibited for a three- year
period following the time a stockholder
becomes an “interested stockholder”
Range
(generally a person who beneficially owns
15% or more of a corporation’s voting
stock), from engaging in any business
combination with an interested stockholder
who unless:
(generally a person who beneficially owns
15% or more of a corporation’s voting
stock), from engaging in any business
combination with an interested
stockholder who unless:
•    prior to the time the stockholder became
an interested stockholder, the Memorial
board of directors approved either the
business combination or the transaction
which resulted in the stockholder becoming
an interested stockholder;
•    prior to the time the stockholder
became an interested stockholder, the
Range board of directors approved either
the business combination or the
transaction which resulted in the
stockholder becoming an interested
stockholder;
•    the interested stockholder owned at
least 85% of the voting stock of the
corporation, excluding specified shares,
upon consummation of the transaction
which resulted in the stockholder becoming
an interested stockholder; or
•    at or subsequent to the time the
stockholder became an interested
stockholder, the business combination is
approved by the Memorial board of
directors and authorized by the affirmative
vote, at an annual or special meeting and
not by written consent, of at least 66 2/3% of
the outstanding voting shares of the
corporation, excluding shares held by that
interested stockholder.
•    the interested stockholder owned at
least 85% of the voting stock of the
corporation, excluding specified shares,
upon consummation of the transaction
which resulted in the stockholder
becoming an interested stockholder; or
•    at or subsequent to the time the
stockholder became an interested
stockholder, the business combination is
approved by the Range board of directors
and authorized by the affirmative vote, at
an annual or special meeting and not by
written consent, of at least 66 2/3% of the
outstanding voting shares of the
corporation, excluding shares held by that
interested stockholder.
A business combination generally includes:
•    mergers, consolidations and sales or
other dispositions of 10% or more of the
assets of a corporation to or with an
interested stockholder;
•    specified transactions resulting in the
issuance or transfer to an interested
stockholder of any capital stock of the
corporation or its subsidiaries; and
A business combination generally
includes:
•    mergers, consolidations and sales or
other dispositions of 10% or more of the
assets of a corporation to or with an
interested stockholder;
•    specified transactions resulting in the
issuance or transfer to an interested
stockholder of any capital stock of the
corporation or its subsidiaries; and
182
Memorial
•    other transactions resulting in a
disproportionate financial benefit to an
interested stockholder.
A corporation may elect not to be governed
by §203 of the DGCL. Neither Memorial’s
certificate of incorporation nor its bylaws
contain this election. Therefore, Memorial is
governed by §203 of the DGCL.
Range
•    other transactions resulting in a
disproportionate financial benefit to an
interested stockholder.
A corporation may elect not to be
governed by §203 of the DGCL. Neither
Range’s certificate of incorporation nor its
by-laws contain this election. Therefore,
Range is governed by §203 of the DGCL.
Table of Contents
The Memorial board of directors has
adopted resolutions rendering this statute
inapplicable to the merger agreement and
the transactions contemplated thereby.
Pursuant to the merger agreement, Range
and Merger Sub have represented to
Memorial that neither Range nor Merger
Sub (nor any affiliate or associate thereof)
is, was or at any time during the last three
years became, an “interested stockholder”
of Memorial for purposes of §203 of the
DGCL.
Pursuant to the merger agreement, Range
and Merger Sub have represented to
Memorial that neither Range nor Merger
Sub has the requisite beneficial
ownership of Memorial common stock that
would cause either of them to be an
“interested stockholder” of Memorial for
purposes of §203 of the DGCL.
Table of Contents
183
NO APPRAISAL RIGHTS
Under Delaware law, as well as the certificate of incorporation and bylaws of each company, neither the
holders of Range capital stock nor the holders of Memorial capital stock, respectively, are entitled to
appraisal rights in connection with the merger.
Table of Contents
184
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the shares of Range common stock to be issued pursuant to the merger will be passed upon
by Sidley Austin LLP. The material U.S. federal income tax consequences relating to the merger will be
passed upon for Range by Sidley Austin LLP and for Memorial by Vinson & Elkins LLP.
Range
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Range appearing in Range’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2015, and the effectiveness of Range’s internal control over financial reporting as
of December 31, 2015 have been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in its reports thereon, which are incorporated herein by reference. Such
consolidated financial statements are incorporated herein by reference in reliance upon such reports given
on the authority of such firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The estimates of proved oil and gas reserves for Range incorporated by reference herein were based on
internally prepared reserve estimates. Wright & Company, Inc., an independent petroleum engineering firm,
audited approximately 94% of Range’s proved reserves. These estimates are included and incorporated
herein in reliance on the authority of such firm as an expert in such matters.
Memorial
The consolidated balance sheets of Memorial Resource Development Corp. and subsidiaries as of
December 31, 2015 and 2014, the related consolidated statements of operations, equity, and cash flows for
the year ended December 31, 2015, and the related consolidated and combined statements of operations,
equity, and cash flows for each of the years in the two-year period ended December 31, 2014, have been
incorporated by reference herein from the Current Report on Form 8-K dated July 28, 2016. Management’s
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015 has
also been incorporated by reference herein from the annual report dated February 24, 2016 on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2015 in reliance upon the reports of KPMG LLP, independent registered
public accounting firm, incorporated by reference herein upon the authority of said firm as experts in
accounting and auditing.
The audit report on the consolidated and combined financial statements of Memorial Resource
Development Corp. states that the statements of operations, equity, and cash flows for each of the years in
the two-year period ended December 31, 2014 have been prepared on a combined basis of accounting. The
audit report on the consolidated and combined financial statements of Memorial Resource Development
Corp. also refers to a change in method of accounting for debt issuance costs and deferred income taxes
effective January 1, 2014.
Estimated quantities of the proved oil and natural gas reserves and the net present value of Memorial
reserves as of December 31, 2015 incorporated by reference in this joint proxy statement/prospectus are
based on a reserve report prepared by Memorial and audited by Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc.
These estimates are included and incorporated by reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus in
reliance on the authority of Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. as experts in such matters.
Estimated quantities of certain MEMP proved oil and natural gas reserves as of December 31, 2015
incorporated by reference in this joint proxy statement/prospectus are based on a reserve report prepared
by MEMP and audited by Ryder Scott Company, L.P. These estimates are included and incorporated by
reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus in reliance upon the authority of such firm as an expert
in these matters.
Table of Contents
Range
185
FUTURE STOCKHOLDER PROPOSALS
Range has already held its annual meeting of stockholders for 2016. Range expects to hold a regular
annual meeting in 2017, regardless of whether the merger is completed.
Rule 14a-8. For inclusion in the proxy statement and form of proxy relating to the Range 2017 annual
meeting, stockholder proposals submitted pursuant to Rule 14a-8 under the Exchange Act must be
received by Range’s Secretary not later than December 10, 2016 and must otherwise comply with the
requirements of Rule 14a-8.
Range By-law Procedures for Submitting Proposals and Director Nominations. In addition to the
procedures of Rule 14a-8, stockholders may also propose business for Range’s annual meeting (including
nominations for the Range board of directors) by following the procedures outlined in Range’s by-laws.
Pursuant to Range’s by-laws, a stockholder must deliver notice, mailed to and received at the principal
executive offices of Range, not less than 90 calendar days nor more than 120 calendar days before the
anniversary date of the preceding year’s annual meeting. However, if the date of the annual meeting is
advanced by more than 30 calendar days, or delayed by more than 60 calendar days, from such
anniversary date, a stockholder’s notice must be so delivered not earlier than the 120th calendar day prior
to such annual meeting and not later than the 90th calendar day prior to such annual meeting. Furthermore,
if the first public announcement of the date of the annual meeting is less than 100 days prior to the date of
the annual meeting, the deadline for submitting the stockholder notice will instead be the close of business
on the tenth day following the day on which Range first publicly announces the date of the annual meeting.
In accordance with these provisions, stockholders must deliver notice to Range no earlier than January 18,
2017 and no later than February 17, 2017 for their proposals or nominations to be considered at the Range
2017 annual meeting.
Proxy Access. Even though the by-law procedures described above grant Range’s stockholders the right
to propose nominees for directors, Range is not required to include those nominees in Range’s proxy
materials unless the proxy access requirements contained in Range’s by-laws are met. The Range board of
directors amended Range’s by-laws to add these proxy access provisions in February 2016.
Under these provisions, a stockholder or group of not more than 20 stockholders is permitted to submit a
director nominee if that stockholder or group has owned at least 3% of the outstanding Range common
stock continuously for at least three years. That three year test must be met on Range’s Secretary’s receipt
of the stockholder’s or group’s notice of proxy access nomination, as well as the record date for the annual
meeting and the date of the annual meeting itself. For purposes of determining the 20-stockholder limit,
collective investment funds that hold themselves out as a related fund or that share the same sponsor are
treated as a single stockholder. A stockholder or group that satisfies these eligibility requirements is
referred to as an “eligible stockholder.” The maximum number of nominees that can be submitted by
eligible stockholders under this procedure is 20% of the Range board of directors or two, whichever is
greater.
In order to satisfy Range’s proxy access requirements, an eligible stockholder must provide written notice
of its nomination to Range’s secretary during the period between the 150th and 120th days (including those
days) prior to the first anniversary of the date that Range first distributed its proxy statement to its
stockholders for the previous year’s annual meeting. Neither the adjournment nor postponement of the
annual meeting will extend or change the deadline for giving of a proxy access nomination notice. For
Range’s 2017 annual meeting, that nomination period would begin on the close of business of November 9,
2016 and end on the close of business on December 9, 2016.
As to each person proposed to be nominated for election or reelection as a director pursuant to delivering
timely notice to Range’s Secretary, the eligible stockholder’s notice to Range’s Secretary must include a
completed questionnaire and signed director representation, agreement and conditional resignation, each
as
Table of Contents
186
required by Range’s by-laws. As to the eligible stockholder giving the notice, the eligible stockholder’s
notice to Range’s Secretary must set forth (a) the name, age, business address and residence address of
such stockholder and certain of its affiliates, (b) any interest of the eligible stockholder in the nomination or
nominations and a description of all arrangements or understandings between such stockholder, on the
one hand, and the proposed nominee and certain of the nominee’s affiliates, on the other hand, pursuant to
which the nomination or nominations are to be made by the eligible stockholder, (c) to the extent known,
the name and address of any other stockholder owning, beneficially or of record, any stock of Range and
who supports any nominee proposed by such stockholder, (d) other information relating to any such
nominee and certain of its affiliates and the eligible stockholder that would be required to be disclosed in a
proxy statement or other filings required to be made in connection with solicitations of proxies for election
of directors in a contested election pursuant to Section 14 of the Exchange Act (including, if applicable,
such person’s written consent to being named in the proxy statement as a nominee and to serving as a
director if elected) and (e) a description of all direct and indirect compensation and other material monetary
agreements, arrangements and understandings during the past three years, and any other material
relationships, between or among the eligible stockholder, on the one hand, and each nominee and certain
of such nominee’s affiliates, on the other hand, including, without limitation, all biographical and related
party transaction and other information that would be required to be disclosed pursuant to the federal and
state securities laws if the stockholder making the nomination were the “registrant” for purposes of such
rule and the nominee and certain of that nominee’s affiliates were a director or executive officer of such
registrant.
A nominating stockholder must deliver, among other things, within the time period in which it must deliver
its proxy access notice (i) information required with respect to the person it nominates as director, (ii) a
written representation that the nominee will act as a representative of Range and comply with all policies of
Range, and (iii) that all statements made to Range by the nominating stockholder will be true and correct in
all material respects. Range may also require a proposed nominee to submit other reasonable information
that may relate to material information regarding the nominee’s independence or eligibility. The nominating
stockholder may also provide Range’s secretary a supporting statement in support of its nominee’s
candidacy. Range may choose to exclude from its proxy materials a stockholder nominee if certain
circumstances occur, such as the stockholder nominee’s violating the Exchange Act, the stockholder
nominee’s not meeting independence requirements, and the nominee having been subject to a criminal
proceeding within the last ten years. If either the nominating stockholder or the stockholder nominee
breaches its obligations or agreements, such person loses its eligibility.
Memorial
Rule 14a-8. Memorial has already held its annual meeting of stockholders for 2016. It is not expected that
Memorial will hold an annual meeting for 2017, unless the merger is not completed. To be considered for
inclusion in next year’s proxy materials, a Memorial’s stockholder’s proposal must be submitted in writing
by December 2, 2016, to Memorial’s Corporate Secretary at 500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800, Houston, Texas
77002. However, if the date of the annual meeting is more than 30 days before or after May 13, 2017, the
deadline is a reasonable time before Memorial begins to print and send its proxy materials for next year’s
annual meeting.
Memorial Bylaw Procedures for Submitting Proposals and Director Nominations. If a Memorial stockholder
wishes to submit a proposal that is not to be included in Memorial’s proxy materials for next year’s annual
meeting pursuant to the SEC stockholder proposal procedures or to nominate a director, the Memorial
stockholder must do so between January 13, 2017 and February 12, 2017. However, if the date of that
annual meeting is more than 30 days before or more than 60 days after May 13, 2017, notice must be given
not earlier than the 120th day before such annual meeting date and not later than the 90th day before such
annual meeting date or, if later, the 10th day following the day on which Memorial first publicly announces
the annual meeting date. Memorial stockholders are also advised to review Memorial’s amended and
restated bylaws, which contain additional requirements about advance notice of stockholder proposals and
director nominations.
Table of Contents
187
OTHER MATTERS PRESENTED AT THE MEETINGS
As of the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus, neither the Range board of directors nor the
Memorial board of directors knows of any matters that will be presented for consideration at either the
Range special meeting or the Memorial special meeting, respectively, other than as described in this joint
proxy statement/prospectus. If any other matters come before either the Range special meeting or the
Memorial special meeting and shall be voted upon, the proposed proxy will be deemed to confer authority
to the individuals named as authorized therein to vote the shares represented by the proxy as to any
matters that fall within the purposes set forth in the notice of special meeting. It is intended that the persons
named in the enclosed proxy and acting thereunder will vote in accordance with their best judgment on
such matters.
188
Table of Contents
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
Range and Memorial each file annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy statements and other
information with the SEC under the Exchange Act. You may read and copy any of this information at the
SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-
SEC-0330 for further information on the Public Reference Room. The SEC also maintains an internet
website that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers,
including Range and Memorial, who file electronically with the SEC. The address of that site is
www.sec.gov.
Investors may also consult Range’s or Memorial’s website for more information about Range or Memorial,
as applicable. Range’s website is www.rangeresources.com. Memorial’s website is www.memorialrd.com.
Information included on these web sites is not incorporated by reference into this joint proxy
statement/prospectus.
Range has filed with the SEC a registration statement of which this joint proxy statement/prospectus forms
a part. The registration statement registers the issuance of the shares of Range common stock to be issued
to Memorial stockholders pursuant to the merger. The registration statement, including the attached
exhibits, contains additional relevant information about Range and the Range common stock. The rules
and regulations of the SEC allow Range and Memorial to omit certain information included in the
registration statement from this joint proxy statement/prospectus.
In addition, the SEC allows Range and Memorial to disclose important information to you by referring you to
other documents filed separately with the SEC. This information is considered to be a part of this joint
proxy statement/prospectus.
This joint proxy statement/prospectus incorporates by reference the documents listed below that Range
has previously filed with the SEC (other than information furnished pursuant to Item 2.01 or Item 7.01 of a
Current Report on Form 8-K). These documents contain important information about Range, its financial
condition or other matters.
•   Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015.
•   Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A filed April 8, 2016, as supplemented April 14, 2016.
•   Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarterly periods ended March 31, 2016 and June 30, 2016.
•   Current Reports on Form 8-K, filed January 5, 2016, February 26, 2016, March 1, 2016, April 13, 2016,
April 28, 2016, May 19, 2016, June 29, 2016, July 26, 2016, August 3, 2016 and August 8, 2016.
•   Current Report on Form 8-K/A, filed May 19, 2016.
•   The description of Range common stock contained in Range’s registration statement on Form 10 filed with
the SEC on June 18, 1996, including any subsequently filed amendments and reports filed for the purpose
of updating such description.
In addition, Range incorporates by reference any future filings it makes with the SEC under Section 13(a),
13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act after the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus and prior to the
date of the Range special meeting (other than information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of
any Current Report on Form 8-K, unless expressly stated otherwise therein). Such documents are
considered to be a part of this joint proxy statement/prospectus, effective as of the date such documents
are filed.
Table of Contents
189
You can obtain any of these documents from the SEC through the SEC’s website at the address described
above, or Range will provide you with copies of these documents, without charge, upon written or oral
request to:
Range Resources Corporation
100 Throckmorton Street, Suite 1200
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
(817) 869-4267
Attn: Investor Relations
This joint proxy statement/prospectus also incorporates by reference the documents listed below that
Memorial has previously filed with the SEC (other than information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or
Item 7.01 of a Current Report on Form 8-K). These documents contain important information about
Memorial, its financial condition or other matters.
•   Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015.
•   Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarterly periods ended March 31, 2016 and June 30, 2016.
•   Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A filed April 1, 2016.
•   Current Reports on Form 8-K, filed February 1, 2016, February 24, 2016, May 2, 2016, May 10, 2016,
May 16, 2016, May 17, 2016, June 1, 2016, July 18, 2016 and July 28, 2016.
•   The description of the Memorial common stock contained in Memorial’s Form 8-A filed with the SEC on
June 12, 2014, including any amendment to that form that Memorial may file in the future for the purpose of
updating the description of the Memorial common stock.
In addition, Memorial incorporates by reference any future filings it makes with the SEC under Section 13(a),
13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act after the date of this joint proxy statement/prospectus and prior to the
date of the Memorial special meeting (other than information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of
any Current Report on Form 8-K, unless expressly stated otherwise therein). Such documents are
considered to be a part of this joint proxy statement/prospectus, effective as of the date such documents
are filed.
You can obtain any of these documents from the SEC, through the SEC’s website at the address described
above, or Memorial will provide you with copies of these documents, without charge, upon written or oral
request to:
Memorial Resource Development Corp.
500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 588-8339
Attention: Investor Relations
In the event of conflicting information in this joint proxy statement/prospectus in comparison to any
document incorporated by reference into this joint proxy statement/prospectus, or among documents
incorporated by reference, the information in the latest filed document controls.
Table of Contents
190
The terms defined in this glossary are used in this joint proxy statement/prospectus.
GLOSSARY OF CERTAIN OIL AND GAS TERMS
Bbl.
Bcf.
One barrel of oil of crude oil or other liquid hydrocarbons.
One billion cubic feet of gas.
Bcfe.
One billion cubic feet of natural gas equivalents.
Mbbl.
One thousand barrels of crude oil or other liquid hydrocarbons.
Mmbtu.   One million British thermal units.
Mmcf.
One million cubic feet of gas.
Mcfe.
One thousand cubic feet of gas equivalents.
Mcfed.
One thousand cubic feet of gas equivalents per day.
Mmcfed.  One million cubic feet of gas equivalents per day.
NGLs.
Natural gas liquids.
Present value (PV). The present value of future net cash flows, using a 10% discount rate, from estimated
proved reserves, using constant prices and costs in effect on the date of the report (unless such prices or
costs are subject to change pursuant to contractual provisions). The after tax present value is the
Standardized Measure.
Proved reserves. The quantities of crude oil, natural gas and NGLs that geological and engineering data
can estimate with reasonable certainty to be economically producible within a reasonable time from known
reservoirs under existing economic, operating and regulatory conditions prior to the time at which
contracts providing the right to operate expire, unless evidence indicates that renewal is reasonably
certain.
Note: For purposes of Bcfe, Mcfe, Mcfed and Mmcfed, oil and NGLS are converted into natural gas
equivalents based on a ratio of 6 thousand cubic feet for each barrel of oil or NGLs, which reflects relative
energy content but is not indicative of the relationship among oil, NGL and natural gas prices.
Table of Contents
191
Annex A
AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER
among
RANGE RESOURCES CORPORATION,
MEDINA MERGER SUB, INC.
and
MEMORIAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT CORP.
Dated as of May 15, 2016
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I CERTAIN DEFINITIONS
1.1          Certain Definitions
1.2          Terms Defined Elsewhere
ARTICLE II THE MERGER
2.1          The Merger
2.2          Closing
2.3          Effect of the Merger
2.4          Organizational Documents
2.5          Directors and Officers of the Surviving Corporation
2.6          Directors of Parent
ARTICLE III EFFECT OF THE MERGER ON THE CAPITAL STOCK OF THE COMPANY AND MERGER
SUB; EXCHANGE
3.1          Effect of the Merger on Capital Stock
3.2          Treatment of Equity Compensation Awards
3.3          Payment for Securities; Exchange
3.4          No Dissenters’ Rights
ARTICLE IV REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE COMPANY
4.1          Organization, Standing and Power
4.2          Capital Structure
4.3          Authority; No Violations; Consents and Approvals
4.4          Consents
4.5          SEC Documents; Financial Statements
4.6          Information Supplied
4.7          Absence of Certain Changes or Events
Page 
     A-1  
     A-1  
     A-9  
    A-11  
    A-11  
    A-11  
    A-12  
    A-12  
    A-12  
    A-12
A-12  
    A-12  
    A-13  
    A-13  
    A-16  
    A-16  
    A-16  
    A-17  
    A-17  
    A-18  
    A-18  
    A-19  
    A-19
4.8          No Undisclosed Liabilities
4.9          Company Permits; Compliance with Applicable Law
4.10        Litigation
4.11        Compensation; Benefits
4.12        Labor Matters
4.13        Taxes
4.14        Intellectual Property
4.15        Real Property
4.16        Oil and Gas Matters
4.17        Environmental Matters
4.18        Material Contracts
4.19        Insurance
4.20        Opinion of Financial Advisor
4.21        Derivative Transactions
4.22        Brokers
4.23        Related Party Transactions
4.24        Corporate Governance
4.25        Regulatory Matters
4.26        No Additional Representations
ARTICLE V REPRESENTATION AND WARRANTIES OF PARENT AND MERGER SUB
5.1          Organization, Standing and Power
5.2          Capital Structure
Table of Contents
A-i
5.3          Authority; No Violations, Consents and Approvals
5.4          Consents
5.5          SEC Documents; Financial Statements
5.6          Information Supplied
5.7          Absence of Certain Changes or Events
5.8          No Undisclosed Liabilities
5.9          Compliance with Applicable Laws
5.10        Litigation
5.11        Compensation; Benefits
5.12        Taxes
5.13        Oil and Gas Matters
5.14        Environmental Matters
5.15        Opinion of Financial Advisor
5.16        Brokers
5.17        Ownership of Company Common Stock
5.18        Business Conduct
5.19        Corporate Governance
5.20        Regulatory Matters
5.21        No Additional Representations
ARTICLE VI COVENANTS AND AGREEMENTS
6.1          Conduct of Company Business Pending the Merger
6.2          Conduct of Parent Business Pending the Merger
6.3          No Solicitation
6.4          Parent Change in Recommendation
6.5          Preparation of Joint Proxy Statement and Registration Statement
A-20  
    A-20  
    A-20  
    A-21  
    A-22  
    A-22  
    A-23  
    A-23  
    A-24  
    A-25  
    A-26  
    A-27  
    A-28  
    A-28  
    A-28  
    A-28  
    A-28  
    A-29  
    A-29  
    A-30  
    A-30  
    A-30
Page 
    A-31  
    A-32  
    A-32  
    A-33  
    A-33  
    A-33  
    A-33  
    A-34  
    A-34  
    A-35  
    A-35  
    A-36  
    A-37  
    A-37  
    A-37  
    A-37  
    A-37  
    A-37  
    A-38  
    A-38  
    A-38  
    A-41  
    A-42  
    A-45
6.5          Preparation of Joint Proxy Statement and Registration Statement
6.6          Stockholders Meetings
6.7          Access to Information
6.8          HSR and Other Approvals
6.9          Employee Matters
6.10        Indemnification; Directors’ and Officers’ Insurance
6.11        Agreement to Defend; Stockholder Litigation
6.12        Public Announcements
6.13        Advice of Certain Matters; Control of Business
6.14        Conveyance Taxes
6.15        Reasonable Best Efforts; Notification
6.16        Section 16 Matters
6.17        Listing Application
6.18        Tax Treatment
6.19        Takeover Laws
6.20        Obligations of Merger Sub
6.21        Debt Offers
ARTICLE VII CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
7.1          Conditions to Each Party’s Obligation to Consummate the Merger
7.2          Additional Conditions to Obligations of Parent and Merger Sub
7.3          Additional Conditions to Obligations of the Company
7.4          Frustration of Closing Conditions
ARTICLE VIII TERMINATION
8.1          Termination
8.2          Notice of Termination; Effect of Termination
8.3          Expenses and Other Payments
Table of Contents
ARTICLE IX GENERAL PROVISIONS
9.1          Schedule Definitions
9.2          Survival
9.3          Notices
9.4          Rules of Construction
9.5          Counterparts
9.6          Entire Agreement; Third Party Beneficiaries
9.7          Governing Law; Venue; Waiver of Jury Trial
9.8          Severability
9.9          Assignment
9.10        Affiliate Liability
9.11        Specific Performance
9.12        Amendment
9.13        Extension; Waiver
Table of Contents
A-ii
A-iii
A-45  
    A-46
A-47  
    A-48  
    A-49  
    A-50  
    A-52  
    A-52  
    A-52  
    A-53  
    A-53  
    A-53  
    A-53  
    A-53  
    A-54  
    A-54  
    A-54  
    A-55  
    A-55  
    A-56  
    A-56  
    A-57  
    A-57  
    A-57  
    A-58  
    A-59
Page 
    A-60  
    A-60  
    A-60  
    A-61  
    A-61  
    A-62  
    A-62  
    A-63  
    A-64  
    A-64  
    A-64  
    A-64  
    A-65  
    A-65
AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER
AGREEMENT AND PLAN OF MERGER, dated as of May 15, 2016 (this “Agreement”), among Range
Resources Corporation, a Delaware corporation (“Parent”), Medina Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware
corporation and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Parent (“Merger Sub”), and Memorial Resource Development
Corp., a Delaware corporation (the “Company”).
WHEREAS, the respective Boards of Directors of Parent (the “Parent Board”), the Company (the “Company
Board”) and Merger Sub (the “Merger Sub Board”) have unanimously approved this Agreement and
determined that the terms of this Agreement are in the respective best interests of Parent, the Company or
Merger Sub, as the case may be, and their respective stockholders;
WHEREAS, the Company Board and the Merger Sub Board have declared the advisability of this
Agreement and recommended adoption of this Agreement by their respective stockholders;
WHEREAS, Parent will cause the sole stockholder of Merger Sub to adopt this Agreement promptly
following its execution; and
WHEREAS, concurrently with the execution and delivery of this Agreement, Parent, MRD Holdco LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company (“Holdco”), and certain other stockholders of the Company are entering
into a voting agreement (the “Voting Agreement”) pursuant to which, among other things, Holdco and
certain other stockholders have agreed to vote their shares of Company Common Stock in favor of the
approval and adoption of this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby, including the Merger.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing and the representations, warranties, covenants and
agreements contained in this Agreement, and for other valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency
of which are hereby acknowledged, Parent, Merger Sub and the Company agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
CERTAIN DEFINITIONS
1.1 Certain Definitions. As used in this Agreement, the following terms have the meanings set forth below:
“Affiliate” means, with respect to any Person, any other Person directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled
by, or under common control with, such Person, through one or more intermediaries or otherwise.
“Aggregated Group” means all trades and businesses (regardless of whether incorporated) that together
with any Person would be treated as a single employer under Section 414(b), (c), or (m) of the Code or
Section 4001 of ERISA.
“Alternative Proposal” means any contract, proposal, offer or indication of interest relating to any
transaction or series of related transactions involving: (A) any merger, amalgamation, share exchange,
recapitalization, consolidation, liquidation or dissolution of Parent, (B) any direct or indirect acquisition (by
asset purchase, stock purchase, merger, or otherwise) by any Person or group of any business or assets
of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries (including capital stock of or ownership interest in any Subsidiary) that
generated more than 20% of Parent’s consolidated net revenue or earnings before interest, Taxes,
depreciation and amortization for the preceding twelve months, or any license, lease or long-term supply
agreement having a similar economic effect, or (C) any direct or indirect acquisition of beneficial ownership
by any Person or group of more than 20% of the voting stock of Parent or any tender or exchange offer that
if consummated would result in any Person or group beneficially owning more than 20% of the voting stock
of Parent.
“beneficial ownership,” including the correlative term “beneficially owning,” has the meaning ascribed to
such term in Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act.
A-1
Table of Contents
“CERCLA” means Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C.
§9601 et seq.
“Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
“Company Expenses” means a cash amount equal to $25,000,000 to be paid in respect of the Company’s
costs and expenses in connection with the negotiation, execution and performance of this Agreement and
the Transactions.
“Company Intervening Event” means any material event, fact, circumstance, development or occurrence
that is not known by the Company Board as of the date of this Agreement (or if known, the magnitude or
material consequences of which were not known by the Company Board as of the date of this Agreement),
which event, fact, circumstance, development or occurrence becomes known (or the magnitude or material
consequences thereof become known) to or by the Company Board prior to obtaining the Company
Stockholder Approval; provided, however, that none of the following shall constitute a Company
Intervening Event: any event, fact, circumstance, development or occurrence resulting from any action
taken or omitted by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries that is required to be taken or omitted by the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries pursuant to this Agreement, including any action taken or omitted by
the Company or any of its Subsidiaries pursuant to and in compliance with the covenants set forth in
Section 6.1, Section 6.8 or Section 6.15(a).
“Company Plan” means any Employee Benefit Plan sponsored, maintained or contributed to by the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries, to which the Company or any Subsidiary is a party, to which the
Company or any Subsidiary is obligated to contribute, or with respect to which the Company or any
Subsidiary has any liability (including contingent liability).
“Company Senior Notes” means the Company’s 5.875% Senior Notes, due 2022, issued pursuant to an
indenture (as supplemented) dated as of July 10, 2014, with U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee.
“Company Stockholder Approval” means the adoption of this Agreement by the stockholders of the
Company in accordance with the DGCL and the Organizational Documents of the Company.
“Company Superior Proposal” means a bona fide written proposal by any Person or group (other than
Parent or any of its Affiliates) to acquire, directly or indirectly, (a) businesses or assets of the Company or
any of its Subsidiaries (including capital stock of or ownership interest in any Subsidiary) that generated
50% or more of the Company’s and its Subsidiaries’ net revenue or earnings before interest, Taxes,
depreciation and amortization for the preceding twelve months, respectively, or (b) more than 50% of the
outstanding shares of Company Common Stock, in each case whether by way of merger, amalgamation,
share exchange, tender offer, exchange offer, recapitalization, consolidation, sale of assets or otherwise,
that in the good faith determination of the Company Board or any committee thereof, after consultation with
its financial advisors and after taking into account relevant legal, financial, regulatory, estimated timing of
consummation and other aspects of such proposal and the Person or group making such proposal, would,
if consummated in accordance with its terms, result in a transaction more favorable to the Company’s
stockholders than the Transactions.
“Company Termination Fee” means a cash amount equal to $75,000,000.
“Competing Proposal” means any contract, proposal, offer or indication of interest relating to any
transaction or series of related transactions (other than transactions with Parent or any of its Subsidiaries)
involving: (A) any direct or indirect acquisition (by asset purchase, stock purchase, merger, or otherwise)
by any Person or group (other than Holdco and its Affiliates) of any business or assets of the Company or
any of its Subsidiaries (including capital stock of or ownership interest in any Subsidiary) that generated
20% or more of the Company’s and its Subsidiaries’ net revenue or earnings before interest, Taxes,
depreciation and amortization
A-2
Table of Contents
for the preceding twelve months, or any license, lease or long-term supply agreement having a similar
economic effect, (B) any direct or indirect acquisition of beneficial ownership by any Person or group (other
than Holdco and its Affiliates) of 20% or more of the outstanding shares of Company Common Stock or any
tender or exchange offer that if consummated would result in any Person or group (other than Holdco and
its Affiliates) beneficially owning 20% or more of the outstanding shares of Company Common Stock or
(C) merger, consolidation, share exchange, business combination, recapitalization, liquidation, dissolution
or similar transaction involving the Company which is structured to permit any Person or group (other than
Holdco and its Affiliates) to acquire beneficial ownership of 20% or more of the Company’s and its
Subsidiaries’ assets or equity interests.
“control” and its correlative terms, means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or
cause the direction of the management and policies of a Person, whether through the ownership of voting
securities, by contract or otherwise.
“Derivative Transaction” means any swap transaction, option, warrant, forward purchase or sale
transaction, futures transaction, cap transaction, floor transaction or collar transaction relating to one or
more currencies, commodities, bonds, equity securities, loans, interest rates, catastrophe events, weather-
related events, credit-related events or conditions or any indexes, or any other similar transaction
(including any option with respect to any of these transactions) or combination of any of these
transactions, including collateralized mortgage obligations or other similar instruments or any debt or
equity instruments evidencing or embedding any such types of transactions, and any related credit
support, collateral or other similar arrangements related to such transactions.
“Employee Benefit Plan” of any Person means any “employee benefit plan” (within the meaning of
Section 3(3) of ERISA, regardless of whether such plan is subject to ERISA), and any personnel policy (oral
or written), stock option, restricted stock, stock purchase plan, equity or equity-based compensation plan
or arrangement, phantom equity or appreciation rights plan or arrangement, collective bargaining
agreement, bonus plan or arrangement, incentive award plan or arrangement, vacation or holiday pay
policy, retention or severance pay plan, policy or agreement, deferred compensation agreement or
arrangement, change in control, hospitalization or other medical, dental, vision, accident, disability, life or
other insurance, executive compensation or supplemental income arrangement, consulting agreement,
employment agreement, and any other employee benefit plan, agreement, arrangement, program, practice,
or understanding.
“Encumbrances” means liens, pledges, charges, encumbrances, claims, mortgages, deeds of trust,
security interests, restrictions, rights of first refusal, defects in title, or other burdens, options or
encumbrances of any kind.
“Environmental Laws” means any and all applicable Laws pertaining to prevention of pollution or
protection of the environment (including, without limitation, any natural resource damages or any
generation, use, storage, treatment, disposal or Release of Hazardous Materials into the indoor or outdoor
environment) in effect as of the date hereof.
“Environmental Permit” means any permit, license, regulation, consent, certification, variance, exemption,
approval or other authorization required under any Environmental Law.
“ERISA” means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
“Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
“Existing Voting Agreement” means the Voting Agreement among the Company, Holdco and certain other
Persons, dated as of June 18, 2014.
A-3
Table of Contents
“Governmental Entity” means any court, governmental, regulatory or administrative agency or commission
or other governmental authority or instrumentality, domestic or foreign.
“group” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act.
“Hazardous Materials” means any (1) chemical, product, substance, waste, pollutant, or contaminant that is
defined or listed as hazardous or toxic or that is otherwise regulated under any Environmental Law;
(2) asbestos containing materials, whether in a friable or non-friable condition, lead-containing material
polychlorinated biphenyls, naturally occurring radioactive materials or radon; and (3) any Hydrocarbons.
“Hydrocarbons” means crude oil, natural gas, condensate, drip gas and natural gas liquids, coalbed gas,
ethane, propane, iso-butane, nor-butane, gasoline, scrubber liquids and other liquids or gaseous
hydrocarbons or other substances (including minerals or gases), or any combination thereof, produced or
associated therewith.
“Indebtedness” of any Person means, without duplication: (a) indebtedness of such Person for borrowed
money; (b) obligations of such Person to pay the deferred purchase or acquisition price for any property of
such Person; (c) reimbursement obligations of such Person in respect of drawn letters of credit or similar
instruments issued or accepted by banks and other financial institutions for the account of such Person;
(d) obligations of such Person under a lease to the extent such obligations are required to be classified and
accounted for as a capital lease on a balance sheet of such Person under GAAP; (e) indebtedness of
others as described in clauses (a) through (d) above guaranteed by such Person; but Indebtedness does
not include accounts payable to trade creditors, or accrued expenses arising in the ordinary course of
business consistent with past practice, in each case, that are not yet due and payable, or are being
disputed in good faith, and the endorsement of negotiable instruments for collection in the ordinary course
of business.
“Intellectual Property” means any and all proprietary, industrial and intellectual property rights, under the
applicable Law of any jurisdiction or rights under international treaties, both statutory and common law
rights, including: (A) utility models, supplementary protection certificates, patents and applications for
same, and extensions, divisions, continuations, continuations-in-part, reexaminations, and reissues
thereof; (B) trademarks, service marks, trade names, slogans, domain names, logos, trade dress and other
identifiers of source, and registrations and applications for registrations thereof (including all goodwill
associated with the foregoing); (C) copyrights, moral rights, database rights, other rights in works of
authorship and registrations and applications for registration of the foregoing; and (D) trade secrets, know-
how, and rights in confidential information, including designs, formulations, concepts, compilations of
information, methods, techniques, procedures, and processes, whether or not patentable.
“IRS” means the Internal Revenue Service.
“knowledge” means the actual knowledge, after reasonable inquiry, of (a) in the case of the Company, the
individuals listed in Schedule 1.1 of the Company Disclosure Letter and (b) in the case of Parent, the
individuals listed in Schedule 1.1 of the Parent Disclosure Letter.
“Law” means any law, rule, regulation, ordinance, code, judgment, order, treaty, convention, governmental
directive or other legally enforceable requirement, U.S. or non-U.S., of any Governmental Entity, including
common law.
“Material Adverse Effect” means, when used with respect to any Person, any occurrence, condition,
change, event or effect that is materially adverse to the financial condition, business, or results of
operations of such Person and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, or prevents or materially delays or
impairs the ability of such Person (and its Subsidiaries, if applicable) to consummate the Transactions;
provided, however, that in no event shall any of the following constitute a Material Adverse Effect: (A) any
occurrence, condition, change, event or effect resulting from or relating to changes in general economic or
financial market conditions; (B) any
Table of Contents
A-4
occurrence, condition, change (including changes in applicable Law), event or effect that generally affects
the oil and gas exploration and production industry generally (including changes in commodity prices,
general market prices and regulatory changes affecting such industry generally); (C) the outbreak or
escalation of hostilities involving the United States, the declaration by the United States of a national
emergency or war or the occurrence of any natural disasters and acts of terrorism (but not any such event
resulting in any damage or destruction to or loss of such Person’s physical properties to the extent such
change or effect would otherwise constitute a Material Adverse Effect); (D) any failure to meet internal or
analysts’ estimates, projections or forecasts (it being understood that the underlying cause of any such
failure, not otherwise excluded by the exceptions set forth in this definition, may be taken into
consideration in determining whether a Material Adverse Effect has occurred or is reasonably expected to
occur); (E) a decline in market price, or a change in trading volume, of such Person’s Common Stock (it
being understood that any underlying cause of any such decline or change, not otherwise excluded by the
exceptions set forth in this definition, may be taken into consideration when determining whether a Material
Adverse Effect has occurred or is reasonably expected to occur); (F) any occurrence, condition, change,
event or effect resulting from or relating to the announcement or pendency of the Transactions; (G) any
change in GAAP, or in the interpretation thereof, as imposed upon such Person, its Subsidiaries or their
respective businesses or any change in applicable Law, or in the interpretation thereof; (H) any occurrence,
condition, change, event or effect resulting from compliance by such Person with the terms of this
Agreement and each other Transaction Agreement to which such Person is a party; (I) any litigation arising
from any alleged breach of fiduciary duty or other violation of applicable Law relating to this Agreement or
the Transactions; and (J) any downgrade in rating of any Indebtedness or debt securities of such Person or
any of its Subsidiaries (it being understood that any underlying cause of any such downgrade, not
otherwise excluded by the exceptions set forth in this definition, may be taken into consideration when
determining whether a Material Adverse Effect has occurred or is reasonably expected to occur); provided,
however, that any occurrence, condition, change, event or effect referred to in the foregoing clause (A),
(B) or (C) will be taken into account for purposes of determining whether a Material Adverse Effect has
occurred in the event, and only to the extent, that such occurrence, condition, change, event or effect
disproportionately affects such Person and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, compared to other Persons
operating in such industry in the same regions and segments as such Person.
“Nasdaq” means The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC.
“Negotiation Period” means, as applicable, the period commencing on the date of receipt by either
(x) Parent of a Company Superior Proposal Notice or a Company Change of Recommendation Notice, or
(y) Company of a Parent Change of Recommendation Notice, and, in each case of the foregoing clauses
(x) and (y), ending at 11:59 p.m. Central time on the date that is the third Business Day after the date on
which such notice is received by the Company or Parent, respectively; provided, however, that the
Negotiation Period with respect to a Company Superior Proposal Notice may be extended in accordance
with Section 6.3(e)(iii)(C).
“NYSE” means the New York Stock Exchange.
“Oil and Gas Contracts” means any of the following contracts to which the Company and/or any of its
Subsidiaries is a party (other than, in each case, an Oil and Gas Lease): all farm-in and farm-out agreements,
areas of mutual interest agreements, joint venture agreements, development agreements, production
sharing agreements, operating agreements, unitization, pooling and communitization agreements,
declarations and orders, division orders, transfer orders, oil and gas sales agreements, exchange
agreements, gathering and processing contracts and agreements, drilling, service and supply contracts,
geophysical and geological contracts, land broker, title attorney and abstractor contracts and all other
contracts relating to Hydrocarbons or revenues therefrom and claims and rights thereto, and, in each case,
all rights, titles and interests thereunder.
“Oil and Gas Leases” means all leases, subleases, licenses or other occupancy or similar agreements
under which a Person leases, subleases or licenses or otherwise acquires or obtains operating rights in
and to Hydrocarbons or any other real property which is material to the operation of such Person’s
business.
Table of Contents
A-5
“Oil and Gas Properties” means all interests in and rights with respect to (a) oil, gas, mineral, and similar
properties of any kind and nature, including working, leasehold and mineral interests and operating rights
and royalties, overriding royalties, production payments, net profit interests and other non-working
interests and non-operating interests (including all Oil and Gas Leases, operating agreements, unitization
and pooling agreements and orders, division orders, transfer orders, mineral deeds, royalty deeds, and in
each case, interests thereunder), surface interests, fee interests, reversionary interests, reservations and
concessions and (b) all wells located on or producing from such leases and properties.
“Organizational Documents” means (a) with respect to a corporation, the charter, articles or certificate of
incorporation, as applicable, and bylaws thereof, (b) with respect to a limited liability company, the
certificate of formation or organization, as applicable, and the operating or limited liability company
agreement thereof, (c) with respect to a partnership, the certificate of formation and the partnership
agreement, and (d) with respect to any other Person the organizational, constituent and/or governing
documents and/or instruments of such Person.
“other party” means (a) when used with respect to the Company, Parent and Merger Sub and (b) when used
with respect to Parent or Merger Sub, the Company.
“Parent Alternative Proposal Fee” means a cash amount equal to $300,000,000.
“Parent Change of Recommendation” means (i) any failure to include the Parent Board Recommendation in
the Joint Proxy Statement, (ii) making any change, qualification, withholding, withdrawal or modification, or
publicly proposing to change, qualify, withhold, withdraw or modify, in a manner adverse to the Company,
the Parent Board Recommendation, or (iii) resolving or agreeing to take any of the actions contained in
clauses (i) and (ii).
“Parent Expenses” means a cash amount equal to $25,000,000 to be paid in respect of Parent’s costs and
expenses in connection with the negotiation, execution and performance of this Agreement and the
Transactions.
“Parent Intervening Event” means any material event, fact, circumstance, development or occurrence that
is not known by the Parent Board as of the date of this Agreement (or if known, the magnitude or material
consequences of which were not known by the Parent Board as of the date of this Agreement), which
event, fact, circumstance, development or occurrence becomes known (or the magnitude or material
consequences thereof become known) to or by the Parent Board prior to obtaining the Parent Stockholder
Approval; provided, however that none of the following shall constitute a Parent Intervening Event: any
event, fact, circumstance, development or occurrence resulting from (x) any action taken or omitted by
Parent or any of its Subsidiaries that is required to be taken or omitted by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries
pursuant this Agreement, including any action taken or omitted by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries
pursuant to and in compliance with the covenants set forth in Section 6.2, Section 6.8 or Section 6.15(a) or
(y) any action taken or costs incurred with respect to the Company Senior Notes as a result of the entry into
this Agreement and the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby.
“Parent Stockholder Approval” means the approval of the Parent Common Stock Issuance by the
affirmative vote of a majority in voting power of Parent Common Stock issued and outstanding and entitled
to vote thereon present in person and represented by proxy at the Parent Stockholders Meeting in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the NYSE and the Organizational Documents of the Company.
“Parent Stockholders Meeting” means a meeting of the stockholders of Parent to consider the approval of
the Parent Stock Issuance, including any postponement, adjournment or recess thereof.
“Parent Superior Proposal” means a bona fide written Alternative Proposal that in the good faith
determination of the Parent Board or any committee thereof, after consultation with its financial advisors
and
Table of Contents
A-6
after taking into account relevant legal, financial, regulatory, estimated timing of consummation and other
aspects of such proposal and the Person or group making such proposal, would, if consummated in
accordance with its terms, result in a transaction more favorable to the Parent’s stockholders than the
Transactions. For purposes of this definition of “Parent Superior Proposal,” any reference in the definition
of Alternative Proposal to “20%” shall be deemed to be a reference to “50%.”
“Parent Termination Fee” means a cash amount equal to $125,000,000.
“party” or “parties” means a party or the parties to this Agreement.
“Permitted Encumbrances” means:
(a) to the extent not applicable to the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby or otherwise waived
prior to the Effective Time, preferential purchase rights, rights of first refusal, purchase options and similar
rights granted pursuant to any contracts, including joint operating agreements, joint ownership
agreements, stockholders agreements, organic documents and other similar agreements and documents;
(b) contractual or statutory mechanic’s, materialmen’s, warehouseman’s, journeyman’s and carrier’s liens
and other similar Encumbrances arising in the ordinary course of business for amounts not yet delinquent
and Encumbrances for Taxes or assessments that are not yet delinquent or, in all instances, if delinquent,
that are being contested in good faith in the ordinary course of business and for which adequate reserves
have been established by the party responsible for payment thereof;
(c) Production Burdens payable to third parties that are deducted in the calculation of discounted present
value in the Company Reserve Report or the Parent Reserve Report, as applicable, and any Production
Burdens payable to third parties affecting any Oil and Gas Property that was acquired subsequent to the
date of the Company Reserve Report or Parent Reserve Report, as applicable;
(d) Encumbrances arising in the ordinary course of business under operating agreements, joint venture
agreements, partnership agreements, Oil and Gas Leases, farm-out agreements, division orders, contracts
for the sale, purchase, transportation, processing or exchange of oil, gas or other Hydrocarbons,
unitization and pooling declarations and agreements, area of mutual interest agreements, development
agreements, joint ownership arrangements and other agreements that are customary in the oil and gas
business, but only if, in each case, such Encumbrance (i) secures obligations that are not Indebtedness or
a deferred purchase price and are not delinquent and (ii) has no material adverse effect on the value, use or
operation of the property encumbered thereby;
(e) such Encumbrances as the Company (in the case of Encumbrances with respect to properties or assets
of the Company or its Subsidiaries) or the Parent (in the case of Encumbrances with respect to properties
or assets of Parent or its Subsidiaries), as applicable, may have expressly waived in writing;
(k) all easements, zoning restrictions, rights-of-way, servitudes, permits, surface leases and other similar
rights in respect of surface operations, and easements for pipelines, streets, alleys, highways, telephone
lines, power lines, railways and other easements and rights-of-way, on, over or in respect of any of the
properties of the Company or Parent, as applicable, or any of their respective Subsidiaries, that are
customarily granted in the oil and gas industry and do not materially interfere with the operation, value or
use of the property or asset affected;
(m) any Encumbrances discharged at or prior to the Effective Time (including Encumbrances securing any
Indebtedness that will be paid off in connection with Closing);
(n) Encumbrances imposed or promulgated by applicable Law or any Governmental Entity with respect to
real property, including zoning, building or similar restrictions; or
Table of Contents
A-7
(o) Encumbrances, exceptions, defects or irregularities in title, easements, imperfections of title, claims,
charges, security interests, rights-of-way, covenants, restrictions and other similar matters that would be
accepted by a reasonably prudent purchaser of oil and gas interests, that would not reduce the net revenue
interest share of the Company or Parent, as applicable, or such party’s Subsidiaries, in any Oil and Gas
Lease below the net revenue interest share shown in the Company Reserve Report or Parent Reserve
Report, as applicable, with respect to such lease, or increase the working interest of the Company or
Parent, as applicable, or of such party’s Subsidiaries, in any Oil and Gas Lease above the working interest
shown on the Company Reserve Report or Parent Reserve Report, as applicable, with respect to such
lease and, in each case, that have not and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the
aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect or Parent Material Adverse Effect, as applicable.
“Person” means any individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, joint stock company,
trust, estate, joint venture, Governmental Entity, association or unincorporated organization, or any other
form of business or professional entity.
“Proceeding” means any actual or threatened claim (including a claim of a violation of applicable Law),
action, audit, demand, suit, proceeding, investigation or other proceeding at law or in equity or order or
ruling, in each case whether civil, criminal, administrative, investigative or otherwise and whether or not
such claim, action, audit, demand, suit, proceeding, investigation or other proceeding or order or ruling
results in a formal civil or criminal litigation or regulatory action.
“Production Burdens” means any royalties (including lessor’s royalties), overriding royalties, production
payments, net profit interests or other burdens upon, measured by or payable out of oil, gas or mineral
production.
“Release” means any depositing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, placing, emitting, discarding,
abandoning, emptying, discharging, migrating, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing.
“SEC” means the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Securities Act” means the Securities Act of 1933.
“Significant Subsidiary” means a Subsidiary that is a “significant subsidiary” as defined in Rule 1-02 of
Regulation S-X promulgated by the SEC.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to a Person, any Person, whether incorporated or unincorporated, of
which (a) at least 50% of the securities or ownership interests having by their terms ordinary voting power
to elect a majority of the board of directors or other Persons performing similar functions, (b) a general
partner interest or (c) a managing member interest, is directly or indirectly owned or controlled by the
subject Person or by one or more of its respective Subsidiaries; provided, however, for purposes of this
Agreement, Memorial Production Partners GP LLC, Beta Operating Company, LLC, MEMP Services LLC,
Memorial Production Partners LP and each of their respective Subsidiaries shall not be considered a
Subsidiary of the Company.
“Systems” means the refined petroleum product, crude oil, natural gas, liquefied natural gas, natural gas
liquid and other pipelines, lateral lines, pumps, pump stations, storage facilities, terminals, processing
plants and other related operations, assets, machinery and equipment that are owned by the Company or
any of its Subsidiaries, or Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, as applicable, and are used for the conduct of
the business of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, as applicable,
as presently conducted.
“Takeover Law” means any “fair price,” “moratorium,” “control share acquisition,” “business combination”
or any other anti-takeover statute or similar statute enacted under applicable Law.
Table of Contents
A-8
“Taxes” means (a) any taxes, assessments, fees, unclaimed property and escheat obligations, or other
governmental charges imposed by any Governmental Entity, including income, franchise, profits, gross
receipts, modified gross receipts, net proceeds, alternative or add on minimum, ad valorem, value added,
turnover, sales, use, property, environmental, stamp, leasing, lease, user, excise, duty, franchise, capital
stock, transfer, registration, license, withholding, social security (or similar), unemployment, disability,
payroll, employment, social contributions, fuel, excess profits, occupational, premium, windfall profit,
severance, estimated, or other charge of any kind whatsoever, including any interest, penalty, or addition
thereto, whether disputed or not, (b) any liability for the payment of any amounts of the type described in
clause (a) as a result of being a member of a combined, unitary or consolidated group for any period, and
(c) any liability of for the payment of any amounts of the type described in clause (a) or (b) as a result of the
operation of Law or any obligation to indemnify any other Person.
“Tax Returns” means any return, report, statement, information return, claim for refund or other document
(including any related or supporting information) filed or required to be filed with any Governmental Entity
in connection with the determination, assessment, collection or administration of any Taxes or the
administration of any Laws relating to any Taxes.
“Transfer Taxes” means all sales, use, value added, documentary, stamp duty, stock transfer, registration,
conveyance, excise, recording, license and other similar taxes and fees, including any interest, penalties,
additions to tax or additional amounts in respect of the foregoing.
“Transaction Agreements” means this Agreement and each other agreement to be executed and delivered
in connection herewith and therewith, including the Voting Agreement.
“Transactions” means the Merger and the other transactions contemplated by this Agreement and the
Transaction Agreements.
“Upstream MLP GP PSA” means that certain Purchase and Sale Agreement dated as of April 27, 2016 by
and between Memorial Production Partners LP and the Company, as amended, modified, supplemented,
restated or replaced (in each case in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement) from time to time.
“Voting Debt” of a Person means bonds, debentures, notes or other Indebtedness having the right to vote
(or convertible into securities having the right to vote) on any matters on which stockholders of such
Person may vote.
1.2 Terms Defined Elsewhere. As used in this Agreement, the following terms have the meanings set forth
below:
Definition
2005 Parent Plan
401(k) Plan
Agreement
Antitrust Authority
Antitrust Laws
Section  
5.2  
 
 
6.9(d)  
 Preamble  
 
6.8(b)
Table of Contents
Antitrust Laws
Book-Entry Shares
Business Day
Cap Amount
Certificate of Merger
Certificates
Closing
Closing Date
Company
A-9
Definition
Company Affiliate
Company Board
Company Board Recommendation
Company Capital Stock
Company Change of Recommendation
Company Change of Recommendation Notice
Company Common Stock
Company Contracts
Company Disclosure Letter
Company Employee
Company Independent Petroleum Engineers
Company Intellectual Property
Company Material Adverse Effect
Company Material Leased Real Property
Company Material Real Property Lease
Company Owned Real Property
Company Plans
Company Permits
Company Preferred Stock
Company Related Party Transaction
Company Reserve Report
Company SEC Documents
Company Stockholders Meeting
Company Stock Plan
Company Superior Proposal Notice
Company Tax Certificate
Competition Law Notifications
Confidentiality Agreement
Creditors’ Rights
DGCL
Debt Offer
Divestiture Action
e-mail
Effective Time
End Date
Exchange Agent
Exchange Fund
Exchange Ratio
6.8(b)  
  3.3(b)(i)
2.2(a)  
 
6.10(d)  
 
 
2.2(b)  
  3.3(b)(i)  
2.2(a)  
 
 
2.2(a)  
 Preamble
Section  
9.10  
 
Recitals  
 
4.3(a)  
 
4.2  
 
6.3(c)  
 
  6.3(e)(v)(B)  
3.1(b)(i)  
 
 
4.18(b)  
  Article IV  
6.9(a)  
 
4.16(a)  
 
4.14  
 
 
4.1  
4.15(a)  
 
4.15(b)  
 
 
4.15(a)  
4.11(a)  
 
4.9(a)  
 
4.2  
 
 
4.23  
4.16(a)  
 
4.5(a)  
 
4.4  
 
 
3.2  
6.3(e)(iii)
(B)  
6.18  
6.8(b)  
6.7(b)  
4.3(a)  
2.1  
6.21  
6.8(b)  
9.3  
2.2(b)  
8.1(b)(ii)  
3.3(a)
3.3(a)  
3.1(b)(i)
Table of Contents
GAAP
HSR Act
Holdco
Indemnified Liabilities
Indemnified Persons
Joint Proxy Statement
Letter of Transmittal
Material Company Insurance Policies
Merger
Merger Consideration
Merger Sub
Merger Sub Board
Offer Documents
A-10
Definition
Parent
Parent Board
Parent Board Recommendation
Parent Change of Recommendation Notice
Parent Common Stock
Parent Disclosure Letter
Parent Independent Petroleum Engineers
Parent Material Adverse Effect
Parent Permits
Parent Plans
Parent Preferred Stock
Parent Reserve Report
Parent SEC Documents
Parent Stock Issuance
Parent Stock Plan
Parent Tax Certificate
Registration Statement
Replacement Plans
Representatives
Surviving Corporation
Terminable Breach
Voting Agreement
ARTICLE II
THE MERGER
4.5(b)  
 
4.4  
 
Recitals  
 
6.10(a)  
 
6.10(a)  
 
4.4  
 
3.3(b)(i)  
 
4.19  
 
2.1  
 
 
3.1(b)(i)  
  Preamble  
 
Recitals  
6.21
Section  
 Preamble  
  Recitals  
5.3(a)  
 
 
6.4  
  3.1(b)(i)  
  Article V  
5.13(a)  
 
 
5.1  
5.9(a)  
 
5.11(a)  
 
 
5.2  
5.13(a)  
 
5.5(a)  
 
5.3(a)  
 
5.2  
 
 
6.18  
 
4.6  
6.9(b)  
 
 
6.7(a)  
 
2.1  
  8.1(b)(iii)  
  Recitals
2.1 The Merger. Upon the terms and subject to the conditions of this Agreement, at the Effective Time,
Merger Sub will be merged with and into the Company (the “Merger”) in accordance with the provisions of
the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (the “DGCL”). As a result of the Merger, the separate
existence of Merger Sub shall cease and the Company shall continue its existence under the laws of the
State of Delaware as the surviving corporation (in such capacity, the Company is sometimes referred to
herein as the “Surviving Corporation”).
2.2 Closing.
(a) The closing of the Merger (the “Closing”), shall take place at 9:00 a.m., Houston, Texas time, on a date
that is two Business Days following the satisfaction or (to the extent permitted by applicable Law) waiver in
accordance with this Agreement of all of the conditions set forth in Article VI (other than any such
conditions which by their nature cannot be satisfied until the Closing Date, which shall be required to be so
satisfied or (to the extent permitted by applicable Law) waived in accordance with this Agreement on the
Closing Date) at the offices of Vinson & Elkins LLP in Houston, Texas, or such other place as Parent and
the Company may agree in writing. For purposes of this Agreement “Closing Date” shall mean the date on
which the Closing occurs; and “Business Day” shall mean a day other than a day on which banks in the
State of New York or the State of Delaware are authorized or obligated to be closed.
(b) As soon as practicable on the Closing Date after the Closing, a certificate of merger prepared and
executed in accordance with the relevant provisions of the DGCL (the “Certificate of Merger”) shall be filed
with the Office of the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware. The Merger shall become effective upon
the filing of the Certificate of Merger with the Office of the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware, or at
such later time as shall be agreed upon in writing by Parent and the Company and specified in the
Certificate of Merger (the “Effective Time”).
Table of Contents
A-11
2.3 Effect of the Merger. At the Effective Time, the Merger shall have the effects set forth in this Agreement
and the applicable provisions of the DGCL. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, and subject
thereto, at the Effective Time, all the property, rights, privileges, powers and franchises of each of the
Company and Merger Sub shall vest in the Surviving Corporation, and all debts, liabilities, obligations,
restrictions, disabilities and duties of each of the Company and the Merger Sub shall become the debts,
liabilities, obligations, restrictions, disabilities and duties of the Surviving Corporation.
2.4 Organizational Documents. At the Effective Time, the Organizational Documents of the Company in
effect immediately prior to the Effective Time shall continue to be the Organizational Documents of the
Surviving Corporation, until thereafter amended, subject to Section 6.10(b), in accordance with their
respective terms and applicable Law.
2.5 Directors and Officers of the Surviving Corporation. The parties shall take all necessary action such that
from and after the Effective Time, the directors and officers of Merger Sub shall be the directors and officers
of the Surviving Corporation, and such directors and officers shall serve until their successors have been
duly elected or appointed and qualified or until their death, resignation or removal in accordance with the
Organizational Documents of the Surviving Corporation.
2.6 Directors of Parent. Prior to the Effective Time, Parent shall take all necessary corporate action (a) so
that upon and after the Effective Time, the size of the Parent Board is increased by one member and (b) to
appoint to the Parent Board one member of the existing Company Board who has been designated by the
existing Company Board, subject to consent by the Governance and Nominating Committee of the Parent
Board, to fill the vacancies on the Parent Board created by such increase. Parent, through the Parent
Board, shall take all necessary action to nominate such new director for election to the Parent Board in the
proxy statement relating to the first annual meeting of the stockholders of Parent following the Closing. The
Company shall provide Parent written notice of the designee selected by the Company Board pursuant to
clause (b) no earlier than the tenth Business Day following the date of this Agreement, and Parent and the
Company shall use reasonable best efforts to cause an individual designated by the Company Board,
subject to consent of the Governance and Nominating Committee, to be approved by the Parent Board
prior to the earlier of (x) the filing of the final pre-mailing amendment to the Joint Proxy Statement with the
SEC and (y) June 30, 2016.
EFFECT OF THE MERGER ON THE CAPITAL STOCK OF THE COMPANY AND MERGER SUB; EXCHANGE
ARTICLE III
3.1 Effect of the Merger on Capital Stock. At the Effective Time, by virtue of the Merger and without any
action on the part of Parent, Merger Sub, the Company or any holder of any securities of Parent, Merger
Sub, the Company:
(a) Capital Stock of Merger Sub. Each share of capital stock of Merger Sub issued and outstanding
immediately prior to the Effective Time shall be converted into and shall represent one fully paid and
nonassessable share of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, of the Surviving Corporation, so that,
after the Effective Time, Parent shall be the holder of all of the issued and outstanding shares of the
Surviving Corporation’s common stock.
(b) Capital Stock of the Company.
(i) Subject to the other provisions of this Article III, each share of common stock, par value $0.01 per share,
of the Company (“Company Common Stock”), issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective
Time (excluding any shares of Company Common Stock described in clause (iii) of this Section 3.1(b)),
including for the avoidance of doubt any shares of Company Common Stock outstanding immediately prior
to the Effective Time whose prior restrictions have lapsed pursuant to Section 3.2, shall
Table of Contents
A-12
be converted into the right to receive from Parent that number of fully-paid and nonassessable shares of
Common Stock, par value $.01 per share, of Parent (the “Parent Common Stock”) equal to the Exchange
Ratio (the “Merger Consideration”). As used in this Agreement, “Exchange Ratio” means 0.375.
(ii) All such shares of Company Common Stock, when so converted, shall cease to be outstanding and
shall automatically be canceled and cease to exist. Each holder of a share of Company Common Stock that
was outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time shall cease to have any rights with respect thereto,
except the right to receive (A) the Merger Consideration, (B) any dividends or other distributions in
accordance with Section 3.3(g) and (C) any cash to be paid in lieu of any fractional shares of Parent
Common Stock in accordance with Section 3.3(h), in each case to be issued or paid in consideration
therefor upon the surrender of any Certificates or Book-Entry Shares, as applicable, in accordance with
Section 3.3.
(iii) All shares of Company Common Stock held by the Company as treasury shares or by Parent or Merger
Sub or by any wholly owned Subsidiary of Parent, Merger Sub or the Company immediately prior to the
Effective Time shall automatically be canceled and cease to exist as of the Effective Time, and no
consideration shall be delivered or deliverable therefor.
(c) Impact of Stock Splits, Etc. In the event of any change in (i) the number of shares of Company Common
Stock, or securities convertible or exchangeable into or exercisable for shares of Company Common Stock
or (ii) the number of shares of Parent Common Stock, or securities convertible or exchangeable into or
exercisable for shares of Parent Common Stock (including options to purchase Parent Common Stock), in
each case issued and outstanding after the date of this Agreement and prior the Effective Time by reason
of any stock split, reverse stock split, stock dividend, subdivision, reclassification, recapitalization,
combination, exchange of shares or the like, the Exchange Ratio shall be equitably adjusted to reflect the
effect of such change and, as so adjusted, shall from and after the date of such event, be the Merger
Consideration, subject to further adjustment in accordance with this Section 3.1(c).
3.2 Treatment of Equity Compensation Awards. Immediately prior to the Effective Time, each outstanding
share of restricted Company Common Stock issued pursuant to the Memorial Resource Development
Corp. 2014 Long Term Incentive Plan (the “Company Stock Plan”) shall become fully vested and the
restrictions applicable thereto shall immediately lapse, and, at the Effective Time, each share of such
restricted Company Common Stock shall be treated as a share of Company Common Stock for all
purposes of this Agreement, including the right to receive the Merger Consideration in accordance with the
terms hereof. At or prior to the Effective Time, the Company and the Company Board (or a committee
thereof), as applicable, shall use their respective reasonable best efforts to take any actions that are
necessary or desirable to effectuate the provisions of this Section 3.2, including adopting resolutions.
3.3 Payment for Securities; Exchange.
(a) Exchange Agent; Exchange Fund. Prior to the Effective Time, Merger Sub shall enter into an agreement
with the Company’s transfer agent (or another entity reasonably acceptable to the Company) to act as
agent for the holders of Company Common Stock in connection with the Merger (the “Exchange Agent”)
and to receive the Merger Consideration and cash sufficient to pay cash in lieu of fractional shares,
pursuant to Section 3.3(h) to which such holders shall become entitled pursuant to this Article III. On the
Closing Date and prior to the filing of the Certificate of Merger, Parent shall deposit, or cause to be
deposited, with the Exchange Agent, for the benefit of the former holders of shares of Company Common
Stock, for issuance in accordance with this Article III through the Exchange Agent, the number of shares of
Parent Common Stock issuable to the holders of Company Common Stock outstanding immediately prior
to the Effective Time pursuant to Section 3.1. Parent agrees to make available to the Exchange Agent, from
time to time as needed, cash sufficient to pay any dividends and other distributions pursuant to
Section 3.3(g) and to make payments in lieu of fractional shares pursuant to Section 3.3(h). The Exchange
Agent shall, pursuant to irrevocable instructions, deliver the Merger Consideration contemplated to be
issued in exchange for shares of Company Common Stock pursuant to this Agreement out of the
Exchange Fund. Except as contemplated by this Section 3.3(a) and Sections 3.3(g) and
Table of Contents
A-13
3.3(h), the Exchange Fund shall not be used for any other purpose. Any cash and shares of Parent
Common Stock deposited with the Exchange Agent (including as payment for fractional shares in
accordance with Section 3.3(h) and any dividends or other distributions in accordance with Section 3.3(g))
shall hereinafter be referred to as the “Exchange Fund.” The Surviving Corporation shall pay all charges
and expenses, including those of the Exchange Agent, in connection with the exchange of shares for the
Merger Consideration. Any interest or other income resulting from investment of the cash portion of the
Exchange Fund shall become part of the Exchange Fund.
(b) Payment Procedures.
(i) As soon as reasonably practicable after the Effective Time, but in no event more than three Business
Days after the Closing Date, Parent shall cause the Exchange Agent to deliver to each record holder, as of
immediately prior to the Effective Time, of (A) an outstanding certificate or certificates that immediately prior
to the Effective Time represented shares of Company Common Stock (the “Certificates”) or (B) shares of
Company Common Stock represented by book-entry (“Book-Entry Shares”), a letter of transmittal (“Letter
of Transmittal”) (which shall specify that delivery shall be effected, and risk of loss and title to the
Certificates shall pass, only upon proper delivery of the Certificates to the Exchange Agent or, in the case
of Book-Entry Shares, upon adherence to the procedures set forth in the Letter of Transmittal, and which
shall be in a customary form and agreed to by Parent and the Company prior to the Closing) and
instructions for use in effecting the surrender of the Certificates or, in the case of Book-Entry Shares, the
surrender of such shares, for payment of the Merger Consideration set forth in Section 3.1(b)(i).
(ii) Upon surrender to the Exchange Agent of a Certificate or Book-Entry Shares, together with the Letter of
Transmittal, duly completed and validly executed in accordance with the instructions thereto, and such
other customary documents as may be reasonably required by the Exchange Agent, the holder of such
Certificate or Book-Entry Shares shall be entitled to receive in exchange therefor (A) one or more shares of
Parent Common Stock (which shall be in uncertificated book-entry form unless a physical certificate is
requested by such holder) representing, in the aggregate, the whole number of shares of Parent Common
Stock, if any, that such holder has the right to receive pursuant to Section 3.1 (after taking into account all
shares of Company Common Stock then held by such holder) and (B) a check in the amount equal to the
cash payable in lieu of any fractional shares of Parent Common Stock pursuant to Section 3.3(h) and
dividends and other distributions pursuant to Section 3.3(g). No interest shall be paid or accrued for the
benefit of holders of the Certificates or Book-Entry Shares on the Merger Consideration payable in respect
of the Certificates or Book-Entry Shares. If payment of the Merger Consideration is to be made to a Person
other than the record holder of such shares of Company Common Stock, it shall be a condition of payment
that shares so surrendered shall be properly endorsed or shall be otherwise in proper form for transfer and
that the Person requesting such payment shall have paid any transfer and other Taxes required by reason
of the payment of the Merger Consideration to a Person other than the registered holder of such shares
surrendered or shall have established to the satisfaction of the Surviving Corporation that such Taxes
either have been paid or are not applicable. Until surrendered as contemplated by this Section 3.3(b)(ii),
each Certificate and each Book-Entry Share shall be deemed at any time after the Effective Time to
represent only the right to receive upon such surrender the Merger Consideration payable in respect of
such shares of Company Common Stock, cash in lieu of any fractional shares of Parent Common Stock to
which such holder is entitled pursuant to Section 3.3(h) and any dividends or other distributions to which
such holder is entitled pursuant to Section 3.3(g).
(c) Termination of Rights. All Merger Consideration (including any dividends or other distributions with
respect to Parent Common Stock pursuant to Section 3.3(g) and any cash in lieu of fractional shares of
Parent Common Stock pursuant to Section 3.3(h)) paid upon the surrender of and in exchange for shares
of Company Common Stock in accordance with the terms hereof shall be deemed to have been paid in full
satisfaction of all rights pertaining to such Company Common Stock. At the Effective Time, the stock
transfer books of the Surviving Corporation shall be closed immediately, and there shall be no further
registration of transfers on the stock transfer books of the Surviving Corporation of the shares of Company
Common Stock that were outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time. If, after the Effective Time,
Certificates or Book-Entry
Table of Contents
A-14
Shares are presented to the Surviving Corporation for any reason, they shall be canceled and exchanged
for the Merger Consideration payable in respect of the shares of Company Common Stock previously
represented by such Certificates or Book-Entry Shares (other than Certificates or Book-Entry Shares
evidencing shares of Company Common Stock described in clause (iii) of Section 3.1(b)), any cash in lieu
of fractional shares of Parent Common Stock to which the holders thereof are entitled pursuant to
Section 3.3(h) and any dividends or other distributions to which the holders thereof are entitled pursuant to
Section 3.3(g), without any interest thereon.
(d) Termination of Exchange Fund. Any portion of the Exchange Fund that remains undistributed to the
former stockholders of the Company on the 365th day after the Closing Date shall be delivered to the
Surviving Corporation, upon demand, and any former common stockholders of the Company who have not
theretofore received the Merger Consideration, any cash in lieu of fractional shares of Parent Common
Stock to which they are entitled pursuant to Section 3.3(h) and any dividends or other distributions with
respect to Parent Common Stock to which they are entitled pursuant to Section 3.3(g), in each case without
interest thereon, to which they are entitled under this Article III shall thereafter look only to the Surviving
Corporation and Parent for payment of their claim for such amounts.
(e) No Liability. None of the Surviving Corporation, Parent, Merger Sub or the Exchange Agent shall be
liable to any holder of Company Common Stock for any amount of Merger Consideration properly delivered
to a public official pursuant to any applicable abandoned property, escheat or similar Law. If any Certificate
or Book-Entry Share has not been surrendered prior to the time that is immediately prior to the time at
which Merger Consideration in respect of such Certificate or Book-Entry Share would otherwise escheat to
or become the property of any Governmental Entity, any such shares, cash, dividends or distributions in
respect of such Certificate or Book-Entry Share shall, to the extent permitted by applicable Law, become
the property of Parent, free and clear of all claims or interest of any Person previously entitled thereto.
(f) Lost, Stolen, or Destroyed Certificates. If any Certificate (other than a Certificate evidencing shares of
Company Common Stock described in clause (iii) of Section 3.1(b)) shall have been lost, stolen or
destroyed, upon the making of an affidavit of that fact by the Person claiming such Certificate to be lost,
stolen or destroyed and, if reasonably required by Parent or the Surviving Corporation, the posting by such
Person of a bond in such reasonable amount as Parent or the Surviving Corporation may direct as
indemnity against any claim that may be made against it with respect to such Certificate, the Exchange
Agent shall issue in exchange for such lost, stolen or destroyed Certificate the Merger Consideration
payable in respect of the shares of Company Common Stock formerly represented by such Certificate, any
cash in lieu of fractional shares of Parent Common Stock to which the holders thereof are entitled pursuant
to Section 3.3(h) and any dividends or other distributions to which the holders thereof are entitled pursuant
to Section 3.3(g).
(g) Distributions with Respect to Unexchanged Shares of Parent Common Stock. No dividends or other
distributions declared or made with respect to shares of Parent Common Stock with a record date after the
Effective Time shall be paid to the holder of any unsurrendered Certificate or Book-Entry Shares with
respect to the whole shares of Parent Common Stock that such holder would be entitled to receive upon
surrender of such Certificate or Book-Entry Shares and no cash payment in lieu of fractional shares of
Parent Common Stock shall be paid to any such holder, in each case until such holder shall surrender
such Certificate or Book-Entry Shares in accordance with this Section 3.3. Following surrender of any such
Certificate or Book-Entry Shares, there shall be paid to such holder of whole shares of Parent Common
Stock issuable in exchange therefor, without interest, (i) promptly after the time of such surrender, the
amount of dividends or other distributions with a record date after the Effective Time theretofore paid with
respect to such whole shares of Parent Common Stock, and (ii) at the appropriate payment date, the
amount of dividends or other distributions with a record date after the Effective Time but prior to such
surrender and a payment date subsequent to such surrender payable with respect to such whole shares of
Parent Common Stock. For purposes of dividends or other distributions in respect of shares of Parent
Common Stock, all whole shares of Parent Common Stock to be issued pursuant to the Merger shall be
entitled to dividends pursuant to the immediately preceding sentence as if such whole shares of Parent
Common Stock were issued and outstanding as of the Effective Time.
Table of Contents
A-15
(h) No Fractional Shares of Parent Common Stock. No certificates or scrip or shares representing fractional
shares of Parent Common Stock shall be issued upon the surrender for exchange of Certificates or Book-
Entry Shares and such fractional share interests will not entitle the owner thereof to vote or to have any
rights of a stockholder of Parent or a holder of shares of Parent Common Stock. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Agreement, each holder of shares of Company Common Stock exchanged pursuant to the
Merger who would otherwise have been entitled to receive a fraction of a share of Parent Common Stock
(after taking into account all Certificates and Book-Entry Shares delivered by such holder) shall receive, in
lieu thereof, cash (without interest) in an amount equal to the product of (i) such fractional part of a share of
Parent Common Stock multiplied by (ii) the volume weighted average price of Parent Common Stock for the
five consecutive trading days immediately prior to the Closing Date as reported by Bloomberg, L.P. As
promptly as reasonably practicable after Parent’s receipt of written notification from the Exchange Agent of
the determination of the amount of cash, if any, to be paid to holders of fractional interests, Parent shall
instruct the Exchange Agent to forward payments to such holders of fractional interests subject to and in
accordance with the terms hereof.
(i) Withholding Taxes. Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, Parent, the Surviving
Corporation and the Exchange Agent shall be entitled to deduct or withhold from the consideration
otherwise payable to any holder of Company Common Stock pursuant to this Agreement any amount
required to be deducted or withheld with respect to the making of such payment under applicable Tax Law.
To the extent that amounts are so properly deducted or withheld by the Exchange Agent, the Surviving
Corporation or Parent, as the case may be, such deducted or withheld amounts shall be treated for all
purposes of this Agreement as having been paid to the holder of the Company Common Stock in respect
of which such deduction or withholding was made by the Exchange Agent, the Surviving Corporation or
Parent, as the case may be.
3.4 No Dissenters’ Rights. No dissenters’ or appraisal rights shall be available with respect to the
Transactions.
ARTICLE IV
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES OF THE COMPANY
Except (i) as set forth in the disclosure letter dated as of the date of this Agreement and delivered by the
Company to Parent and Merger Sub on or prior to the date of this Agreement (the “Company Disclosure
Letter”) and (ii) as disclosed in the Company SEC Documents (excluding any disclosures set forth in any
such Company SEC Documents in any risk factor section, any forward-looking disclosure in any section
relating to forward-looking statements or any other statements that are non-specific, predictive or primarily
cautionary in nature other than historical facts included therein), where the relevance of the information as
an exception to (or disclosure for purposes of) a particular representation is reasonably apparent on the
face of such disclosure, the Company represents and warrants to Parent and Merger Sub as follows:
4.1 Organization, Standing and Power. Each of the Company and its Subsidiaries (a) is a corporation,
partnership or limited liability company duly organized, as the case may be, validly existing and in good
standing under the Laws of its jurisdiction of incorporation or organization, (b) has all requisite entity power
and authority to own, lease and operate its properties and to carry on its business as now being conducted,
and (c) is duly qualified and in good standing to do business in each jurisdiction in which the business it is
conducting, or the operation, ownership or leasing of its properties, makes such qualification necessary,
other than where the failure to be duly organized, validly existing, or to so qualify or be in good standing
has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse
Effect on the Company (a “Company Material Adverse Effect”). The Company has heretofore made
available to Parent complete and correct copies of its Organizational Documents, as well as the equivalent
organizational documents of each Subsidiary, in each case as of the date hereof. The respective
jurisdictions of formation of each Subsidiary of the Company are identified on Schedule 4.1 of the
Company Disclosure Letter.
Table of Contents
A-16
4.2 Capital Structure. As of the date of this Agreement, the authorized capital stock of the Company
consists of (a) 600,000,000 shares of Company Common Stock and (b) 50,000,000 shares of preferred
stock, par value $0.01 per share (“Company Preferred Stock” and, together with the Company Common
Stock, the “Company Capital Stock”). At the close of business on May 13, 2016: (i) 206,360,672 shares of
Company Common Stock were issued and outstanding, including 2,619,588 shares of restricted Company
Common Stock issued pursuant to the Company Stock Plan; (ii) no shares of Company Preferred Stock
were issued and outstanding; (iii) 16,259,811 shares of Company Common Stock were reserved for
issuance pursuant to the Company Stock Plan; and (iv) no Voting Debt of the Company was issued and
outstanding. All outstanding shares of Company Common Stock are validly issued, fully paid and non-
assessable and are not subject to preemptive rights. All outstanding shares of Company Common Stock
have been issued and granted in compliance in all material respects with (i) applicable securities Laws and
other applicable Law and (ii) all requirements set forth in applicable contracts. As of the close of business
on May 13, 2016, there are no outstanding options, warrants or other rights to subscribe for, purchase or
acquire from the Company or any of its Subsidiaries any capital stock of the Company or securities
convertible into or exchangeable or exercisable for capital stock of the Company (and the exercise,
conversion, purchase, exchange or other similar price thereof). All outstanding shares of capital stock of
the Subsidiaries of the Company that are owned by the Company, or a direct or indirect wholly-owned
Subsidiary of the Company, are free and clear of all Encumbrances, other than Permitted Encumbrances.
Except as set forth in this Section 4.2, and except for stock grants or other awards granted in accordance
with Section 6.1(b)(ii), there are outstanding: (1) no shares of Company Capital Stock, (2) no Voting Debt,
(3) no securities of the Company or any Subsidiary of the Company convertible into or exchangeable or
exercisable for shares of Company Capital Stock or Voting Debt, and (4) no options, warrants, calls, rights
(including preemptive rights), commitments or agreements to which the Company or any Subsidiary of the
Company is a party or by which it is bound in any case obligating the Company or any Subsidiary of the
Company to issue, deliver, sell, purchase, redeem or acquire, or cause to be issued, delivered, sold,
purchased, redeemed or acquired, additional shares of Company Capital Stock or any Voting Debt or other
voting securities of the Company, or obligating the Company or any Subsidiary of the Company to grant,
extend or enter into any such option, warrant, call, right, commitment or agreement. Other than the Existing
Voting Agreement, there are not any stockholder agreements, voting trusts or other agreements to which
the Company is a party or by which it is bound relating to the voting of any shares of the Company Capital
Stock. As of the date of this Agreement, the Company has no (x) material joint venture or other similar
material equity interests in any Person or (y) obligations, whether contingent or otherwise, to consummate
any material additional investment in any Person other than its Subsidiaries.
4.3 Authority; No Violations; Consents and Approvals.
(a) Assuming the accuracy of the representation in Section 5.17, the Company has all requisite corporate
power and authority to execute and deliver this Agreement and, subject to the Company Stockholder
Approval, to consummate the Transactions. Assuming the accuracy of the representation in Section 5.17,
the execution and delivery of this Agreement by the Company and the consummation by the Company of
the Transactions have been duly authorized by all necessary corporate action on the part of the Company,
subject, with respect to Merger, to the Company Stockholder Approval. This Agreement has been duly
executed and delivered by the Company and, assuming the accuracy of the representation in Section 5.17
and that this Agreement constitutes the valid and binding obligation of Parent and Merger Sub, constitutes
a valid and binding obligation of the Company enforceable in accordance with its terms, subject, as to
enforceability, to bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium and other Laws of general
applicability relating to or affecting creditors’ rights and to general principles of equity regardless of
whether such enforceability is considered in a Proceeding in equity or at law (collectively, “Creditors’
Rights”). The Company Board, at a meeting duly called and held by unanimous vote, (i) determined that this
Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby, including the Merger, are fair to, and in the best
interests of, the Company’s stockholders, (ii) approved and declared advisable this Agreement and the
transactions contemplated hereby, including the Merger, and (iii) resolved to recommend that the holders of
Company Common Stock approve and adopt this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby,
including the Merger (such recommendation described in clause (iii), the “Company Board
Table of Contents
A-17
Recommendation”). Assuming the accuracy of the representation in Section 5.17, the Company
Stockholder Approval is the only vote of the holders of any class or series of the Company’s capital stock
necessary to approve and adopt this Agreement and the Merger.
(b) The execution and delivery of this Agreement does not, and the consummation of the Transactions will
not, result in any violation of, or default (with or without notice or lapse of time, or both) under, or
acceleration of any material obligation or the loss, suspension, limitation or impairment of a material benefit
under (or right of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries to own or use any assets or properties required
for the conduct of their respective businesses, including any of the Oil and Gas Properties owned or held
by them), or result in (or give rise to) the creation of any Encumbrance or any rights of termination,
cancellation, first offer or first refusal, in each case, with respect to any of the properties or assets of the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries (including, for the avoidance of doubt, any of their Oil and Gas
Properties) under, any provision of (i) the Organizational Documents of the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries, (ii) assuming the accuracy of the representation in Section 5.17, any loan or credit agreement,
note, bond, mortgage, indenture, lease or other agreement, permit, franchise or license to which the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries is a party or by which it or any of its Subsidiaries or its or their
respective properties or assets are bound, or (iii) assuming the accuracy of the representation in
Section 5.17 and assuming the consents, approvals, orders, authorizations, registrations, filings or permits
referred to in Section 4.4 are duly and timely obtained or made and the Company Stockholder Approval has
been obtained, any Law applicable to the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or any of their respective
properties or assets, other than, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), any such violations, defaults,
acceleration, losses, or Encumbrances that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect.
(c) Neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is in default or violation (and no event has occurred
which, with notice or the lapse of time or both, would constitute a default or violation) of any term, condition
or provision of (i) the Organizational Documents of the Company or any of its Significant Subsidiaries or
(ii) any loan or credit agreement, note, bond, mortgage, indenture, lease or other agreement, permit,
franchise or license to which the Company or any of its Subsidiaries is now a party or by which the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries or any of their respective properties or assets is bound, except for
defaults or violations that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the
aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect.
4.4 Consents. No consent, approval, order or authorization of, or registration, declaration or filing with, or
permit from any Governmental Entity is required to be obtained or made by the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries in connection with the execution and delivery of this Agreement by the Company or the
consummation by the Company of the Transactions, except for: (a) the filing of a premerger notification
report by the Company under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 (the “HSR Act”),
and the expiration or termination of the applicable waiting period with respect thereto; (b) the filing with the
SEC of (i) a joint proxy statement in preliminary and definitive form (the “Joint Proxy Statement”) relating to
the meeting of the stockholders of the Company to consider the adoption of this Agreement (including any
postponement, adjournment or recess thereof, the “Company Stockholders Meeting”) and the Parent
Stockholders Meeting and (ii) such reports under Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act, and such other
compliance with the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations thereunder, as may be required in
connection with this Agreement and the Transactions; (c) the filing of the Certificate of Merger with the
Office of the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware; (d) filings with the Nasdaq; (e) such filings and
approvals as may be required by any applicable state securities or “blue sky” laws or Takeover Laws; and
(f) any such consent approval, order, authorization, registration, filing or permit that the failure to obtain or
make has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Company
Material Adverse Effect.
4.5 SEC Documents; Financial Statements.
(a) Since January 1, 2015, the Company has filed or furnished with the SEC all forms, reports, schedules
and statements required to be filed or furnished under the Securities Act or the Exchange Act (such
Table of Contents
A-18
forms, reports, schedules and statements, the “Company SEC Documents”). As of their respective dates,
each of the Company SEC Documents, as amended, complied as to form in all material respects with the
applicable requirements of the Securities Act, or the Exchange Act, as the case may be, and the rules and
regulations of the SEC thereunder applicable to such Company SEC Documents, and none of the
Company SEC Documents contained, when filed or, if amended prior to the date of this Agreement, as of
the date of such amendment with respect to those disclosures that are amended, any untrue statement of a
material fact or omitted to state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the
statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading. The
Company has made all certifications and statements required by Sections 302 and 906 of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act and the related rules and regulations promulgated thereunder with respect to the Company SEC
Documents. As of the date hereof, neither the Company nor any of its officers has received notice from any
Governmental Entity challenging or questioning the accuracy, completeness, form or manner of filing of
such certifications. As of the date hereof, there are no outstanding or unresolved comments received by
the Company from the SEC with respect to any of the Company SEC Documents. As of the date hereof, to
the knowledge of the Company, none of the Company SEC Documents is the subject of ongoing SEC
review or investigation. None of the Company’s Subsidiaries is, or has been at any time, subject to the
reporting requirements of Sections 13(a) and 15(d) of the Exchange Act.
(b) The financial statements of the Company included in the Company SEC Documents, including all notes
and schedules thereto, complied in all material respects, when filed or if amended prior to the date of this
Agreement, as of the date of such amendment, with the rules and regulations of the SEC with respect
thereto, were prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States
(“GAAP”) applied on a consistent basis during the periods involved (except as may be indicated in the
notes thereto or, in the case of the unaudited statements, as permitted by Rule 10-01 of Regulation S-X of
the SEC) and fairly present in all material respects in accordance with applicable requirements of GAAP
(subject, in the case of the unaudited statements, to normal year-end audit adjustments) the financial
position of the Company and its consolidated Subsidiaries as of their respective dates and the results of
operations and the cash flows of the Company and its consolidated Subsidiaries for the periods presented
therein. The books and records of the Company and its Subsidiaries have been, and are being, maintained
in accordance with GAAP and any other applicable legal and accounting requirements. KPMG LLP is an
independent public accounting firm with respect to the Company and, as of the date of this Agreement, has
not resigned or been dismissed as independent public accountants of the Company.
4.6 Information Supplied. None of the information supplied or to be supplied by the Company for inclusion
or incorporation by reference in (a) the registration statement on Form S-4 to be filed with the SEC by
Parent pursuant to which shares of Parent Common Stock issuable in the Merger will be registered with the
SEC (including any amendments or supplements, the “Registration Statement”) shall contain any untrue
statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in
order to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which they are made, not
misleading or (b) the Joint Proxy Statement will, at the date it is first mailed to stockholders of the Company
and to stockholders of Parent and at the time of the Company Stockholders Meeting and the Parent
Stockholders Meeting, contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact
required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they are made, not misleading. The Joint Proxy Statement and the Registration
Statement, each to the extent it relates to the Company or its Subsidiaries or other information supplied by
the Company for inclusion therein, will comply as to form in all material respects with the provisions of the
Securities Act and the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations thereunder; provided, however, that no
representation is made by the Company with respect to statements made therein based on information
supplied by Parent or Merger Sub specifically for inclusion or incorporation by reference therein.
4.7 Absence of Certain Changes or Events.
(a) Since December 31, 2015, there has not been any event, change, effect or development that, individually
or in the aggregate, had or would be reasonably likely to have a Company Material Adverse Effect.
Table of Contents
A-19
(b) From December 31, 2015 through the date of this Agreement, (i) the Company and its Subsidiaries have
conducted their business in the ordinary course of business in all material respects and (ii) neither the
Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has undertaken any action that would be prohibited by Section 6.1(b)
(iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (ix) or (xii) if such provision were in effect at all times since December 31, 2015 (or, in the
case of subparagraph (ix), since March 31, 2016).
4.8 No Undisclosed Liabilities. There are no liabilities of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries of any kind
whatsoever, whether accrued, contingent, absolute, determined, determinable or otherwise, other than:
(a) liabilities adequately provided for on the balance sheet of the Company dated as of March 31, 2016
(including the notes thereto) contained in the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the three
months ended March 31, 2016; (b) liabilities incurred in the ordinary course of business subsequent to
March 31, 2016; (c) liabilities for fees and expenses incurred in connection with the Transactions;
(d) liabilities not required to be presented on the face of an unaudited interim balance sheet prepared in
accordance with GAAP; (e) liabilities incurred as permitted under Section 6.1(b)(x); and (f) liabilities that
have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Company
Material Adverse Effect.
4.9 Company Permits; Compliance with Applicable Law.
(a) The Company and its Subsidiaries hold all franchises, tariffs, grants, authorizations, licenses, permits,
easements, variances, exemptions, consents, certificates, approvals and orders of all Governmental
Entities necessary for the lawful conduct of their respective businesses (the “Company Permits”), except
where the failure to so hold has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the
aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect. The Company and its Subsidiaries are in compliance with
the terms of the Company Permits, except where the failure to so comply has not had and would not be
reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect. The
businesses of the Company and its Subsidiaries are not currently being conducted, and at no time during
the past three years have been conducted, in violation of any applicable Law, except for violations that
have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Company
Material Adverse Effect. To the knowledge of the Company, no investigation or review by any Governmental
Entity with respect to the Company or any of its Subsidiaries is pending or threatened, other than those the
outcome of which has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate,
a Company Material Adverse Effect.
(b) Except with respect to Tax matters (which are provided for in Section 4.13) and environmental matters
(which are provided for in Section 4.17), the Company and its Subsidiaries are in compliance with, and are
not in default under or in violation of, any applicable Law, except where such non-compliance, default or
violation have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a
Company Material Adverse Effect. The Company has not received any written communication since
December 31, 2015 from a Governmental Entity that alleges that the Company is not in compliance with or is
in default or violation of any applicable Law, except where such non-compliance, default or violation would
not, individually or in the aggregate, be reasonably likely to have a Company Material Adverse Effect.
4.10 Litigation. Except for such matters as have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect, there is no (a) Proceeding pending, or,
to the knowledge of the Company, threatened against the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or
(b) judgment, decree, injunction, ruling or order of any Governmental Entity or arbitrator outstanding
against the Company or any of its Subsidiaries. To the knowledge of the Company, as of the date hereof, no
officer or director of the Company is a defendant in any material Proceeding in connection with his or her
status as an officer or director of the Company or any Subsidiary of the Company. There is no judgment,
settlement, order, decision, direction, writ, injunction, decree, stipulation or legal or arbitration award of, or
promulgated or issued by, any Governmental Entity in effect to which any of the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries is a party or subject that materially interferes with, or would be reasonably likely to materially
interfere with, the business of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries as currently conducted.
Table of Contents
4.11 Compensation; Benefits.
A-20
(a) Set forth on Schedule 4.10 of the Company Disclosure Letter is a list, as of the date hereof, of all of the
Company Plans. True, correct and complete copies of each of the Company Plans (or, with respect to any
unwritten Company Plan, a written summary thereof) and related trust documents, insurance contracts and
any amendments thereto and favorable determination or opinion letters, if applicable, have been furnished
or made available to Parent or its Representatives, along with the most recent report filed on Form 5500 and
accompanying schedules, financial statements and actuarial reports and current summary plan description
and summary of material modifications with respect to each Company Plan required to file a Form 5500 and
all correspondence received from or provided to the Department of Labor, the Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation, the IRS or any other Governmental Entity during the past three years.
(b) Each Company Plan has been maintained in compliance with all applicable Laws, except where the
failure to so comply has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the
aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect.
(c) There are no actions, suits or claims pending (other than routine claims for benefits) or, to the
knowledge of the Company, threatened against, or with respect to, any of the Company Plans, except for
such actions, suits or claims that are not material to the Company or any of its Subsidiaries. There is no
audit, inquiry or examination pending or, to the knowledge of the Company, threatened by the IRS, the
Department of Labor, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation or any other Governmental Entity with
respect to any Company Plan.
(d) All material contributions required to be made to the Company Plans pursuant to their terms have been
timely made.
(e) There are no material unfunded benefit obligations that have not been properly accrued for in the
Company’s financial statements or disclosed in the notes thereto in accordance with GAAP.
(f) Neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries, nor any member of an Aggregated Group to which any
such Person belongs, contributes to, has an obligation to contribute to, or has any liability with respect to
(including contingent liability) and no Company Plan is, a plan subject to Title IV of ERISA (including a
multiemployer plan within the meaning of Section 3(37) of ERISA), Section 302 of ERISA, or Section 412 of
the Code or a multiple employer welfare arrangement (as defined in Section 3(40)(A) or ERISA).
(j) No Company Plan and neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries provides, or has any obligation to
provide, current or former employees of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries (or any beneficiaries
thereof) welfare benefits (including medical and life insurance benefits) after such Person terminates
employment with the Company and its Subsidiaries, except for the coverage continuation requirements of
the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985, as amended, and as codified in
Section 4980B of the Code and Section 601 et. seq. of ERISA. No Company Plan and neither the Company
nor any of its Subsidiaries provides, or has any obligation to provide welfare benefits to any Person who is
not a current or former employee of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, or a beneficiary thereof.
(k) Except for items that shall not be the financial responsibility of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries
and any items pursuant to the agreements set forth on Schedule 4.18(a)(xv) of the Company Disclosure
Letter, neither the execution of this Agreement nor the consummation of the Transactions (either alone or
in combination with another event) will or can be reasonably expected to (i) entitle any current or former
director, officer, employee or consultant to any payment (including severance pay or similar
compensation), any cancellation of Indebtedness, or any increase in compensation; (ii) result in the
acceleration of payment, funding or vesting under any Company Plan; or (iii) result in any increase in
benefits payable under any Company Plan. No amount paid or payable (whether in cash, in property, or in
the form of benefits) in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby (either alone or in
combination with another event) will be an “excess
Table of Contents
A-21
parachute payment” within the meaning of Section 280G of the Code. Neither the Company nor any of its
Subsidiaries has any obligation to make a “gross-up” or similar payment in respect of any Taxes that may
become payable under Section 4999 of the Code.
4.12 Labor Matters.
(a) As of the date of this Agreement, (i) neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is a party to any
collective bargaining agreement or other agreement with any labor union, (ii) there is no pending union
representation petition involving employees of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, and (iii) the
Company does not have knowledge of any activity or proceeding of any labor organization (or
representative thereof) or employee group (or representative thereof) to organize any such employees.
(b) There is no unfair labor practice, charge or grievance arising out of a collective bargaining agreement,
other agreement with any labor union, or other labor-related grievance proceeding against the Company or
any of its Subsidiaries pending, or, to the knowledge of the Company, threatened, other than such matters
that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Company
Material Adverse Effect.
(c) There is no strike, dispute, slowdown, work stoppage or lockout pending, or, to the knowledge of the
Company, threatened, against or involving the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, other than such matters
that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Company
Material Adverse Effect.
(d) The Company and its Subsidiaries are, and since January 1, 2015 have been, in compliance in all
material respects with all applicable Laws respecting employment and employment practices, and there are
no Proceedings pending or, to the knowledge of the Company, threatened against the Company or any of
its Subsidiaries, by or on behalf of any applicant for employment, any current or former employee or any
class of the foregoing, relating to any of the foregoing applicable Laws, or alleging breach of any express or
implied contract of employment, wrongful termination of employment, or alleging any other discriminatory,
wrongful or tortious conduct in connection with the employment relationship, other than any such matters
described in this sentence that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in
the aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect. Since January 1, 2015, neither the Company nor any of
its Subsidiaries has received any written notice of the intent of the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, the National Labor Relations Board, the Department of Labor or any other Governmental
Entity responsible for the enforcement of labor or employment Laws to conduct an investigation with
respect to the Company or any of its Subsidiaries which has had or would be reasonably likely to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect.
4.13 Taxes.
(a) (i) All material Tax Returns required to be filed (taking into account extensions of time for filing) by the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries have been timely filed; (ii) all material Taxes that are due and payable by
the Company or any of its Subsidiaries have been timely paid in full; and (iii) all material withholding Tax
requirements imposed on or with respect to the Company or any of its Subsidiaries have been timely
satisfied in full.
(b) There is not in force any waiver or agreement for any extension of time for the assessment or payment
of any material Tax by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, and there is no pending audit, examination
or other proceeding (and the Company and its Subsidiaries have not received notice in writing of any
proposed or threatened audit, examination or other proceeding) relating to the assessment or collection of
any material Taxes due from the Company or any of its Subsidiaries.
Table of Contents
A-22
(c) No material power of attorney that is currently in force has been granted with respect to Taxes that could
affect the Company or any of its Subsidiaries after the Closing.
(d) There is no outstanding material claim, assessment or deficiency against the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries for any Taxes that has been asserted or threatened in writing by any Governmental Entity, and
no written claim has been made, within the preceding three years, by a Governmental Entity in a jurisdiction
where the Company or any of its Subsidiaries does not file Tax Returns or pay Taxes that it is obligated to
file Tax Returns or pay Taxes in such jurisdiction.
(e) Neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries (i) is a party to any material agreement or arrangement
relating to the apportionment, sharing, assignment or allocation of Taxes (not including, for the avoidance
of doubt (y) an agreement or arrangement solely among the members of a group the common parent of
which is the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, or (z) any Tax sharing or indemnification provisions
contained in any agreement entered into in the ordinary course of business and not primarily relating to
Tax (e.g., leases, credit agreements or other commercial agreements)), (ii) will be required to include any
material item of income in, or exclude any material item of deduction from, taxable income following the
Closing Date as a result of the application of an accounting method (e.g., the installment sale or completed
contract method of accounting) or a change in accounting method, or (ii) has any material liability for Taxes
of any Person (other than the Company or any of its Subsidiaries) under Treasury Regulations
Section 1.1502-6 or any similar provision of state, local or foreign Law, as a transferee or successor, by
contract or otherwise.
(f) Neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has participated, or is currently participating, in a “listed
transaction” as defined in Treasury Regulations Section 1.6011-4(b).
(g) Neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has constituted a “distributing corporation” or a
“controlled corporation” (or a successor thereto) in a distribution of stock intended to qualify for tax-free
treatment under Section 355 of the Code that is reasonably likely to result in the imposition of Tax on the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries under Section 355(e) of the Code as a result of the Transactions.
(h) After reasonable diligence, neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is aware of the existence of
any fact, or has taken or agreed to take any action, that would prevent the Merger from qualifying as a
“reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. Neither the Company nor any of its
Subsidiaries has knowledge of any agreement, plan or other circumstance that would prevent the Merger
from qualifying as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code.
4.14 Intellectual Property. The Company and its Subsidiaries own or have the right to use all Intellectual
Property necessary for the operation of the businesses of each of the Company and its Subsidiaries as
presently conducted (collectively, the “Company Intellectual Property”) free and clear of all Encumbrances
except for Permitted Encumbrances, except where the failure to own or have the right to use such
properties has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a
Company Material Adverse Effect. To the knowledge of the Company, the use of the Company Intellectual
Property by the Company and its Subsidiaries in the operation of the business of each of the Company and
its Subsidiaries as presently conducted does not infringe upon or misappropriate any Intellectual Property
of any other Person, except for such matters that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect. The Company and its Subsidiaries
have taken reasonable measures to protect the confidentiality of trade secrets used in the businesses of
each of the Company and its Subsidiaries as presently conducted, except where failure to do so has not
had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material
Adverse Effect.
4.15 Real Property. Except as has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the
aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect, and except with respect to any of the Company’s Oil and
Gas Properties, (a) the Company and its Subsidiaries have good, valid and defensible title to all material real
property
Table of Contents
A-23
owned by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company Owned Real Property”) and
valid leasehold estates in all material real property leased, subleased, licensed or otherwise occupied
(whether as tenant, subtenant or pursuant to other occupancy arrangements) by the Company or any
Subsidiary of the Company (collectively, including the improvements thereon, the “Company Material
Leased Real Property”) free and clear of all Encumbrances, except Permitted Encumbrances, (b) each
agreement under which the Company or any Subsidiary of the Company is the landlord, sublandlord,
tenant, subtenant, or occupant with respect to the Company Material Leased Real Property (each, a
“Company Material Real Property Lease”) to the knowledge of the Company is in full force and effect and is
valid and enforceable against the parties thereto in accordance with its terms, subject, as to enforceability,
to Creditors’ Rights, and neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries, or to the knowledge of the
Company, any other party thereto, has received written notice of any default under any Company Material
Real Property Lease, and a true, correct and complete copy of each Company Material Real Property Lease
has been made available to Parent prior to the date hereof, and (c) there does not exist any pending or, to
the knowledge of the Company, threatened, condemnation or eminent domain proceedings that affect any
of the Company’s Oil and Gas Properties, Company Owned Real Property or Company Material Leased
Real Property.
4.16 Oil and Gas Matters.
(a) Except as has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have a Company Material Adverse Effect
and except for property (i) sold or otherwise disposed of in the ordinary course of business since the dates
of the reserve report prepared by Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (the “Company Independent
Petroleum Engineers”) relating to the Company interests referred to therein as of December 31, 2015 (the
“Company Reserve Report”) or (ii) reflected in the Company Reserve Report or in the Company SEC
Documents as having been sold or otherwise disposed of, as of the date hereof, the Company and its
Subsidiaries have good and defensible title to all Oil and Gas Properties forming the basis for the reserves
reflected in the Company Reserve Report and in each case as attributable to interests owned by the
Company and its Subsidiaries, free and clear of any Encumbrances, except for Permitted Encumbrances.
For purposes of the foregoing sentence, “good and defensible title” means that the Company’s or one or
more of its Subsidiaries’, as applicable, title (as of the date hereof and as of the Closing) to each of the Oil
and Gas Properties held or owned by them (or purported to be held or owned by them) (1) entitles the
Company (or one or more of its Subsidiaries, as applicable) to receive (after satisfaction of all Production
Burdens applicable thereto), not less than the net revenue interest share shown in the Company Reserve
Report of all Hydrocarbons produced from such Oil and Gas Properties throughout the life of such Oil and
Gas Properties, (2) obligates the Company (or one or more of its Subsidiaries, as applicable) to bear a
percentage of the costs and expenses for the maintenance and development of, and operations relating to,
such Oil and Gas Properties, of not greater than the working interest shown on the Company Reserve
Report for such Oil and Gas Properties (other than any positive differences in such percentage) and the
applicable working interest shown on the Company Reserve Report for such Oil and Gas Properties that
are accompanied by a proportionate (or greater) net revenue interest in such Oil and Gas Properties and
(3) is free and clear of all Encumbrances (other than Permitted Encumbrances).
(b) The factual, non-interpretive data supplied by the Company to the Company Independent Petroleum
Engineers relating to the Company interests referred to in the Company Reserve Report, by or on behalf of
the Company and its Subsidiaries in connection with the preparation of the Company Reserve Report was,
as of the time provided, accurate in all material respects. The oil and gas reserve estimates of the Company
set forth in the Company Reserve Report are derived from reports that have been prepared by the
Company Independent Petroleum Engineers, and such reserve estimates fairly reflect, in all material
respects, the oil and gas reserves of the Company at the dates indicated therein and are in accordance with
SEC guidelines applicable thereto applied on a consistent basis throughout the periods involved. Except
for changes generally affecting the oil and gas exploration, development and production industry
(including changes in commodity prices) and normal depletion by production, there has been no change in
respect of the matters addressed in the Company Reserve Report that have not had and would be
reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect.
A-24
Table of Contents
(c) All proceeds from the sale of Hydrocarbons produced from the Oil and Gas Properties of the Company
and its Subsidiaries are being received by such selling entities in a timely manner and no proceeds from
the sale of Hydrocarbons produced from any such Oil and Gas Properties are being held in suspense (by
the Company, any of its Subsidiaries, any third party operator thereof or any other Person or individual) for
any reason except as reported in the Company SEC Documents.
(d) Except as has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a
Company Material Adverse Effect, (i) all rentals, shut-ins and similar payments owed to any Person or
individual under (or otherwise with respect to) any such Oil and Gas Leases have been properly and timely
paid, (ii) all royalties, minimum royalties, overriding royalties and other Production Burdens with respect to
any Oil and Gas Properties owned or held by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries have been timely and
properly paid, and (iii) none of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries (and, to the Company’s knowledge,
no third party operator) has violated any provision of, or taken or failed to take any act that, with or without
notice, lapse of time, or both, would constitute a default under the provisions of any Oil and Gas Lease (or
entitle the lessor thereunder to cancel or terminate such Oil and Gas Lease) included in the Oil and Gas
Properties owned or held by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries.
4.17 Environmental Matters.
(a) Except for those matters that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in
the aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect:
(i) the Company and its Subsidiaries and their respective operations and assets are in compliance with all
Environmental Laws and Environmental Permits;
(ii) the Company and its Subsidiaries have obtained all Environmental Permits required under
Environmental Laws to operate the business as currently operated;
(iii) the Company and its Subsidiaries are not subject to any Proceeding under Environmental Laws that
have any payments or obligations outstanding or unfulfilled;
(iv) since January 1, 2014, none of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries has received any written notice
from any Governmental Entity or any third party alleging, with respect to any such entity or any of their
respective assets, real properties (whether owned or leased or formerly owned or leased) or operations, the
violation of or liability under any Environmental Law (including liability as a potentially responsible party
under CERCLA or any analogous state laws) or any Environmental Permit that remains pending or
unresolved;
(v) there are no Proceedings pending, or, to the knowledge of the Company, threatened by a Governmental
Entity or other third party against the Company or its Subsidiaries that allege a violation of or liability under
any Environmental Law, and, to the knowledge of the Company, there are no existing facts or
circumstances that would reasonably be expected to give rise to any such Proceeding;
(vi) there have been no Releases of Hazardous Materials at any property currently or, to the knowledge of
the Company, formerly owned, operated or otherwise used by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, or, to
the knowledge of the Company, by any predecessors of the Company or any Subsidiary of the Company,
which Releases are reasonably likely to result in liability to the Company under Environmental Law, and
neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has received any written notice asserting a liability or
obligation under any Environmental Laws with respect to the investigation, remediation, removal, or
monitoring of the Release of any Hazardous Materials at or from any property currently or formerly owned,
operated, or otherwise used by the Company, or at or from any off-site location where Hazardous Materials
from the Company’s operations have been sent for treatment, disposal storage or handling; and
(vii) there have been no environmental investigations, studies, audits, or other analyses conducted during
the past three (3) years by or on behalf of, or that are in the possession of, the Company or its
Table of Contents
A-25
Subsidiaries addressing potentially material environmental matters with respect to any property owned,
operated or otherwise used by any of them that have not been delivered or otherwise made available to
Parent prior to the date hereof.
(b) Except as expressly set forth in this Section 4.17, neither the Company nor its Subsidiaries make any
representation or warranty regarding compliance or failure to comply with, or any actual or contingent
liability under, any Environmental Law.
4.18 Material Contracts.
(a) Schedule 4.18 of the Company Disclosure Letter sets forth a true and complete list, as of the date of this
Agreement, (provided, however, that the Company not be required to list any such agreements in Schedule
4.18 of the Company Disclosure Letter that are filed as exhibits to the Company SEC Documents) of:
(i) each “material contract” (as such term is defined in Item 601(b)(10) of Regulation S-K under the
Exchange Act);
(ii) each contract that provides for the acquisition, disposition, license, use, distribution or outsourcing of
assets, services, rights or properties (other than Oil and Gas Properties) with respect to which the Company
reasonably expects that the Company and its Subsidiaries will make annual payments in excess of
$15,000,000;
(iii) each contract that constitutes a commitment relating to Indebtedness for borrowed money or the
deferred purchase price of property by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries (whether incurred, assumed,
guaranteed or secured by any asset) in excess of $15,000,000, other than agreements solely between or
among the Company and its Subsidiaries;
(iv) each contract for lease of personal property or real property (other than Oil and Gas Properties)
involving aggregate payments in excess of $15,000,000 in any calendar year that are not terminable without
penalty within 60 days, other than contracts related to drilling rigs;
(v) each contract containing any area of mutual interest, joint bidding area, joint acquisition area, or non-
compete or similar type of provision that, following the Effective Time, by virtue of Parent becoming an
Affiliate of the Company as a result of the Transactions, would by its terms materially restrict the ability of
Parent or any of its Subsidiaries to compete in any line of business or with any Person or geographic area
during any period of time after the Effective Time;
(vi) each contract involving the pending acquisition or sale of (or option to purchase or sell) any material
amount of the assets or properties (including Hydrocarbons) of the Company or its Subsidiaries, taken as a
whole, other than contracts involving the acquisition or sale of (or option to purchase or sell) Hydrocarbons
in the ordinary course of business;
(vii) each contract for any Derivative Transaction;
(viii) each material partnership, joint venture or limited liability company agreement, other than any
customary joint operating agreements, unit agreements or participation agreements affecting the Oil and
Gas Properties of the Company;
(ix) each joint development agreement, exploration agreement, participation, farmout, farmin or program
agreement or similar contract requiring the Company or any of its Subsidiaries to make expenditures that
would reasonably be expected to be in excess of $15,000,000 in the aggregate during the twelve (12)-month
period following the date of this Agreement, other than customary joint operating agreements and
continuous development obligations under Oil and Gas Leases;
(x) any material lease or sublease with respect to a Company Material Leased Real Property;
(xi) each collective bargaining agreement to which the Company is a party or is subject;
Table of Contents
A-26
(xii) each agreement under which the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, on the one hand, has advanced
or loaned any amount of money to any of the following, on the other hand (x) an executive officer or director
of the Company or any Subsidiary of the Company, (y) a beneficial owner (within the meaning of
Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act) of 5% or more of the Company Common Stock or (z) Affiliate,
“associate” or member of the “immediate family” (as such terms are respectively defined in Rules 12b-2
and 16a-1 of the Exchange Act) of any of the Persons described in the foregoing clauses (x) or (y);
(xiii) any contract that provides for a “take-or-pay” clause or any similar prepayment obligation, acreage
dedication, minimum volume commitments or capacity reservation fees to a gathering, transportation or
other arrangement downstream of the wellhead, that cover, guaranty or commit volumes in excess of 50
MMcf (or, in the case of liquids, in excess of 8,333 barrels of oil equivalent) of Hydrocarbons of the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries per day over a period of one month (calculated on a yearly average
basis) or for a term greater than ten (10) years;
(xiv) any contract between the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, on the one hand, and any of their
respective officers or directors, or any holder 5% or more of the outstanding shares of Company Common
Stock (or any such Person’s Affiliates) on the other hand;
(xv) any contract that, upon the consummation of the Transactions, would (either alone or upon the
occurrence of any additional acts or events, including the passage of time) result in any payment or benefit
(whether of severance pay or otherwise) becoming due, or the acceleration or vesting of any right to any
payment or benefits, from Parent, Merger Sub, the Company or any of their respective Subsidiaries to any
officer, director, consultant or employee of any of the foregoing;
(xvi) any contract that would or would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially delay or materially
impede the consummation of any of the Transactions; and
(xvii) each agreement that contains any standstill, “most favored nation” or most favored customer
provision, preferential right or rights of first or last offer, negotiation or refusal, in each case other than
those contained in (A) any agreement in which such provision is solely for the benefit of the Company or
any of its Subsidiaries, (B) customary royalty pricing provisions in Oil and Gas Leases or (C) customary
preferential rights in joint operating agreements, unit agreements or participation agreements affecting the
business or the Oil and Gas Properties of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries, to which the Company or
any of its Subsidiaries or any of their respective Affiliates is subject, and is material to the business of the
Company and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole.
(b) Collectively, the contracts set forth in Section 4.18(a) are herein referred to as the “Company Contracts.”
Except as has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a
Company Material Adverse Effect, each Company Contract is legal, valid, binding and enforceable in
accordance with its terms on the Company and each of its Subsidiaries that is a party thereto and, to the
knowledge of the Company, each other party thereto, and is in full force and effect, subject, as to
enforceability, to Creditor’s Rights. Except as has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect, neither the Company nor any of its
Subsidiaries is in breach or default under any Company Contract nor, to the knowledge of the Company, is
any other party to any such Company Contract in breach or default thereunder. The Company has
heretofore made available to Parent complete and correct copies of the Company Contracts as of the date
hereof.
4.19 Insurance. Set forth on Schedule 4.19 of the Company Disclosure Letter is a true, correct and complete
list of all material insurance policies held by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries as of the date of this
Agreement (collectively, the “Material Company Insurance Policies”). Each of the Material Company
Insurance Policies is in full force and effect on the date of this Agreement and a true, correct and complete
copy of each Material Company Insurance Policy has been made available to Parent upon Parent’s request
prior to the date of this Agreement. All premiums payable under the Material Company Insurance Policies
prior to the date of this Agreement have been duly paid to date. As of the date of this Agreement, no written
notice of cancellation or termination has been received with respect to any Material Company Insurance
Policy.
Table of Contents
A-27
4.20 Opinion of Financial Advisor. The Company Board has received the opinion of Morgan Stanley & Co.
LLC addressed to the Company Board to the effect that, as of the date of the opinion and based upon and
subject to the limitations, qualifications and assumptions set forth therein, the Exchange Ratio pursuant to
this Agreement is fair from a financial point of view to the holders of the Company Common Stock (other
than the shares of Company Common Stock described in clause (iii) of Section 3.1(b) of this Agreement).
The Company Board has received the opinion of Barclays Capital Inc. addressed to the Company Board to
the effect that, based upon and subject to the limitations, qualifications and assumptions set forth therein,
as of the date of the opinion, the Exchange Ratio provided for in the Transactions is fair, from a financial
point of view, to the holders of the Company Common Stock (other than the shares of Company Common
Stock described in clause (iii) of Section 3.1(b) of this Agreement).
4.21 Derivative Transactions. Except as has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material Adverse Effect:
(a) All Derivative Transactions entered into by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or for the account of
any of its customers as of the date of this Agreement were entered into in accordance with applicable Laws,
and in accordance with the investment, securities, commodities, risk management and other policies,
practices and procedures employed by the Company and its Subsidiaries, and were entered into with
counterparties believed at the time to be financially responsible and able to understand (either alone or in
consultation with their advisers) and to bear the risks of such Derivative Transactions.
(b) The Company and each of its Subsidiaries have duly performed in all respects all of their respective
obligations under the Derivative Transactions to the extent that such obligations to perform have accrued,
and there are be no breaches, violations, collateral deficiencies, requests for collateral or demands for
payment, or defaults or allegations or assertions of such by any party thereunder.
4.22 Brokers. Except for the fees and expenses payable to Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC and Barclays Capital
Inc., no broker, investment banker, or other Person is entitled to any broker’s, finder’s or other similar fee or
commission in connection with the Transactions based upon arrangements made by or on behalf of the
Company.
4.23 Related Party Transactions. As of the date of this Agreement, neither the Company nor any of its
Subsidiaries is party to any transaction or arrangement under which any (i) present or former executive
officer or director of the Company or any Subsidiary of the Company, (ii) beneficial owner (within the
meaning of Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act) of 5% or more of the Company Common Stock or
(iii) Affiliate, “associate” or member of the “immediate family” (as such terms are respectively defined in
Rules 12b-2 and 16a-1 of the Exchange Act) of any of the foregoing is a party to any actual or proposed
loan, lease or other contract with or binding upon the Company or any Subsidiary of the Company or owns
or has any interest in any of their respective properties or assets, in each case as would be required to be
disclosed by the Company pursuant to Item 404 of Regulation S-K promulgated under the Exchange Act
(each of the foregoing, a “Company Related Party Transaction”). The Upstream MLP GP PSA has been duly
executed and delivered by the Company and its Subsidiaries thereto and, assuming due authorization,
execution and delivery by the other parties thereto, constitutes a valid and binding obligation of the
Company and its Subsidiaries party thereto enforceable in accordance with its terms, subject, as to
enforceability, Creditors’ Rights.
4.24 Corporate Governance.
(a) As of the date of this Agreement, the Company has disclosed to the Company’s auditors and the
Company Board’s audit committee (A) all known significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the
design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely
affect in any material respect the Company’s ability to record, process, summarize and report its
consolidated financial information and (B) any known fraud, whether or not material, that involves
management or other employees who have a significant role in the Company’s internal controls over
financial reporting. Since January 1, 2014, neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries has made or
permitted to remain outstanding any “extensions of
Table of Contents
A-28
credit” (within the meaning of Section 402 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act) or prohibited loans to any executive
officer of the Company (as defined in Rule 3b-7 under the Exchange Act) or director of the Company or any
of its Subsidiaries.
(b) The Company has established and maintains “disclosure controls and procedures” (as such term is
defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act). To the knowledge of the Company, such
disclosures controls and procedures are designed to ensure that material information relating to the
Company, including its Subsidiaries, required to be disclosed by the Company, including its Subsidiaries,
in the reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to the
Company’s principal executive officer and its principal financial officer to allow timely decisions regarding
required disclosure; and such disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that information
required to be disclosed by the Company in the reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is
recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in SEC rules and forms.
4.25 Regulatory Matters.
(a) Neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries is (A) an “investment company” or a company
“controlled” by an “investment company” within the meaning of the U.S. Investment Company Act of 1940
or (B) a “holding company”, a “subsidiary company” of a “holding company”, an affiliate of a “holding
company”, a “public utility” or a “public-utility company” as each such term is defined in the U.S. Public
Utility Holding Company Act of 2005.
(b) All natural gas pipeline Systems and related facilities owned by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries
are (A) “gathering facilities” that are exempt from regulation by the U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission under the Natural Gas Act of 1938 and (B) not subject to rate regulation or comprehensive
nondiscriminatory access regulation under the laws of any state or other local jurisdiction.
4.26 No Additional Representations.
(a) Except for the representations and warranties made in this Article IV, neither the Company nor any other
Person makes any express or implied representation or warranty with respect to the Company or its
Subsidiaries or their respective businesses, operations, assets, liabilities or conditions (financial or
otherwise) in connection with this Agreement or the Transactions, and the Company hereby disclaims any
such other representations or warranties. In particular, without limiting the foregoing disclaimer, neither the
Company nor any other Person makes or has made any representation or warranty to Parent, Merger Sub,
or any of their respective Affiliates or Representatives with respect to (i) any financial projection, forecast,
estimate, budget or prospect information relating to the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or their
respective businesses; or (ii) except for the representations and warranties made by the Company in this
Article IV, any oral or written information presented to Parent or Merger Sub or any of their respective
Affiliates or Representatives in the course of their due diligence investigation of the Company, the
negotiation of this Agreement or in the course of the Transactions.
(b) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Agreement to the contrary, the Company acknowledges and
agrees that none of Parent, Merger Sub or any other Person has made or is making any representations or
warranties relating to Parent or its Subsidiaries (including Merger Sub) whatsoever, express or implied,
beyond those expressly given by Parent and Merger Sub in Article V, including any implied representation
or warranty as to the accuracy or completeness of any information regarding Parent furnished or made
available to the Company, or any of its Representatives and that the Company has not relied on any such
other representation or warranty not set forth in this Agreement. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the Company acknowledges that no representations or warranties are made with respect to any
projections, forecasts, estimates, budgets or prospect information that may have been made available to
the Company or any of its Representatives (including in certain “data rooms,” “virtual data rooms,”
management presentations or in any other form in expectation of, or in connection with, the Merger or the
other Transactions).
Table of Contents
A-29
ARTICLE V
REPRESENTATION AND WARRANTIES OF PARENT AND MERGER SUB
Except (i) as set forth in the disclosure letter (regardless of whether or not a reference to a particular section
of such disclosure letter is contained in this Article V) dated as of the date of this Agreement and delivered
by Parent and Merger Sub to the Company on or prior to the date of this Agreement (the “Parent Disclosure
Letter”), and (ii) as disclosed in the Parent SEC Documents (excluding any disclosures set forth in any
such Parent SEC Documents in any risk factor section, any forward-looking disclosure in any section
relating to forward-looking statements or any other statements that are non-specific, predictive or primarily
cautionary in nature other than historical facts included therein), where the relevance of the information as
an exception to (or disclosure for purposes of) a particular representation is reasonably apparent on the
face of such disclosure, Parent and Merger Sub jointly and severally represent and warrant to the Company
as follows:
5.1 Organization, Standing and Power. Each of Parent and its Subsidiaries is a corporation, partnership or
limited liability company duly organized, as the case may be, validly existing and in good standing under
the Laws of its jurisdiction of incorporation or organization, has all requisite entity power and authority to
own, lease and operate its properties and to carry on its business as now being conducted, and is duly
qualified and in good standing to do business in each jurisdiction in which the business it is conducting, or
the operation, ownership or leasing of its properties, makes such qualification necessary, other than where
the failure to be duly organized, validly existing, or to so qualify or be in good standing has not had and
would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse Effect on Parent
(a “Parent Material Adverse Effect”). Parent and Merger Sub each has heretofore made available to the
Company complete and correct copies of its Organizational Documents.
5.2 Capital Structure. As of the date of this Agreement, the authorized capital stock of Parent consists of
(a) 475,000,000 shares of Parent Common Stock and (b) 10,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value
$1.00 per share (“Parent Preferred Stock”). At the close of business on May 13, 2016: (i) 169,747,995 shares
of Parent Common Stock were issued and outstanding, which includes undistributed shares of Parent
Common Stock held in the Parent’s Amended and Restated 2004 Deferred Compensation Plan for
Directors and Select Employees; and (ii) no shares of Parent Preferred Stock were issued and outstanding;
(iii) an aggregate of 5,135,291 shares of Parent Common Stock were available for future equity award grants
pursuant to Parent’s Amended and Restated 2005 Equity-Based Incentive Compensation Plan (the “2005
Parent Plan”); and (iv) there was no Voting Debt. As of May 13, 2016: (i) unvested equity awards (consisting
of, restricted stock units and performance share units) in the aggregate amount of 1,479,987 shares of
Parent Common Stock were held by the Parent’s directors, officers and other employees pursuant to the
2005 Parent Plan; and (ii) 1,379,173 stock appreciation rights with a weighted average strike price of $64.79
were outstanding (such stock appreciation rights being anti-dilutive as of the date hereof). All outstanding
shares of Parent Common Stock are validly issued, fully paid and non-assessable and are not subject to
preemptive rights. The Parent Common Stock to be issued pursuant to this Agreement, when issued, will
be validly issued, fully paid and nonassessable and not subject to preemptive rights. All outstanding
shares of Parent Common Stock have been, and the Parent Common Stock to be issued pursuant to this
Agreement, when issued, will be, issued and granted in compliance in all material respects with
(i) applicable securities Laws and other applicable Law and (ii) all requirements set forth in applicable
contracts. As of the close of business on May 13, 2016, there are no outstanding options, warrants or other
rights to subscribe for, purchase or acquire from Parent or any of its Subsidiaries any capital stock of
Parent or securities convertible into or exchangeable or exercisable for capital stock of Parent (and the
exercise, conversion, purchase, exchange or other similar price thereof). All outstanding shares of capital
stock of the Subsidiaries of Parent that are owned by Parent, or a direct or indirect wholly-owned
Subsidiary of Parent, are free and clear of all Encumbrances, other than Permitted Encumbrances. Except
as set forth in this Section 5.2, and except for stock grants or other awards granted in accordance with
Section 6.2(b)(ii), there are outstanding: (1) no shares of capital stock, Voting Debt or other voting securities
of Parent; (2) no securities of Parent or any Subsidiary of Parent convertible into or exchangeable or
exercisable for shares of capital stock, Voting Debt or other voting securities of Parent, and (3) no options,
warrants, calls, rights (including preemptive rights), commitments or
Table of Contents
A-30
agreements to which Parent or any Subsidiary of Parent is a party or by which it is bound in any case
obligating Parent or any Subsidiary of Parent to issue, deliver, sell, purchase, redeem or acquire, or cause
to be issued, delivered, sold, purchased, redeemed or acquired, additional shares of capital stock or any
Voting Debt or other voting securities of Parent, or obligating Parent or any Subsidiary of Parent to grant,
extend or enter into any such option, warrant, call, right, commitment or agreement. Other than the Voting
Agreement, there are not any stockholder agreements, voting trusts or other agreements to which Parent is
a party or by which it is bound relating to the voting of any shares of the capital stock of Parent or the
Company. As of the date of this Agreement, Parent has no (x) material joint venture or other similar material
equity interests in any Person or (y) obligations, whether contingent or otherwise, to consummate any
material additional investment in any Person other than its Subsidiaries and its joint ventures listed on
Schedule 5.2 of the Parent Disclosure Letter. The authorized capital stock of Merger Sub consists of 100
shares of common stock, par value $.01 per share, all of which shares are validly issued, fully paid and
nonassessable and are owned by Parent.
5.3 Authority; No Violations, Consents and Approvals.
(a) Each of Parent and Merger Sub has all requisite corporate power and authority to execute and deliver
this Agreement and, subject to Parent Stockholder Approval, to consummate the Transactions. The
execution and delivery of this Agreement by Parent and Merger Sub and the consummation by Parent and
Merger Sub of the Transactions have been duly authorized by all necessary corporate action on the part of
each of Parent (subject to Parent Stockholder Approval) and Merger Sub (other than the adoption of this
Agreement by Parent as sole stockholder of Merger Sub, which shall occur immediately after the execution
and delivery of this Agreement). This Agreement has been duly executed and delivered by each of Parent
and Merger Sub, and, assuming this Agreement constitutes the valid and binding obligation of the
Company, constitutes a valid and binding obligation of each of Parent and Merger Sub enforceable in
accordance with its terms, subject as to enforceability to Creditors’ Rights. The Parent Board, at a meeting
duly called and held by unanimous vote, (i) determined that this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby, including the issuance of Parent Common Stock pursuant to this Agreement (the
“Parent Stock Issuance”), are fair to, and in the best interests of, Parent, (ii) approved and declared
advisable this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby, including the Parent Stock Issuance,
and (iii) resolved to recommend that the holders of Parent Common Stock approve the Parent Stock
Issuance (the “Parent Board Recommendation”). The Merger Sub Board has by unanimous vote
(i) determined that this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby, including the Merger, are fair
to, and in the best interests of, the sole stockholder of Merger Sub and (ii) approved and declared advisable
this Agreement and the transactions contemplated hereby, including the Merger. Parent, as the owner of all
of the outstanding shares of capital stock of Merger Sub, will immediately after the execution and delivery of
this Agreement adopt this Agreement in its capacity as sole stockholder of Merger Sub. The Parent
Stockholder Approval is the only vote of the holders of any class or series of Parent’s capital stock
necessary to approve and adopt this Agreement and the Merger.
(b) The execution and delivery of this Agreement does not, and the consummation of the Transactions will
not, result in any violation of, or default (with or without notice or lapse of time, or both) under, or
acceleration of any material obligation or the loss, suspension, limitation or impairment of a material benefit
under (or right of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries to own or use any assets or properties required for the
conduct of their respective businesses, including any of the Oil and Gas Properties owned or held by them),
or result in (or give rise to) the creation of any Encumbrance or any rights of termination, cancellation, first
offer or first refusal, in each case, with respect to any of the properties or assets of Parent or any of its
Subsidiaries (including, for the avoidance of doubt, any of their Oil and Gas Properties) under, any
provision of (i) the Organizational Documents of either Parent or Merger Sub or any of their respective
Subsidiaries, (ii) any loan or credit agreement, note, bond, mortgage, indenture, lease or other agreement,
permit, franchise or license to which Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is a party or by which Parent or
Merger Sub or any of their respective Subsidiaries or their respective properties or assets are bound or
(iii) assuming the consents, approvals, orders, authorizations, registrations, filings, or permits referred to in
Section 5.4 are duly and timely obtained or made and the Parent Stockholder Approval has been obtained,
any Law applicable to Parent or any of its Subsidiaries
Table of Contents
A-31
or any of their respective properties or assets, other than, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), any such
violations, defaults, acceleration, losses or Encumbrances that have not had and would not be reasonably
likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
(c) Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries is in default or violation (and no event has occurred which,
with notice or the lapse of time or both, would constitute a default or violation) of any term, condition or
provision of (i) the Organizational Documents of Parent or Merger Sub or any of their Significant
Subsidiaries or (ii) any loan or credit agreement, note, bond, mortgage, indenture, lease or other agreement,
permit, franchise or license to which Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is now a party or by which Parent or
any of its Subsidiaries or any of their respective properties or assets is bound, except for defaults or
violations that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a
Parent Material Adverse Effect.
5.4 Consents. No consent, approval, order or authorization of, or registration, declaration or filing with, or
permit from, any Governmental Entity is required to be obtained or made by Parent or any of its
Subsidiaries in connection with the execution and delivery of this Agreement by Parent and Merger Sub or
the consummation by Parent and Merger Sub of the Transactions except for: (i) the filing of a competition
law notification report by Parent under the HSR Act and the expiration or termination of the applicable
waiting period with respect thereto; (ii) the filing with the SEC of (A) the Joint Proxy Statement and the
Registration Statement and (B) such reports under Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act and such other
compliance with the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations thereunder as may be required in
connection with this Agreement and the Transactions; (iii) the filing of the Certificate of Merger with the
Office of the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware; (iv) filings with the NYSE; (v) such filings and
approvals as may be required by any applicable state securities or “blue sky” Laws or Takeover Laws; and
(vi) any such consent, approval, order, authorization, registration, filing, or permit that the failure to obtain
or make has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Parent
Material Adverse Effect.
5.5 SEC Documents; Financial Statements.
(a) Since January 1, 2015, Parent has filed or furnished with the SEC all forms, reports, schedules and
statements required to be filed or furnished under the Securities Act or the Exchange Act (such forms,
reports, schedules and statements, the “Parent SEC Documents”). As of their respective dates, each of the
Parent SEC Documents, as amended, complied as to form in all material respects with the applicable
requirements of the Securities Act, or the Exchange Act, as the case may be, and the rules and regulations
of the SEC thereunder applicable to such Parent SEC Documents, and none of the Parent SEC Documents
contained, when filed or, if amended prior to the date of this Agreement, as of the date of such amendment
with respect to those disclosures that are amended, any untrue statement of a material fact or omitted to
state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading. Parent has made all certifications and
statements required by Sections 302 and 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the related rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder with respect to the Parent SEC Documents. As of the date hereof,
neither Parent nor any of its officers has received notice from any Governmental Entity challenging or
questioning the accuracy, completeness, form or manner of filing of such certifications. As of the date
hereof, there are no outstanding or unresolved comments received by Parent from the SEC with respect to
any of the Parent SEC Documents. As of the date hereof, to the knowledge of Parent, none of the Parent
SEC Documents is the subject of ongoing SEC review or investigation. None of Parent’s Subsidiaries is, or
has been at any time, subject to the reporting requirements of Sections 13(a) and 15(d) of the Exchange
Act.
(b) The financial statements of Parent included in the Parent SEC Documents, including all notes and
schedules thereto, complied in all material respects, when filed or if amended prior to the date of this
Agreement, as of the date of such amendment, with the rules and regulations of the SEC with respect
thereto, were prepared in accordance with GAAP applied on a consistent basis during the periods involved
(except as may be indicated in the notes thereto or, in the case of the unaudited statements, as permitted by
Rule 10-01 of Regulation S-X of
Table of Contents
A-32
the SEC) and fairly present in all material respects in accordance with applicable requirements of GAAP
(subject, in the case of the unaudited statements, to normal year-end audit adjustments) the financial
position of Parent and its consolidated Subsidiaries as of their respective dates and the results of
operations and the cash flows of Parent and its consolidated Subsidiaries for the periods presented
therein. The books and records of Parent and its Subsidiaries have been, and are being, maintained in
accordance with GAAP and any other applicable legal and accounting requirements. Ernst & Young LLP is
an independent public accounting firm with respect to Parent and, as of the date of this Agreement, has not
resigned or been dismissed as independent public accountants of Parent.
5.6 Information Supplied. None of the information supplied or to be supplied by Parent for inclusion or
incorporation by reference in (a) the Registration Statement shall contain any untrue statement of a material
fact or omit to state any material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the
statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which they are made, not misleading or (b) the Joint
Proxy Statement will, at the date it is first mailed to stockholders of the Company and to stockholders of
Parent and at the time of the Company Stockholders Meeting and the Parent Stockholders Meeting, contain
any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact required to be stated therein or
necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which they are
made, not misleading. The Joint Proxy Statement and the Registration Statement, each to the extent it
relates to Parent or its Subsidiaries or other information supplied by Parent for inclusion therein, will
comply as to form in all material respects with the provisions of the Securities Act and the Exchange Act
and the rules and regulations thereunder; provided, however, that no representation is made by Parent with
respect to statements made therein based on information supplied by the Company specifically for
inclusion or incorporation by reference therein.
5.7 Absence of Certain Changes or Events.
(a) Since December 31, 2015, there has not been any event, change, effect or development that, individually
or in the aggregate, had or would be reasonably likely to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
(b) From December 31, 2015 through the date of this Agreement, (i) Parent and its Subsidiaries have
conducted their business in the ordinary course of business in all material respects and (ii) neither Parent
nor any of its Subsidiaries has undertaken any action that would be prohibited by Section 6.2(b)(iv) or (v) if
such provision were in effect at all times since December 31, 2015.
5.8 No Undisclosed Liabilities. There are no liabilities of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries of any kind
whatsoever, whether accrued, contingent, absolute, determined, determinable or otherwise, other than:
(a) liabilities adequately provided for on the balance sheet of Parent dated as of March 31, 2016 (including
the notes thereto) contained in Parent’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the three months ended
March 31, 2016; (b) liabilities incurred in the ordinary course of business subsequent to March 31, 2016;
(c) liabilities for fees and expenses incurred in connection with the Transactions; (d) liabilities not required
to be presented on the face of an unaudited interim balance sheet prepared in accordance with GAAP;
(e) incurrence of Indebtedness under existing credit facilities; (f) extensions, renewals or refinancings of
existing Indebtedness (including related premiums and expenses); (g) by Parent that is owed to any wholly-
owned Subsidiary of Parent or by any Subsidiary of Parent that is owed to Parent or a wholly-owned
Subsidiary of Parent; and (h) liabilities that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
5.9 Compliance with Applicable Laws.
(a) Parent and its Subsidiaries hold all franchises, tariffs, grants, authorizations, licenses, permits,
easements, variances, exemptions, consents, certificates, approvals and orders of all Governmental
Entities necessary for the lawful conduct of their respective businesses (the “Parent Permits”), except
where the failure to so hold has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the
aggregate, a Parent
Table of Contents
A-33
Material Adverse Effect. Parent and its Subsidiaries are in compliance with the terms of the Parent Permits,
except where the failure to so comply has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually
or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect. The businesses of Parent and its Subsidiaries are not
currently being conducted, and at no time during the past three years have been conducted, in violation of
any applicable Law, except for violations that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect. To the knowledge of Parent no
investigation or review by any Governmental Entity with respect to Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is
pending or threatened, other than those the outcome of which has not had and would not be reasonably
likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
(b) Except with respect to Tax matters (which are provided for in Section 5.12) and environmental matters
(which are provided for in Section 5.14), Parent and its Subsidiaries are in compliance with, and are not in
default under or in violation of, any applicable Law, except where such non-compliance, default or violation
have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material
Adverse Effect. Parent has not received any written communication since December 31, 2015 from a
Governmental Entity that alleges that Parent is not in compliance with or is in default or violation of any
applicable Law, except where such non-compliance, default or violation would not, individually or in the
aggregate, be reasonably likely to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
5.10 Litigation. Except for such matters as have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have,
individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect, there is no (a) Proceeding pending, or to
the knowledge of Parent, threatened against Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, or (b) judgment, decree,
injunction, ruling or order of any Governmental Entity or arbitrator outstanding against Parent or any of its
Subsidiaries. To the knowledge of Parent, as of the date hereof, no officer or director of Parent is a
defendant in any material Proceeding in connection with his or her status as an officer or director of Parent
or any Subsidiary of Parent. There is no judgment, settlement, order, decision, direction, writ, injunction,
decree, stipulation or legal or arbitration award of, or promulgated or issued by, any Governmental Entity in
effect to which any of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries is a party or subject that materially interferes with, or
would be reasonably likely to materially interfere with, the business of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries as
currently conducted.
5.11 Compensation; Benefits.
(a) Set forth on Schedule 5.11(a) of the Parent Disclosure Letter is a list, as of the date hereof, of all
Employee Benefit Plans of Parent (“Parent Plans”). True, correct and complete copies of each of the Parent
Plans and related trust documents and favorable determination letters, if applicable, have been furnished or
made available to the Company or its Representatives, along with the most recent report filed on Form 5500
with respect to each Parent Plan required to file a Form 5500 and summary plan description.
(b) Each Parent Plan has been maintained in compliance with all applicable Laws, except where the failure
to so comply has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a
Parent Material Adverse Effect.
(c) There are no actions, suits or claims pending (other than routine claims for benefits) or, to the
knowledge of Parent, threatened against, or with respect to, any of the Parent Plans, except for such
actions, suits or claims that are not material to Parent and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole.
(d) All material contributions required to be made to the Parent Plans pursuant to their terms have been
timely made.
(e) There are no material unfunded benefit obligations that have not been properly accrued for in Parent’s
financial statements or disclosed in the notes thereto in accordance with GAAP.
Table of Contents
A-34
(f) None of Parent or any member of its Aggregated Group contributes to or has an obligation to contribute
to, and no Parent Plan is, a plan subject to Title IV of ERISA (including a multiemployer plan within the
meaning of Section 3(37) of ERISA), Section 302 of ERISA, or Section 412 of the Code.
5.12 Taxes. After reasonable diligence, neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries is aware of the existence
of any fact, or has taken or agreed to take any action, that would prevent the Merger from qualifying as a
“reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code. Parent does not have knowledge of any
agreement, plan or other circumstance that would prevent the Merger from qualifying as a “reorganization”
within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code.
5.13 Oil and Gas Matters.
(a) Except as would not be reasonably likely to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect and except for
property (i) sold or otherwise disposed of in the ordinary course of business since the dates of the reserve
report prepared by Wright & Company, Inc. (the “Parent Independent Petroleum Engineers”) relating to the
Parent interests referred to therein as of December 31, 2015 (the “Parent Reserve Report”) or (ii) reflected in
the Parent Reserve Report or in the Parent SEC Reports as having been sold or otherwise disposed of, as
of the date hereof, Parent and its Subsidiaries have good and defensible title to all Oil and Gas Properties
forming the basis for the reserves reflected in the Parent Reserve Report and in each case as attributable to
interests owned by Parent and its Subsidiaries, free and clear of any Encumbrances, except for Permitted
Encumbrances. For purposes of the foregoing sentence, “good and defensible title” means that Parent’s or
one or more of its Subsidiaries’, as applicable, title (as of the date hereof and as of the Closing) to each of
the Oil and Gas Properties held or owned by them (or purported to be held or owned by them) (1) entitles
Parent (or one or more of its Subsidiaries, as applicable) to receive (after satisfaction of all Production
Burdens applicable thereto), not less than the net revenue interest share shown in the Parent Reserve
Report of all Hydrocarbons produced from such Oil and Gas Properties throughout the life of such Oil and
Gas Properties, (2) obligates Parent (or one or more of its Subsidiaries, as applicable) to bear a percentage
of the costs and expenses for the maintenance and development of, and operations relating to, such Oil
and Gas Properties, of not greater than the working interest shown on the Parent Reserve Report for such
Oil and Gas Properties (other than any positive differences in such percentage) and the applicable working
interest shown on the Parent Reserve Report for such Oil and Gas Properties that are accompanied by a
proportionate (or greater) net revenue interest in such Oil and Gas Properties and (3) is free and clear of all
Encumbrances (other than Permitted Encumbrances).
(b) The factual, non-interpretive data supplied by Parent to the Parent Independent Petroleum Engineers
relating to the Parent interests referred to in the Parent Reserve Report, by or on behalf of Parent and its
Subsidiaries that was material to such firm’s estimates of proved oil and gas reserves attributable to the Oil
and Gas Properties of Parent and its Subsidiaries in connection with the preparation of the Parent Reserve
Report was, as of the time provided, accurate in all material respects. The oil and gas reserve estimates of
Parent set forth in the Parent Reserve Report are derived from reports that have been prepared by the
Parent Independent Petroleum Engineers, and such reserve estimates fairly reflect, in all material respects,
the oil and gas reserves of Parent at the dates indicated therein and are in accordance with SEC guidelines
applicable thereto applied on a consistent basis throughout the periods involved. Except for changes
generally affecting the oil and gas exploration, development and production industry (including changes in
commodity prices) and normal depletion by production, there has been no change in respect of the matters
addressed in the Parent Reserve Report that has had or would be reasonably likely to have, individually or
in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect.
(c) Except for any such matters that, individually or in the aggregate, have not had and would not be
reasonably likely to have a Parent Material Adverse Effect, all proceeds from the sale of Hydrocarbons
produced from the Oil and Gas Properties of Parent and its Subsidiaries are being received by such selling
entities in a timely manner and no proceeds from the sale of Hydrocarbons produced from any such Oil and
Gas Properties are being held in suspense (by Parent, any of its Subsidiaries, any third party operator
thereof or any other Person or individual) for any reason except as reported in the Parent SEC Documents.
Table of Contents
A-35
(d) Except as has not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a
Parent Material Adverse Effect, (i) all rentals, shut-ins and similar payments owed to any Person or
individual under (or otherwise with respect to) any such Oil and Gas Leases have been properly and timely
paid, (ii) all royalties, minimum royalties, overriding royalties and other Production Burdens with respect to
any Oil and Gas Properties owned or held by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries have been timely and
properly paid and (iii) none of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries (and, to the Parent’s knowledge, no third
party operator) has violated any provision of, or taken or failed to take any act that, with or without notice,
lapse of time, or both, would constitute a default under the provisions of any Oil and Gas Lease (or entitle
the lessor thereunder to cancel or terminate such Oil and Gas Lease) included in the Oil and Gas Properties
owned or held by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries.
5.14 Environmental Matters.
(a) Except for those matters that have not had and would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in
the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect:
(i) Parent and its Subsidiaries and their respective operations and assets are in compliance with all
Environmental Laws and Environmental Permits;
(ii) Parent and its Subsidiaries have obtained all Environmental Permits required under Environmental Laws
to operate the business as currently operated;
(iii) Parent and its Subsidiaries are not subject to Proceeding under Environmental Laws that have any
payments or obligations outstanding or unfulfilled;
(iv) since January 1, 2014, none of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries has received any written notice from any
Governmental Entity or any third party alleging, with respect to any such entity or any of their respective
assets, real properties (whether owned or leased or formerly owned or leased) or operations, the violation
of or liability under any Environmental Law (including liability as a potentially responsible party under
CERCLA or any analogous state laws) or any Environmental Permit that remains pending or unresolved;
(v) there are no Proceedings pending, or, to the knowledge of Parent, threatened by a Governmental Entity
or other third party against Parent or its Subsidiaries that allege a violation of or liability under any
Environmental Law, and, to the knowledge of Parent, there are no existing facts or circumstances that
would reasonably be expected to give rise to any such Proceeding;
(vi) there have been no Releases of Hazardous Materials at any property currently or, to the knowledge of
Parent, formerly owned, operated or otherwise used by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, or, to the
knowledge of Parent, by any predecessors of Parent or any Subsidiary of Parent, which Releases are
reasonably likely to result in liability to Parent under Environmental Law, and neither Parent nor any of its
Subsidiaries has received any written notice asserting a liability or obligation under any Environmental
Laws with respect to the investigation, remediation, removal, or monitoring of the Release of any Hazardous
Materials at or from any property currently or formerly owned, operated, or otherwise used by Parent, or at
or from any off-site location where Hazardous Materials from Parent’s operations have been sent for
treatment, disposal storage or handling; and
(vii) there have been no environmental investigations, studies, audits, or other analyses conducted during
the past three (3) years by or on behalf of, or that are in the possession of, Parent or its Subsidiaries
addressing potentially material environmental matters with respect to any property owned, operated or
otherwise used by any of them that have not been delivered or otherwise made available to the Company
prior to the date hereof.
(b) Except as expressly set forth in this Section 5.14, neither Parent nor its Subsidiaries make any
representation or warranty regarding compliance or failure to comply with, or any actual or contingent
liability under, any Environmental Law.
Table of Contents
A-36
5.15 Opinion of Financial Advisor. The Parent Board has received the opinion of Credit Suisse Securities
(USA) LLC addressed to the Parent Board to the effect that, as of the date this Agreement was approved by
the Parent Board and subject to the assumptions, limitations, qualifications, and other matters considered
in connection with the preparation of its opinion, the Exchange Ratio in the Merger pursuant to this
Agreement was fair, from a financial point of view, to Parent.
5.16 Brokers. Except for the fees and expenses payable to Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC, no broker,
investment banker, or other Person is entitled to any broker’s, finder’s or other similar fee or commission in
connection with the Transactions based upon arrangements made by or on behalf of Parent.
5.17 Ownership of Company Common Stock. Neither Parent nor Merger Sub nor any “affiliate” or
“associate” (as such terms are used in Section 203 of the DGCL) of Parent or Merger Sub, is, or was or
became at any time during the last three years, an “interested stockholder” (as such term is defined in
Section 203 of the DGCL).
5.18 Business Conduct. Merger Sub was incorporated on May 13, 2016. Since its inception, Merger Sub has
not engaged in any activity, other than such actions in connection with (a) its organization and (b) the
preparation, negotiation and execution of this Agreement and the Transactions. Merger Sub has no
operations, has not generated any revenues and has no liabilities other than those incurred in connection
with the foregoing and in association with the Merger as provided in this Agreement.
5.19 Corporate Governance.
(a) As of the date of this Agreement, Parent has disclosed to Parent’s auditors and the Parent Board’s audit
committee (A) all known significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of
internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect in any material
respect Parent’s ability to record, process, summarize and report its consolidated financial information and
(B) any known fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the Parent’s internal controls over financial reporting. Since January 1, 2014, neither
Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries has made or permitted to remain outstanding any “extensions of credit”
(within the meaning of Section 402 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act) or prohibited loans to any executive officer
of Parent (as defined in Rule 3b-7 under the Exchange Act) or director of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries.
(b) Parent has established and maintains “disclosure controls and procedures” (as such term is defined in
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act). To the knowledge of Parent, such disclosures
controls and procedures are designed to ensure that material information relating to Parent, including its
Subsidiaries, required to be disclosed by Parent, including its Subsidiaries, in the reports that it files or
submits under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to Parent’s principal executive officer
and its principal financial officer to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure; and such
disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed by
Parent in the reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized
and reported within the time periods specified in SEC rules and forms.
5.20 Regulatory Matters.
(a) Neither Parent nor any of its Subsidiaries is (A) an “investment company” or a company “controlled” by
an “investment company” within the meaning of the U.S. Investment Company Act of 1940 or (B) a “holding
company”, a “subsidiary company” of a “holding company”, an affiliate of a “holding company”, a “public
utility” or a “public-utility company” as each such term is defined in the U.S. Public Utility Holding Company
Act of 2005.
(b) All natural gas pipeline Systems and related facilities owned by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries are
(A) “gathering facilities” that are exempt from regulation by the U.S. Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission under the Natural Gas Act of 1938, and (B) not subject to rate regulation or comprehensive
nondiscriminatory access regulation under the laws of any state or other local jurisdiction.
A-37
Table of Contents
5.21 No Additional Representations.
(a) Except for the representations and warranties made in this Article V, neither Parent nor any other Person
makes any express or implied representation or warranty with respect to Parent or its Subsidiaries or their
respective businesses, operations, assets, liabilities or conditions (financial or otherwise) in connection
with this Agreement or the Transactions, and Parent hereby disclaims any such other representations or
warranties. In particular, without limiting the foregoing disclaimer, neither Parent nor any other Person
makes or has made any representation or warranty to the Company or any of its Affiliates or
Representatives with respect to (i) any financial projection, forecast, estimate, budget or prospect
information relating to Parent or any of its Subsidiaries or their respective businesses; or (ii) except for the
representations and warranties made by Parent in this Article V, any oral or written information presented to
the Company or any of its Affiliates or Representatives in the course of their due diligence investigation of
Parent, the negotiation of this Agreement or in the course of the Transactions.
(b) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Agreement to the contrary, Parent acknowledges and
agrees that none of the Company or any other Person has made or is making any representations or
warranties relating to the Company or its Subsidiaries whatsoever, express or implied, beyond those
expressly given by the Company in Article IV, including any implied representation or warranty as to the
accuracy or completeness of any information regarding the Company furnished or made available to
Parent, or any of its Representatives and that neither Parent nor Merger Sub has relied upon any such
representation or warranty. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, Parent acknowledges that no
representations or warranties are made with respect to any projections, forecasts, estimates, budgets or
prospect information that may have been made available to Parent or any of its Representatives (including
in certain “data rooms,” “virtual data rooms,” management presentations or in any other form in
expectation of, or in connection with, the Merger or the other Transactions).
ARTICLE VI
COVENANTS AND AGREEMENTS
6.1 Conduct of Company Business Pending the Merger. Except as set forth on Schedule 6.1 of the
Company Disclosure Letter, as expressly provided by this Agreement, as required by applicable Law or
otherwise consented to by Parent in writing (which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or
conditioned):
(a) the Company covenants and agrees that, until the earlier of the Effective Time and the termination of this
Agreement pursuant to Article VIII, it shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to (i) conduct its
businesses in the ordinary course consistent with past practice and, subject to Section 6.1(b)(ix), shall use
reasonable best efforts to preserve intact its present business organization, retain the Company’s current
officers and key employees, and preserve its relationships with its key customers and suppliers, (ii) comply,
in all material respects, with all applicable Law, and (iii) not voluntarily resign, transfer or relinquish any right
as operator of any of their material Oil and Gas Properties; and
(b) without limiting the generality of the foregoing, until the earlier of the Effective Time and the termination
of this Agreement pursuant to Article VIII the Company shall not, and shall cause its Subsidiaries not to:
(i) (A) declare, set aside or pay any dividends on, or make any other distribution in respect of any
outstanding capital stock of, or other equity interests in, the Company or its Subsidiaries except for
dividends and distributions by a direct or indirect wholly owned Subsidiary of the Company to the
Company or a direct or indirect wholly owned Subsidiary of the Company; (B) split, combine or reclassify
any capital stock of, or other equity interests in, the Company or any of its Subsidiaries; or (C) purchase,
redeem or otherwise acquire, or offer to purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, any capital stock of, or
other equity interests in, the Company, except as required by the terms of any capital stock or equity
interest of a Subsidiary or as required by any existing Company Plan, in each case, as such terms, plans or
agreements are in effect as of the date hereof;
Table of Contents
A-38
(ii) offer, issue, deliver, grant or sell, or authorize or propose to offer, issue, deliver, grant or sell, any capital
stock of, or other equity interests in, the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or any securities convertible
into, or any rights, warrants or options to acquire, any such capital stock or equity interests, other than:
(A) the delivery of Company Common Stock upon the expiration of any restrictions on any restricted stock
granted under the Company Stock Plan, (B) issuances by a wholly-owned Subsidiary of the Company of
such Subsidiary’s capital stock or other equity interests to the Company or any other wholly-owned
Subsidiary of the Company, (C) issuances of restricted stock granted under the Company Stock Plan to
non-officer employees (provided, however, that the aggregate amount of all such increases shall in no
event exceed $2,500,000) and (D) withholding of Company Common Stock to satisfy any Tax withholding
obligations with respect to awards granted pursuant to the Company Stock Plan.
(iii) amend or propose to amend the Company’s Organizational Documents or the Organizational
Documents of any of the Company’s Significant Subsidiaries;
(iv) (A) merge, consolidate, combine or amalgamate with any Person other than another wholly-owned
Subsidiary of the Company, (B) acquire or agree to acquire (including by merging or consolidating with,
purchasing any equity interest in or a substantial portion of the assets of, licensing, or by any other
manner), any business or any corporation, partnership, association or other business organization or
division thereof, in each case other than (1) pursuant to an agreement of the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries in effect on the date of this Agreement, (2) acquisitions for which the consideration is
$20,000,000 individually and $100,000,000 in the aggregate and (3) acquisitions and licenses in the ordinary
course of business or (C) make any loans, advances or capital contributions to, or investments in, any
Person (other than the Company or any of its wholly-owned Subsidiaries), except for (1) loans, advances or
capital contributions in the form of trade credit granted to customers in the ordinary course of business
consistent with past practices, and (2) capital contributions to, or investments in, any Person not in excess
of $10,000,000 individually or $30,000,000 in the aggregate;
(v) sell, lease or otherwise dispose of, or agree to sell, lease or otherwise dispose of, any material portion of
its assets or properties, other than (A) pursuant to an agreement of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries
in effect on the date of this Agreement or (B) sales, leases or dispositions (1) for which the consideration is
$20,000,000 or less or (2) made in the ordinary course of business.
(vi) consummate, authorize, recommend, propose or announce an intention to adopt a plan of complete or
partial liquidation or dissolution of the Company or any of its Significant Subsidiaries;
(vii) change in any material respect their material accounting principles, practices or methods, except as
required by GAAP or statutory accounting requirements;
(viii) except as otherwise done pursuant to an acquisition permitted by Section 6.1(b)(iv), (A) make or
rescind any material election relating to Taxes (including any election for any joint venture, partnership,
limited liability company or other investment where the Company has the authority to make such binding
election, but excluding any election that must be made periodically and consistent with past practice),
(B) settle or compromise any material Proceeding relating to Taxes, except where the amount of such
settlement or compromise does not exceed the greater of 125% of the reserve for such matter on the
Company financial statements or $1,000,000, or (C) change in any material respects any of its methods of
reporting income or deductions for income Tax purposes from those employed in the preparation of its
income Tax Returns that have been filed for prior taxable years;
(ix) (A) grant any increases in the compensation (including bonuses) or benefits payable or to become
payable to any of its directors, officers or employees with an annualized salary of $225,000 or more, except
increases required by applicable Law or any Company Plan; (B) grant any increases in the compensation
(including bonuses) or benefits payable or to become payable to any of employees with an annualized
salary less than $225,000, except for increases in the compensation or benefits of such employees made in
the ordinary course of business for the purpose of retention or hiring of that individual; (C) pay or agree to
pay to any director, officer or key employee making an annualized salary of more than $225,000, whether
past
Table of Contents
A-39
or present, any material pension, retirement allowance or other employee benefit not required by any of the
existing Company Plans; (D) enter into any new, or materially amend any existing, employment, retention,
change in control or severance or termination agreement with any director, officer or key employee with an
annualized salary of $225,000 or more; (E) establish or become obligated under any collective bargaining
agreement or any material Employee Benefit Plan that was not in existence or approved by the Company
Board in the ordinary course of business prior to the date of this Agreement, or amend or terminate any
such plan or arrangement in existence on the date of this Agreement if such amendment would have the
effect of materially enhancing any benefits thereunder; (F) fund (or agree to fund) any compensation or
benefits under any Employee Benefit Plan, including through a “rabbi” or similar trust, except where
required by any Employee Benefit Plan existing on the date of this Agreement; or (G) hire any new
employee or independent contractor or terminate the employment or service relationship of any employee
or independent contractor, other than where such hiring or termination is in the ordinary course of
business consistent with past practice;
(x) incur, create or assume any Indebtedness or guarantee any such Indebtedness of another Person or
create any Encumbrances on any property or assets of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries in
connection with any Indebtedness thereof, other than Permitted Encumbrances; provided, however, that
the foregoing shall not restrict the (A) incurrence of Indebtedness (1) under existing credit facilities, (2) for
extensions, renewals or refinancings of existing Indebtedness (including related premiums and expenses),
(3) additional borrowings in an amount not to exceed $15,000,000 in the aggregate, or (4) by the Company
that is owed to any wholly-owned Subsidiary of the Company or by any Subsidiary of the Company that is
owed to the Company or a wholly-owned Subsidiary of the Company, or (B) the creation of any
Encumbrances securing any Indebtedness permitted to be incurred by clause (A) above;
(xi) (A) enter into any contract that would be a Company Contract other than in the ordinary course of
business consistent with past practice, or (B) modify, amend, terminate or assign, waive or assign any
material right or benefit under, any Company Contract;
(xii) settle or offer or propose to settle, any Proceeding involving the payment of monetary damages by the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries of any amount exceeding $10,000,000 in the aggregate; provided,
however, that neither the Company nor any of its Subsidiaries shall settle or compromise any Proceeding if
such settlement or compromise (A) involves a material conduct remedy or material injunctive or similar
relief, (B) involves an admission of criminal wrongdoing by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or
(C) has a restrictive impact on the business of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries in any material
respect;
(xiii) authorize or make capital expenditures that are in the aggregate greater than 125 % of the aggregate
amount of capital expenditures scheduled to be made in the Company’s capital expenditure budget for the
period indicated as set forth in Schedule 6.1(b)(xiii) of the Company Disclosure Letter, except for capital
expenditures to repair damage resulting from insured casualty events where there is a reasonable basis for
a claim of insurance or made in response to any emergency, whether caused by war, terrorism, weather
events, public health events, outages or otherwise;
(xiv) fail to use reasonable best efforts to maintain, with financially responsible insurance companies,
insurance in such amounts and against such risks and losses as is maintained by it at present;
(xv) take any action that would or would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially delay or materially
impede the consummation of any of the Transactions;
(xvi) amend or modify the Upstream MLP GP PSA in a manner that would impose or leave outstanding any
additional material continuing liabilities relating to or arising out of the ownership of Memorial Production
Partners GP LLC on the Company or any of its Subsidiaries after the Effective Time;
(xvii) enter into or amend any Company Related Party Transaction, other than in the ordinary course of
business consistent with past practice; or
(xviii) agree or commit to take any action that is prohibited by this Section 6.1(b).
A-40
Table of Contents
6.2 Conduct of Parent Business Pending the Merger. Except as set forth on Schedule 6.2 of the Parent
Disclosure Letter, as expressly provided by this Agreement, as required by applicable Law or otherwise
consented to by the Company in writing (which consent, other than in the case of Section 6.2(b)(ix), shall
not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned):
(a) Parent covenants and agrees that, until the earlier of the Effective Time and the termination of this
Agreement pursuant to Article VIII, it shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to, (i) conduct its
businesses in the ordinary course consistent with past practice and shall use reasonable best efforts to
preserve intact its present business organization, retain Parent’s current officers and key employees,
(ii) comply, in all material respects, with applicable Law and (iii) not voluntarily resign, transfer or relinquish
any right as operator of any of their material Oil and Gas Properties; and
(b) without limiting the generality of the foregoing, until the earlier of the Effective Time and the termination
of this Agreement pursuant to Article VIII, Parent shall not, and shall cause its Subsidiaries not to:
(i) (A) declare, set aside or pay any dividends on, or make any other distribution in respect of any
outstanding capital stock of, or other equity interests in, Parent or its Subsidiaries, except for dividends and
distributions by a direct or indirect Subsidiary of Parent to Parent or a direct or indirect Subsidiary of
Parent; (B) split, combine or reclassify any capital stock of, or other equity interests in, Parent or any of its
Subsidiaries; or (C) purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire, or offer to purchase, redeem or otherwise
acquire, any capital stock of, or other equity interests in, Parent, except as required by the terms of any
capital stock or equity interest of a Subsidiary or as contemplated by any director compensation plan,
Employee Benefit Plan or employment agreement of Parent in each case existing as of the date hereof;
(ii) offer, issue, deliver, grant or sell, or authorize or propose to offer, issue, deliver, grant or sell, any capital
stock of, or other equity interests in, Parent or any of its Subsidiaries or any securities convertible into, or
any rights, warrants or options to acquire, any such capital stock or equity interests, other than: (A) subject
to compliance with Section 6.2(b)(vii) in all respects, issuances of Parent Common Stock as consideration
for, or to finance or refinance the Indebtedness (including the Company Senior Notes) incurred to finance,
or assumed as a result of, acquisitions by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries of business or assets,
(B) issuances and sales of Parent Common Stock for cash consideration (other than pursuant to clause
(A) above) if the number of shares of Parent Common Stock so issued does not exceed in the aggregate
5% of the issued and outstanding Parent Common Stock as of the date of this Agreement, (C) the delivery
of Parent Common Stock upon the expiration of any restrictions on any restricted stock granted under the
Parent Stock Plan, (D) issuances by a wholly-owned Subsidiary of Parent of such Subsidiary’s capital stock
or other equity interests to Parent or any other wholly-owned Subsidiary of Parent, (E) issuances of
restricted stock granted under the Parent Stock Plan to employees and directors in amounts consistent
with past practice or (F) withholding of Parent Common Stock to satisfy any Tax withholding obligations
with respect to awards granted pursuant to the Parent Stock Plan;
(iii) amend or propose to amend Parent’s Organizational Documents;
(iv) consummate, authorize, recommend, propose or announce an intention to adopt a plan of complete or
partial liquidation or dissolution of Parent or any of its Significant Subsidiaries;
(v) change in any material respect their material accounting principles, practices or methods, except as
required by GAAP or statutory accounting requirements or similar principles in non-U.S. jurisdictions or as
disclosed in any Parent SEC Document;
(vi) take any action, cause any action to be taken, knowingly fail to take any action or knowingly fail to
cause any action to be taken, which action or failure to act would prevent or impede, or would be
reasonably likely to prevent or impede, the Merger from qualifying as a reorganization within the meaning of
Section 368(a) of the Code;
(vii) (A) enter into, participate or engage in or continue any discussions or negotiations with respect to (I) a
merger, consolidation, combination or amalgamation with any Person other than another wholly-owned
Table of Contents
A-41
Subsidiary of Parent; (II) an acquisition or agreement to acquire (including by merging or consolidating
with, purchasing any equity interest in or a substantial portion of the assets of, licensing, or by any other
manner), any business or any corporation, partnership, association or other business organization or
division thereof; or (III) entry into any partnership, joint venture or similar arrangement involving a material
investment or expenditure of funds by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries, in each case if such action would
or would reasonably be expected to prevent, materially delay or materially impede Parent’s or Merger Sub’s
ability to consummate any of the Transactions or (B) take any action that would or would reasonably be
expected to prevent, materially delay or materially impede the consummation of any of the Transactions;
(viii) agree or commit to take any action that is prohibited by clauses (i) through (vii) of this Section 6.2(b); or
(ix) (A) terminate, amend, modify, assign or waive or assign any rights under any provision of, the Voting
Agreement, (B) enter into any other contract, agreement, arrangement or understanding with the parties to
the Voting Agreement that would have the effect of a termination, amendment, modification, assignment,
waiver or assignment of rights under any provision of the Voting Agreement or (C) agree or commit to take
any action that is prohibited by this Section 6.2(b)(ix).
6.3 No Solicitation.
(a) From and after the date of this Agreement, the Company will, and will cause its Subsidiaries and use
reasonable best efforts to cause its Representatives to, immediately cease, and cause to be terminated, any
solicitation, encouragement, discussion or negotiation with any Person conducted heretofore by the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries or any of its or their Representatives with respect to any Competing
Proposal or any indication of interest that would or would reasonably be expected to lead to a Competing
Proposal.
(b) From and after the date of this Agreement and except as otherwise specifically provided for in this
Section 6.3 the Company will not, and will cause its Subsidiaries and use reasonable best efforts to cause
its Representatives not to, directly or indirectly, (i) initiate, solicit or knowingly encourage or knowingly
facilitate (including by way of furnishing or affording access to any non-public information) any inquiries,
proposals or offers regarding, or the making of a Competing Proposal, (ii) conduct, participate or engage in
any discussions or negotiations with any Person with respect to a Competing Proposal, (iii) furnish or
provide any non-public information or data regarding the Company or its Subsidiaries, or access to the
properties, assets or employees of the Company or its Subsidiaries, to any Person except in the ordinary
course of business consistent with past practice (and, in any event, not in connection with or in response
to a Competing Proposal or any indication of interest that would or would reasonably be expected to lead to
a Competing Proposal), (iv) enter into any letter of intent or agreement in principle, or other agreement
providing for a Competing Proposal (other than a confidentiality agreement as provided in Section 6.3(e)
(ii)), or (v) resolve, agree or publicly propose to, or permit the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or any of
its or their Representatives to agree or publicly propose to take any of the actions referred to in this
Section 6.3(b).
(c) Unless specifically permitted by Section 6.3(e), the Company shall not (i) fail to include the Company
Board Recommendation in the Joint Proxy Statement, (ii) withdraw, modify or qualify, or propose publicly to
withdraw, modify or qualify, in a manner adverse to Parent, the Company Board Recommendation,
(iii) recommend, adopt or approve, or propose publicly to recommend, adopt or approve, any Competing
Proposal or (iv) fail to announce publicly within 10 Business Days after a tender or exchange offer relating
to any Company Common Stock shall have been commenced that the Company Board recommends
rejection of such tender or exchange offer and reaffirms the Company Board Recommendation (the taking
of any action described in this Section 6.3(c) being referred to as a “Company Change of
Recommendation”).
(d) From and after the date of this Agreement, the Company shall advise Parent as promptly as practicable
(but in any event within 48 hours) of the receipt by the Company of any Competing Proposal made on or
after the date of this Agreement or any request for non-public information or data relating to the Company
or any of its Subsidiaries made by any Person that has made or informs the Company that it is considering
making a
Table of Contents
A-42
Competing Proposal or any request for discussions or negotiations with the Company or a Representative
of the Company relating to a Competing Proposal, and, in respect of each such Competing Proposal, the
Company shall provide to Parent as promptly as practicable (but in any event within such 48 hour
timeframe) either (A) a copy of any such Competing Proposal made in writing provided to the Company or
any of its Subsidiaries or (B) a written summary of the material terms of such Competing Proposal
(including the identity of the Person making such Competing Proposal). The Company shall keep Parent
reasonably informed of the status and material terms and conditions of each such Competing Proposal and
any material modification or proposed modification thereto, and shall promptly (and in no event later than
24 hours after transmittal or receipt), provide Parent with copies of any material correspondence and, with
respect to material oral communications, a written summary of such correspondence or communications,
between: (x) on the one hand, the Company or any of their Representatives; and (y) on the other hand, the
Person that made or submitted such Competing Proposal or any Representative of such Person. The
Company agrees that neither it nor any of its Subsidiaries or Affiliates has entered into or shall enter into
any agreement with any Person (including any confidentiality agreement contemplated by this Section 6.3)
that prohibits the Company from either providing any information to Parent in accordance with this
Section 6.3 or otherwise complying with any of its obligations pursuant to this Section 6.3. The Company
shall (x) not release or permit the release of any Person from, or amend, waive or permit the amendment or
waiver of any provision of, any “standstill” or similar agreement or provision to which the Company or any
of its Subsidiaries or its Affiliates is or becomes a party or under which any the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries or Affiliates has any rights, and (y) use its reasonable best efforts to enforce each such
agreement or provision.
(e) Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, the Company, directly or indirectly through
one or more of its Representatives, may:
(i) to the extent applicable, comply with Rule 14e-2(a), Item 1012(a) of Regulation M-A and Rule 14d-9
promulgated under the Exchange Act; provided, however, that none of the Company, the Company Board
or any committee thereof shall, except as expressly permitted by Section 6.3(e)(iii) or Section 6.3(e)(v) effect
a Company Change of Recommendation in any disclosure document or communication filed or publicly
issued or made in conjunction with the compliance with such requirements;
(ii) prior to the adoption of this Agreement by the Company’s stockholders, engage in the activities
prohibited by Sections 6.3(b) with any Person who has made a bona fide Competing Proposal that did not
result from a material breach of Section 6.3 if (A) prior to engaging in any such activities, the Company
Board or any committee thereof determines in good faith, after consultation with its financial advisors and
outside legal counsel, that such Competing Proposal is, or would or would reasonably be expected to lead
to, a Company Superior Proposal and that the failure to engage in such activities would be inconsistent
with the Company Board’s duties under applicable Law, and (B) prior to furnishing any non-public
information that is prohibited from being furnished pursuant to Section 6.3(b), the Company receives an
executed confidentiality and standstill agreement from such Person containing terms that are, in the
aggregate, no less favorable to the Company than those contained in the Confidentiality Agreement and
otherwise complying with the provisions of this Section 6.3; provided, however, that the Company shall
promptly provide to Parent any information concerning the Company provided to any other Person in
connection with a Competing Proposal that was not previously provided to the Parent;
(iii) prior to the adoption of this Agreement by the Company’s stockholders, in response to a bona fide
Competing Proposal that did not result from a material breach of this Section 6.3, if the Company Board (or
any committee thereof) so chooses, cause the Company to terminate this Agreement pursuant to
Section 8.1(d)(i) or effect a Company Change of Recommendation, in each case only after satisfaction of all
of the following conditions:
(A) the Company Board (or a committee thereof) determines in good faith after consultation with its financial
advisors and outside legal counsel that such Competing Proposal is a Company Superior Proposal and
that the failure to effect a Company Change of Recommendation would be inconsistent with its duties
under applicable Law (taking into account any adjustment to the terms and conditions of the Merger
proposed by Parent in response to such Competing Proposal);
Table of Contents
A-43
(B) the Company shall have given notice (a “Company Superior Proposal Notice”) to Parent that the
Company has received such proposal, which notice shall include (1) the material terms and conditions of
such proposal, (2) complete copies of any written proposal or offers (including proposed definitive
agreements providing for the Competing Proposal for such Company Superior Proposal in the form to be
entered into and any other relevant proposed transaction agreements), (3) the identity of the Person making
such Competing Proposal, and (4) the Company’s statement that the Company intends to take such action
at the end of the Negotiation Period;
(C) during the Negotiation Period, the Company shall, and shall cause its Representatives to, (1) negotiate
with Parent and its Representatives in good faith, to the extent Parent wishes to negotiate and so long as
Parent and its Representatives negotiate in good faith, to make such adjustments to the terms and
conditions of this Agreement so that such Company Superior Proposal ceases to constitute a Company
Superior Proposal and (2) keep Parent and its Representatives reasonably informed with respect to the
status and changes in the material terms and conditions of such Competing Proposal or other change in
circumstances related thereto; provided, however, that each time material modifications to the financial
terms of a Competing Proposal determined to be a Company Superior Proposal are made the Negotiation
Period shall be extended for 24 hours after Parent’s receipt of written notification of such modifications;
and
(D) the Company Board shall have considered all revisions to the terms of this Agreement irrevocably
offered in writing by Parent and, at the end of the Negotiation Period, shall have determined in good faith
that (1) such Competing Proposal continues to constitute a Company Superior Proposal even if such
revisions were to be given effect and (2) the failure to effect a Company Change of Recommendation would
be inconsistent with its duties under applicable Law;
(iv) prior to the adoption of this Agreement by the Company’s stockholders, seek clarification from (but not
engage in negotiations with or provide non-public information to) any Person that has made a Competing
Proposal solely to clarify and understand the terms and conditions of such proposal to provide adequate
information for the Company Board or any committee thereof to make an informed determination under
Section 6.3(e)(ii); and
(v) prior to the adoption of this Agreement by the Company’s stockholders, in response to a Company
Intervening Event, if the Company Board (or any committee thereof) so chooses, cause the Company to
effect a Company Change of Recommendation, in each case only after satisfaction of all of the following
conditions:
(A) the Company Board (or a committee thereof) determines in good faith after consultation with its financial
advisors and outside legal counsel that the failure to effect the Company Change of Recommendation
would be inconsistent with its duties under applicable Law;
(B) the Company shall have given notice (a “Company Change of Recommendation Notice”), which notice
shall include (1) a description of the reasons for the Company Change of Recommendation and (2) the
Company’s statement that the Company intends to take such action at the end of the Negotiation Period;
(C) during the Negotiation Period, the Company shall, and shall cause its Representatives to, negotiate with
Parent and its Representatives in good faith, to the extent Parent wishes to negotiate and so long as Parent
and its Representatives negotiate in good faith, to make such adjustments to the terms and conditions of
this Agreement in such a manner that would obviate the need to effect a Company Change of
Recommendation; and
(D) the Company Board shall have considered all revisions to the terms of this Agreement irrevocably
offered in writing by Parent and, at the end of the Negotiation Period, shall have determined in good faith
that such Company Intervening Event remains in effect and the failure to effect the Company Change of
Recommendation in response to such Company Intervening Event would be inconsistent with its duties
under applicable Law, even if such revisions were to be given effect.
Table of Contents
A-44
(f) Notwithstanding anything in this Agreement to the contrary, the Company may inform any Person of the
existence of the provisions of this Section 6.3.
(g) The Company shall use its reasonable best efforts to inform all Representatives of such Company and
its Subsidiaries and Affiliates of the restrictions described in this Section 6.3. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary in this Section 6.3, any action, or failure to take action, that is taken by a Representative of the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries or Affiliates that, if taken by the Company would have been a breach of
this Section 6.3, shall be deemed to be a breach of this Section 6.3 by the Company.
6.4 Parent Change in Recommendation. Except as specifically permitted in this Section 6.4, Parent may not
make a Parent Change of Recommendation. Prior to the obtaining of the Parent Stockholder Approval, the
Parent Board (or any committee thereof) may make a Parent Change of Recommendation in response to a
Parent Intervening Event if the Parent Board shall have reasonably determined in good faith, after
consultation with its financial advisors and outside legal counsel, that the failure of the Parent Board to
make such Parent Change of Recommendation would be inconsistent with the Parent Board’s duties under
applicable Law; provided, however, that the Parent Board (or any committee thereof) shall not make a
Parent Change of Recommendation, unless prior to taking such action, (A) Parent has given the Company
prior written notice informing the Company that Parent intends to make such Parent Change of
Recommendation at the end of the Negotiation Period and a description of the reasons for the Parent
Change of Recommendation (such notice being referred to herein as a “Parent Change of
Recommendation Notice”); (B) during the Negotiation Period, Parent shall have negotiated in good faith,
and shall have caused its Representatives to negotiate in good faith, with the Company and its
Representatives, to the extent the Company wishes to negotiate and so long as the Company and its
Representatives negotiate in good faith, to make such adjustments to the terms and conditions of this
Agreement in such a manner that would obviate the need for making such Parent Change of
Recommendation; and (C) following the end of such Negotiation Period, the Parent Board shall have
considered all revisions to the terms of this Agreement irrevocably offered in writing by the Company and,
at the end of the Negotiation Period, and shall have determined in good faith that such Parent Intervening
Event remains in effect and the failure to make such Parent Change of Recommendation in response to
such Parent Intervening Event would be inconsistent with the Parent Board’s duties under applicable Law.
6.5 Preparation of Joint Proxy Statement and Registration Statement.
(a) Parent will promptly furnish to the Company such data and information relating to it and Merger Sub as
the Company may reasonably request for the purpose of including such data and information in the Joint
Proxy Statement and any amendments or supplements thereto used by the Company to obtain the
adoption by its stockholders of this Agreement. The Company will promptly furnish to Parent such data
and information relating to it and its Subsidiaries as Parent may reasonably request for the purpose of
including such data and information in the Registration Statement and any amendments or supplements.
(b) Promptly following the date hereof, the Company and Parent shall cooperate in preparing and shall
cause to be filed with the SEC a mutually acceptable Joint Proxy Statement relating to the matters to be
submitted to the holders of Company Common Stock at the Company Stockholders Meeting and the
holders of Parent Common Stock at the Parent Stockholders Meeting, and Parent shall prepare and file with
the SEC the Registration Statement (of which the Joint Proxy Statement will be a part). Parent and the
Company shall each use its reasonable best efforts to cause the Registration Statement to become
effective under the Securities Act as soon after such filing as practicable and to keep the Registration
Statement effective as long as is necessary to consummate the Merger. All correspondence and
communications to the SEC made by the Company or Parent with respect to the Transactions will be
provided to the other party with an opportunity to review and comment thereon, prior to such
communication or correspondence being made to the SEC.
(c) Parent and the Company shall make all necessary filings with respect to the Merger and the
Transactions under the Securities Act and the Exchange Act and applicable blue sky laws and the rules
and
Table of Contents
A-45
regulations thereunder. Each party will advise the other, promptly after it receives notice thereof, of the time
when the Registration Statement has become effective or any supplement or amendment has been filed,
the issuance of any stop order, the suspension of the qualification of the Parent Common Stock issuable in
connection with the Merger for offering or sale in any jurisdiction, or any request by the SEC for
amendment of the Joint Proxy Statement or the Registration Statement or comments thereon and
responses thereto or requests by the SEC for additional information. No amendment or supplement to the
Joint Proxy Statement or the Registration Statement shall be filed without the approval of the parties, which
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed; provided, however, that, with respect to
documents filed by a party that are incorporated by reference in the Joint Proxy Statement or the
Registration Statement, this right of approval shall apply only with respect to information relating to the
other party and its Affiliates, their business, financial condition or results of operations or the transactions
contemplated hereby; and provided further that the Company, in connection with any Company Change of
Recommendation, may amend or supplement the Joint Proxy Statement (including by incorporation by
reference) and make other filings with the SEC, to effect such Company Change of Recommendation, and
in such event, this right of approval shall apply only with respect to information relating to Parent and its
Affiliates or their business, financial condition or results of operations.
(d) If at any time prior to the Effective Time, any information relating to Parent or the Company, or any of
their respective Affiliates, officers or directors, should be discovered by Parent or the Company that should
be set forth in an amendment or supplement to the Registration Statement or the Joint Proxy Statement, so
that such documents would not include any misstatement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact
necessary to make the statements therein, in light of the circumstances under which they were made, not
misleading, the party which discovers such information shall promptly notify the other party and an
appropriate amendment or supplement describing such information shall be promptly filed with the SEC
and, to the extent required by applicable Law, disseminated to the stockholders of the Company.
6.6 Stockholders Meetings.
(a) The Company shall take all action necessary in accordance with applicable Laws and the Organizational
Documents of the Company to duly give notice of, convene and hold a meeting of its stockholders for the
purpose of obtaining the Company Stockholder Approval, to be held as promptly as reasonably practicable
following the clearance of the Joint Proxy Statement by the SEC (and in any event no later than 45 days
thereafter). Except as otherwise expressly permitted by Section 6.3, the Company shall (i) through the
Company Board, recommend in the Joint Proxy Statement that the stockholders of the Company vote in
favor of the adoption of this Agreement at the Company Stockholders Meeting and (ii) solicit from
stockholders of the Company proxies in favor of the adoption of this Agreement. The Company shall not
submit to the vote of its stockholders any Competing Proposal. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in this Agreement, the Company (i) shall be required to adjourn or postpone the Company
Stockholders Meeting (A) to the extent necessary to ensure that any required supplement or amendment to
the Joint Proxy Statement is provided to the Company’s stockholders or (B) if, as of the time for which the
Company Stockholders Meeting is scheduled, there are insufficient shares of Company Common Stock
represented (either in person or by proxy) to constitute a quorum necessary to conduct business at such
Company Stockholders Meeting and (ii) may adjourn or postpone the Company Stockholders Meeting if, as
of the time for which the Company Stockholders Meeting is scheduled, there are insufficient shares of
Company Common Stock represented (either in person or by proxy) to obtain the Company Stockholder
Approval; provided, however, that unless otherwise agreed to by the parties, the Company Stockholders
Meeting shall not be adjourned or postponed to a date that is more than 20 Business Days after the date for
which the meeting was previously scheduled (it being understood that such Company Stockholder Meeting
shall be adjourned or postponed every time the circumstances described in the foregoing clauses (i)(A)
and (i)(B) exist, and such Company Stockholder Meeting may be adjourned or postponed every time the
circumstances described in the foregoing clause (ii) exist); and provided further that the Company
Stockholders Meeting shall not be adjourned or postponed to a date on or after two Business Days prior to
the End Date. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company may adjourn or postpone the Company
Stockholders Meeting to a date no later than the second Business Day after the expiration of any
Negotiation Period. Unless
Table of Contents
A-46
this Agreement has been terminated in accordance with its terms, the Company’s obligations to call, give
notice of, convene and hold the Company Stockholder Meeting in accordance with this Section 6.6(a) shall
not be limited or otherwise affected by the making, commencement, disclosure, announcement or
submission of any Company Superior Proposal or Competing Proposal, or by any Company Change of
Recommendation. If requested by Parent, the Company shall promptly provide all voting tabulation reports
relating to the Company Stockholder Meeting that have been prepared by the Company or the Company’s
transfer agent, proxy solicitor or other Representatives.
(b) Parent shall take all action necessary in accordance with applicable Laws and the Organizational
Documents of Parent to duly give notice of, convene and hold a meeting of its stockholders for the purpose
of obtaining the Parent Stockholder Approval, to be held as promptly as reasonably practicable following
the clearance of the Joint Proxy Statement by the SEC (and in any event no later than 45 days thereafter).
Parent’s obligation to give notice of, convene and hold the Parent Stockholder Meeting in accordance with
this Section 6.6(b) shall not be limited or otherwise affected by the making, commencement, disclosure,
announcement or submission of any Alternative Proposal or by any Parent Change of Recommendation.
Except as otherwise expressly permitted by Section 6.4, Parent shall (i) through the Parent Board,
recommend, including through a recommendation in the Joint Proxy Statement, that the stockholders of
Parent vote in favor of the Parent Stock Issuance and (ii) solicit from stockholders of Parent proxies in favor
of the adoption of the Parent Stock Issuance. Parent shall not submit to the vote of its stockholders any
Alternative Proposal. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Agreement, Parent (i) shall
be required to adjourn or postpone the Parent Stockholders Meeting (A) to the extent necessary to ensure
that any required supplement or amendment to the Joint Proxy Statement is provided to the Parent’s
stockholders or (B) if, as of the time for which the Parent Stockholders Meeting is scheduled, there are
insufficient shares of Parent Common Stock represented (either in person or by proxy) to constitute a
quorum necessary to conduct business at such Parent Stockholders Meeting or (ii) may adjourn or
postpone the Parent Stockholders Meeting if, as of the time for which the Parent Stockholders Meeting is
scheduled, there are insufficient shares of Parent Common Stock represented (either in person or by
proxy) to obtain the Parent Stockholder Approval; provided, however, that unless otherwise agreed to by
the parties, the Parent Stockholders Meeting shall not be adjourned or postponed to a date that is more
than 20 Business Days after the date for which the meeting was previously scheduled (it being understood
that such Parent Stockholder Meeting shall be adjourned or postponed every time the circumstances
described in the foregoing clauses (i)(A) and (i)(B) exist, and such Parent Stockholder Meeting may be
adjourned or postponed every time the circumstances described in the foregoing clause (ii) exist); and
provided further that the Parent Stockholders Meeting shall not be adjourned or postponed to a date on or
after two Business Days prior to the End Date. If requested by the Company, Parent shall promptly provide
all voting tabulation reports relating to Parent Stockholder Meeting that have been prepared by Parent or
Parent’s transfer agent, proxy solicitor or other Representatives.
(c) The parties shall use their reasonable best efforts to hold the Company Stockholders Meeting and the
Parent Stockholders Meeting on the same day.
(d) Immediately after the execution of this Agreement, Parent shall duly approve and adopt this Agreement
in its capacity as the sole stockholder of Merger Sub in accordance with applicable Law and the
Organizational Documents of Merger Sub and deliver to the Company evidence of its vote or action by
written consent so approving and adopting this Agreement.
6.7 Access to Information.
(a) Each party shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to, afford to the other party and its officers,
directors, employees, accountants, consultants, agents, legal counsel, financial advisors and other
representatives (collectively, the “Representatives”), during the period prior to the earlier of the Effective
Time and the termination of this Agreement pursuant to the terms of Section 8.1 of this Agreement,
reasonable access, at reasonable times upon reasonable prior notice, to the officers, key employees,
agents, properties, offices and
Table of Contents
A-47
other facilities of such party and its Subsidiaries and to their books, records, contracts and documents and
shall, and shall cause each of its Subsidiaries to, furnish reasonably promptly to the other party and its
Representatives such information concerning its and its Subsidiaries’ business, properties, contracts,
records and personnel as may be reasonably requested, from time to time, by or on behalf of the other
party. Each party and its Representatives shall conduct any such activities in such a manner as not to
interfere unreasonably with the business or operations of the other party or its Subsidiaries or otherwise
cause any unreasonable interference with the prompt and timely discharge by the employees of the other
party and its Subsidiaries of their normal duties. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
Section 6.7(a), each party shall not be required to, or to cause any of its Subsidiaries to, grant access or
furnish information to the other party or any of its Representatives to the extent that such information is
subject to attorney-client privilege or the attorney work-product doctrine or that such access or the
furnishing of such information is prohibited by applicable Law or an existing contract or agreement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, each party shall not have access to personnel records of the other party or
any of its Subsidiaries relating to individual performance or evaluation records, medical histories or other
information that in the other party’s good faith opinion the disclosure of which could subject the other party
or any of its Subsidiaries to risk of liability. Notwithstanding the foregoing, each party shall not be permitted
to conduct any sampling or analysis of any environmental media or building materials at any facility of the
other party or its Subsidiaries without the prior written consent of the other party, which may be granted or
withheld in the other party’s sole discretion. Each party agrees that it will not, and will cause its
Representatives not to, use any information obtained pursuant to this Section 6.7(a) for any purpose
unrelated to the consummation of the Transactions.
(b) The Confidentiality Agreement dated as of February 16, 2016 between Parent and the Company (the
“Confidentiality Agreement”) shall survive the execution and delivery of this Agreement and shall apply to
all information furnished thereunder or hereunder. All information provided to any party or its
Representatives pursuant to or in connection with this Agreement is deemed to be “Evaluation Material” as
defined under the Confidentiality Agreement.
6.8 HSR and Other Approvals.
(a) Except for the filings and notifications made pursuant to Antitrust Laws to which Sections 6.8(b) and (c),
and not this Section 6.8(a), shall apply, promptly following the execution of this Agreement, the parties shall
proceed to prepare and file with the appropriate Governmental Entities all authorizations, consents,
notifications, certifications, registrations, declarations and filings that are necessary in order to
consummate the Transactions and shall diligently and expeditiously prosecute, and shall cooperate fully
with each other in the prosecution of, such matters.
(b) As promptly as reasonably practicable following the execution of this Agreement, but in no event later
than 15 Business Days following the date of this Agreement, the parties shall make any filings required
under the HSR Act. As promptly as reasonably practicable, parties shall make such filings and notifications
as may be required by foreign competition laws and merger regulations (the “Competition Law
Notifications”). Each of Parent and the Company shall cooperate fully with each other and shall furnish to
the other such necessary information and reasonable assistance as the other may reasonably request in
connection with its preparation of any filings under any applicable Antitrust Laws. Unless otherwise agreed,
Parent and the Company shall each use its reasonable best efforts to ensure the prompt expiration of any
applicable waiting period under the HSR Act or any Competition Law Notifications. Parent and the
Company shall each use its reasonable best efforts to respond to and comply with any request for
information from any Governmental Entity charged with enforcing, applying, administering, or investigating
the HSR Act, any Competition Law Notifications or any other Law designed to prohibit, restrict or regulate
actions for the purpose or effect of mergers, monopolization, restraining trade or abusing a dominant
position (collectively, “Antitrust Laws”), including the Federal Trade Commission, the Department of
Justice, any attorney general of any state of the United States, the European Commission or any other
competition authority of any jurisdiction (“Antitrust Authority”). Parent and the Company shall keep each
other apprised of the status of any communications with,
Table of Contents
A-48
and any inquiries or requests for additional information from any Antitrust Authority. Parent shall take any
and all action necessary, including but not limited to (i) selling or otherwise disposing of, or holding
separate and agreeing to sell or otherwise dispose of, assets, categories of assets or businesses of the
Company or Parent or their respective Subsidiaries; (ii) terminating existing relationships, contractual
rights or obligations of the Company or Parent or their respective Subsidiaries; (iii) terminating any venture
or other arrangement; (iv) creating any relationship, contractual rights or obligations of the Company or
Parent or their respective Subsidiaries or (v) effectuating any other change or restructuring of the Company
or Parent or their respective Subsidiaries (and, in each case, to enter into agreements or stipulate to the
entry of an order or decree or file appropriate applications with any Antitrust Authority in connection with
any of the foregoing and in the case of actions by or with respect to the Company or its Subsidiaries or its
or their businesses or assets; provided, however, that any such action may, at the discretion of the
Company, be conditioned upon consummation of the Merger) (each a “Divestiture Action”) to ensure that
no Governmental Entity enters any order, decision, judgment, decree, ruling, injunction (preliminary or
permanent), or establishes any Law or other action preliminarily or permanently restraining, enjoining or
prohibiting the consummation of the Merger, or to ensure that no Antitrust Authority with the authority to
clear, authorize or otherwise approve the consummation of the Merger, fails to do so by the End Date. In the
event that any action is threatened or instituted challenging the Merger as violative of any Antitrust Law, the
Company and Parent shall take such action, including any Divestiture Action, as may be necessary to
avoid, resist or resolve such action. Parent shall be entitled to direct any Proceedings with any Antitrust
Authority or other Person relating to any of the foregoing, provided, however, that it shall afford the
Company a reasonable opportunity to participate therein. In addition, in the event that any permanent or
preliminary injunction or other order is entered or becomes reasonably foreseeable to be entered in any
Proceeding that would make consummation of the Transactions in accordance with the terms of this
Agreement unlawful or that would restrain, enjoin or otherwise prevent or materially delay the
consummation of the Transactions, Parent shall take promptly any and all steps necessary to vacate,
modify or suspend such injunction or order so as to permit such consummation prior to the End Date. The
parties shall take reasonable efforts to share information protected from disclosure under the attorney-
client privilege, work product doctrine, joint defense privilege or any other privilege pursuant to this section
so as to preserve any applicable doctrine or privilege. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
Agreement, none of the Company, Parent or any of their respective Subsidiaries shall be required to take
any Divestiture Action that would have, or that would be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the
aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse Effect or a Company Material Adverse Effect.
(c) The Company, Parent and Merger Sub shall not take any action that would hinder or delay the obtaining
of clearance or the expiration of the required waiting period under the HSR Act, any Competition Law
Notifications or any other applicable Antitrust Law; provided, however, that Parent may take any reasonable
action to resist or reduce the scope of a Divestiture Action, even if it delays such expiration to a later date
(except that such date may not be beyond the End Date).
6.9 Employee Matters.
(a) For a period of one year beginning on the Closing Date, Parent shall cause each individual who is
employed as of the Closing Date by the Company or a Subsidiary thereof (a “Company Employee”) and
who remains employed by Parent or any of its Subsidiaries (including the Surviving Corporation or any of
its Subsidiaries) to be provided with base compensation (salary and wages) and annual incentive
compensation opportunities at a rate no less favorable, with respect to each individual receiving any such
compensation, than that received by similarly-situated employees of Parent or its Subsidiaries.
(b) Parent shall take all actions necessary or appropriate to permit each Company Employee to either
continue to participate from and after the Closing Date in the Company Plans or be eligible to participate
from and after the Closing Date in Employee Benefit Plans of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries (including the
Surviving Corporation or any of its Subsidiaries), subject to the terms and conditions thereof and the
remainder of this Section 6.9(b). To the extent Parent causes a Company Employee to cease to be eligible
to participate in a
Table of Contents
A-49
Company Plan and instead provides for such Company Employee to be eligible to participate in an
Employee Benefit Plan sponsored or maintained by a Parent or one of its Subsidiaries (the “Replacement
Plans”), if such Replacement Plan is a group health plan, Parent shall credit (or cause to be credited) such
Company Employee, for the year during which such coverage under such Replacement Plan begins, with
any deductibles and copayments already incurred during such year under the comparable Company Plan.
Parent, the Surviving Corporation, their Affiliates, and the Replacement Plans shall recognize each
Company Employee’s years of service and level of seniority with the Company and its Subsidiaries
(including service and seniority with any other employer that was recognized by the Company or a
Subsidiary thereof) for purposes of terms of employment and eligibility, vesting and benefit determination
(but not for benefit accruals under any defined benefit or retiree welfare arrangement) under the
Replacement Plans. Parent shall cause each Replacement Plan to waive any preexisting condition
exclusion or restriction with respect to participation and coverage requirements applicable to a Company
Employee to the extent such exclusion or restriction did not apply with respect to such employee under the
corresponding Company Plan.
(c) From and after the Effective Time, Parent shall cause the Surviving Corporation and its Subsidiaries to
honor their respective obligations under all employment, severance, change in control and other
agreements, if any, between the Company (or a Subsidiary thereof) and an individual employed prior to the
Closing Date by the Company or a Subsidiary thereof, but subject to any provisions thereof related to
termination or amendment of such agreements.
(d) Parent shall cause the Surviving Corporation and its Subsidiaries to assume, adopt and continue the
Memorial Resource Development Corp. 401(k) Plan (the “401(k) Plan”) as in existence immediately prior to
the Closing Date. The Surviving Corporation shall become the sponsor of the 401(k) Plan and shall assume
all of the powers, authorities, duties, responsibilities, and obligations thereunder to the extent indicated in
the 401(k) Plan. The Surviving Corporation shall execute such documents as may be appropriate to further
the purposes of the assignment and assumption and to accomplish and complete such assignment and
assumption.
(e) For purposes of determining the number of vacation days and other paid time off to which each
Company Employee is entitled during the calendar year in which the Closing Date occurs, Parent or its
applicable Affiliate will assume and honor all vacation and other paid time off days accrued or earned but
not yet taken by such Company Employee as of the Closing Date.
(f) Nothing in this Agreement shall constitute an amendment to, or be construed as amending, any benefit
plan, program or agreement sponsored, maintained or contributed to by the Company, Parent or any of
their respective Subsidiaries. The provisions of this Section 6.9 are for the sole benefit of the parties and
nothing herein, expressed or implied, is intended or will be construed to confer upon or give to any Person
(including, for the avoidance of doubt, any Company Employee or other current or former employee of the
Company or any of their respective Affiliates), other than the parties and their respective permitted
successors and assigns, any legal or equitable or other rights or remedies (including with respect to the
matters provided for in this Section 6.9) under or by reason of any provision of this Agreement. Nothing in
this Agreement shall require Parent, the Surviving Corporation or any of their Affiliates to continue the
employment of any Company Employee or any other Person.
6.10 Indemnification; Directors’ and Officers’ Insurance.
(a) Without limiting any other rights that any Indemnified Person may have pursuant to any employment
agreement or indemnification agreement in effect on the date hereof or otherwise, from the Effective Time
and until the six year anniversary of the Effective Time, Parent and the Surviving Corporation shall, jointly
and severally, indemnify, defend and hold harmless each Person who is now, or has been at any time prior
to the date of this Agreement or who becomes prior to the Effective Time, a director, officer or employee of
the Company or any of its Subsidiaries or who acts as a fiduciary under any Company Plan or any of its
Subsidiaries (the “Indemnified Persons”) against all losses, claims, damages, costs, fines, penalties,
expenses
Table of Contents
A-50
(including attorneys’ and other professionals’ fees and expenses), liabilities or judgments or amounts that
are paid in settlement, of or incurred in connection with any threatened or actual Proceeding to which such
Indemnified Person is a party or is otherwise involved (including as a witness) based, in whole or in part, on
or arising, in whole or in part, out of the fact that such Person is or was a director, officer or employee of the
Company or any of its Subsidiaries, a fiduciary under any Company Plan or any of its Subsidiaries or is or
was serving at the request of the Company or any of its Subsidiaries as a director, officer, employee or
agent of another corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, Employee Benefit Plan,
trust or other enterprise or by reason of anything done or not done by such Person in any such capacity,
whether pertaining to any act or omission occurring or existing prior to, at or after the Effective Time and
whether asserted or claimed prior to, at or after the Effective Time (“Indemnified Liabilities”), including all
Indemnified Liabilities based in whole or in part on, or arising in whole or in part out of, or pertaining to, this
Agreement or the Transactions, in each case to the fullest extent permitted under applicable Law (and
Parent and the Surviving Corporation shall, jointly and severally, pay expenses incurred in connection
therewith in advance of the final disposition of any such Proceeding to each Indemnified Person to the
fullest extent permitted under applicable Law). Without limiting the foregoing, in the event any such
Proceeding is brought or threatened to be brought against any Indemnified Persons (whether arising
before or after the Effective Time), (i) the Indemnified Persons may retain the Company’s regularly engaged
legal counsel or other counsel satisfactory to them, and Parent and the Surviving Corporation shall pay all
reasonable fees and expenses of such counsel for the Indemnified Persons as promptly as statements
therefor are received, and (ii) Parent and the Surviving Corporation shall use its best efforts to assist in the
defense of any such matter. Any Indemnified Person wishing to claim indemnification or advancement of
expenses under this Section 6.10, upon learning of any such Proceeding, shall notify the Surviving
Corporation (but the failure so to notify shall not relieve a party from any obligations that it may have under
this Section 6.10 except to the extent such failure materially prejudices such party’s position with respect to
such claims). With respect to any determination of whether any Indemnified Person is entitled to
indemnification by Parent or Surviving Corporation under this Section 6.10, such Indemnified Person shall
have the right, as contemplated by the DGCL, to require that such determination be made by special,
independent legal counsel selected by the Indemnified Person and approved by Parent or Surviving
Corporation, as applicable (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed), and who has
not otherwise performed material services for Parent, Surviving Corporation or the Indemnified Person
within the last three (3) years.
(b) Parent and the Surviving Corporation shall not amend, repeal or otherwise modify any provision in the
Organizational Documents of the Surviving Corporation in any manner that would affect (or manage the
Surviving Corporation or its Subsidiaries, with the intent to or in a manner that would) adversely the rights
thereunder or under the Organizational Documents of the Surviving Corporation or any of its Subsidiaries
of any Indemnified Person to indemnification, exculpation and advancement except to the extent required
by applicable Law. Parent shall, and shall cause the Surviving Corporation to, fulfill and honor any
indemnification, expense advancement or exculpation agreements between the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries and any of its directors, officers or employees existing immediately prior to the Effective Time.
(c) Parent and the Surviving Corporation shall indemnify any Indemnified Person against all reasonable,
documented, out-of-pocket costs and expenses (including reasonable attorneys’ fees and expenses), such
amounts to be payable in advance upon request as provided in Section 6.10(a), relating to the enforcement
of such Indemnified Person’s rights under this Section 6.10 or under any charter, bylaw or contract
regardless of whether such Indemnified Person is ultimately determined to be entitled to indemnification
hereunder or thereunder.
(d) Parent and the Surviving Corporation will cause to be put in place, and Parent shall fully prepay
immediately prior to the Effective Time, “tail” insurance policies with a claims period of at least six years
from the Effective Time from an insurance carrier with the same or better credit rating as the Company’s
current insurance carrier with respect to directors’ and officers’ liability insurance in an amount and scope
at least as favorable as the Company’s existing director and officer liability policies disclosed on Schedule
4.19 of the Company Disclosure Letter with respect to matters, acts or omissions existing or occurring at or
prior to the
Table of Contents
A-51
Effective Time; provided, however, that Parent may elect in its sole discretion to, but shall not be required
to, spend more than 300% (the “Cap Amount”) of the last annual premium paid by the Company prior to the
date hereof for the six years of coverage under such tail policy; provided further that if the cost of such
insurance exceeds the Cap Amount, and Parent elects not to spend more than the Cap Amount for such
purpose, then Parent shall purchase as much coverage as is obtainable for the Cap Amount.
(e) In the event that Parent or the Surviving Corporation or any of its successors or assigns (i) consolidates
with or merges into any other Person and shall not be the continuing or surviving corporation or entity of
such consolidation or merger or (ii) transfers all or substantially all of its properties and assets to any
Person, then, in each such case, proper provisions shall be made so that the successors and assigns of
Parent or the Surviving Corporation, as the case may be, shall assume the obligations set forth in this
Section 6.10.
(f) The provisions of this Section 6.10 are intended to be for the benefit of, and shall be enforceable by, the
parties and each Person entitled to indemnification or insurance coverage or expense advancement
pursuant to this Section 6.10, and his heirs and representatives. Parent and the Surviving Corporation shall
not sell, transfer, distribute or otherwise dispose of any of their assets in a manner that would reasonably
be expected to render Parent or Surviving Corporation unable to satisfy their obligations under this
Section 6.10.
6.11 Agreement to Defend; Stockholder Litigation. In the event any Proceeding by any Governmental Entity
or other Person is commenced that questions the validity or legality of the Transactions or seeks damages
in connection therewith, the parties agree to cooperate and use their reasonable best efforts to defend
against and respond thereto.
6.12 Public Announcements. The initial press release with respect to the execution of this Agreement shall
be a joint press release to be reasonably agreed upon by the parties. The parties will not, and each of the
foregoing will cause its Representatives not to, issue any public announcements or make other public
disclosures regarding this Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby, without the prior written
approval of the parties; provided, however, that a party or its Representatives may issue a public
announcement or other public disclosures required by applicable Law or the rules of any stock exchange
upon which such party’s capital stock is traded, provided such party uses reasonable best efforts to afford
the other party an opportunity to first review the content of the proposed disclosure and provide
reasonable comment regarding same; provided further that no provision of this Agreement shall be
deemed to restrict in any manner the Company’s ability to communicate with its employees and that the
Company shall not be required by any provision of this Agreement to consult with or obtain any approval
from any other party with respect to a public announcement or press release issued in connection with the
receipt and existence of a Competing Proposal and matters related thereto or a Company Change of
Recommendation other than as set forth in Section 6.3; provided further that no provision of this
Agreement shall be deemed to restrict in any manner Parent’s ability to communicate with its employees
and that Parent shall not be required by any provision of this Agreement to consult with or obtain any
approval from any other party with respect to a public announcement or press release issued in connection
the receipt and existence of an Alternative Proposal and matters related thereto or with a Parent Change of
Recommendation other than as set forth in Section 6.4.
6.13 Advice of Certain Matters; Control of Business. Subject to compliance with applicable Law, the
Company and Parent, as the case may be, shall confer on a regular basis with each other, report on
operational matters and shall promptly advise each other orally and in writing of any change or event
having, or which would be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Company Material
Adverse Effect or Parent Material Adverse Effect, as the case may be. Except with respect to Antitrust Laws
as provided in Section 5.4, the Company and Parent shall promptly provide each other (or their respective
counsel) copies of all filings made by such party or its Subsidiaries with the SEC or any other
Governmental Entity in connection with this Agreement and the Transactions. Without limiting in any way
any party’s rights or obligations under this Agreement, nothing contained in this Agreement shall give any
party, directly or indirectly, the right to control or direct the other party and their respective Subsidiaries’
operations prior to the Effective Time. Prior to the
Table of Contents
A-52
Effective Time, each of the parties shall exercise, consistent with the terms and conditions of this
Agreement, complete control and supervision over its and its Subsidiaries’ respective operations.
6.14 Conveyance Taxes. The Company and Parent will (a) cooperate in the preparation, execution and filing
of all Tax Returns, questionnaires, applications or other documents regarding any real property transfer or
gains, sales, use, transfer, value added, stock transfer and stamp Taxes, any transfer, recording,
registration and other fees and any similar Taxes which become payable in connection with the
Transactions, (b) cooperate in the preparation, execution and filing of all applications or other documents
regarding any applicable exemptions to any such Tax or fee, and (c) each pay any such Tax or fee which
becomes payable by it on or before the due date therefor.
6.15 Reasonable Best Efforts; Notification.
(a) Except to the extent that the parties’ obligations are specifically set forth elsewhere in this Article VI,
upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in this Agreement (including Section 6.3), each of the
parties shall use reasonable best efforts to take, or cause to be taken, all actions, and to do, or cause to be
done, and to assist and cooperate with the other party in doing, all things necessary, proper or advisable to
consummate and make effective, in the most expeditious manner practicable, the Merger and the other
Transactions. For the avoidance of doubt, neither a Company Change of Recommendation nor a Parent
Change of Recommendation, in either case effected in accordance with this Agreement, shall constitute a
breach of this Section 6.15(a).
(b) The Company shall give prompt notice to Parent, and Parent or Merger Sub shall give prompt notice to
the Company, upon becoming aware of (i) any condition, event or circumstance that will result in any of the
conditions in Section 7.2(a) or 7.3(a) not being met, or (ii) the failure by such party to comply with or satisfy
in any material respect any covenant, condition or agreement to be complied with or satisfied by it under
this Agreement; provided, however, that no such notification shall affect the representations, warranties,
covenants or agreements of the parties or the conditions to the obligations of the parties under this
Agreement.
6.16 Section 16 Matters. Prior to the Effective Time, Parent, Merger Sub and the Company shall take all such
steps as may be required to cause any dispositions of equity securities of the Company (including
derivative securities) or acquisitions of equity securities of Parent (including derivative securities) in
connection with this Agreement by each individual who is subject to the reporting requirements of
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act with respect to the Company, or will become subject to such reporting
requirements with respect to Parent, to be exempt under Rule 16b-3 under the Exchange Act.
6.17 Listing Application. Parent shall take all action necessary to cause the Parent Common Stock to be
issued in the Merger to be approved for listing on the NYSE prior to the Effective Time, subject to official
notice of issuance.
6.18 Tax Treatment. Each of Parent and the Company will use its reasonable best efforts to cause the
Merger to qualify, and will not take, and will use its reasonable best efforts to prevent any Affiliate of such
party from taking, any actions that would reasonably be expected to prevent the Merger from qualifying, as
a reorganization under the provisions of Section 368(a) of the Code. Parent and the Company will
cooperate with one another and use their reasonable best efforts to obtain the opinions of counsel referred
to in Sections 7.2(d) and 7.3(d) and in connection therewith, each shall deliver to such counsel duly
executed Parent tax certificate containing such representations, warranties and covenants as shall be
reasonably necessary or appropriate to enable the counsel referred to in Section 7.2(d) to render the
opinions described in such section (“Parent Tax Certificate”) and a duly executed Company tax certificate
containing such representations, warranties and covenants as shall be reasonably necessary or
appropriate to enable the counsel referred to in Section 7.3(d) to render the opinions described in such
section (“Company Tax Certificate”), respectively dated as of the Closing
Table of Contents
A-53
Date (and, if requested, dated as of the date the Registration Statement is declared effective by the SEC),
and provide such other information as reasonably requested by counsel for purposes of rendering such
opinions.
6.19 Takeover Laws. None of the parties will take any action that would cause the Transactions to be
subject to requirements imposed by any Takeover Laws, and each of them will take all reasonable steps
within its control to exempt (or ensure the continued exemption of) the Transactions from the Takeover
Laws of any state that purport to apply to this Agreement or the Transactions.
6.20 Obligations of Merger Sub. Parent shall take all action necessary to cause Merger Sub and the
Surviving Corporation to perform their respective obligations under this Agreement.
6.21 Debt Offers.
(a) If, prior to the Closing Date, Parent or any of its Subsidiaries decides to commence a tender offer and/or
consent solicitation in respect of some or all of the outstanding Company Senior Notes reasonably
necessary or appropriate to facilitate the Transactions (each, a “Debt Offer”), Parent shall prepare all
necessary and appropriate documentation in connection with such Debt Offers, including the offers to
purchase and consent solicitation statements, letters of transmittal and other related documents
(collectively, the “Offer Documents”). The Company agrees to use reasonable best efforts to provide, and
shall use reasonable best efforts to cause its Subsidiaries and its and their respective Representatives to
provide, reasonable cooperation in connection with the preparation of the Offer Documents and the
consummation of such Debt Offers (which are to be consummated at the Effective Time) including with
respect to the Company’s execution of supplemental indentures (either at the Effective Time or, if earlier,
conditioned upon the occurrence of the Effective Time) reflecting amendments to the indenture governing
the Company Senior Notes taking effect as of the Effective Time, to the extent approved by any required
consents of holders of the Company Senior Notes. All mailings to the holders of the Company Senior Notes
in connection with the Debt Offers shall be subject to the prior review and comment by the Company and
Parent and shall be reasonably acceptable to each of them. If at any time prior to the completion of any Debt
Offer any information in the applicable Offer Documents should be discovered by the Company or Parent
that should be set forth in an amendment or supplement to the Offer Documents, so that such Offer
Documents shall not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state any material fact
required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in light of the
circumstances under which they are made, not misleading, the party that discovers such information shall
promptly notify the other parties, and an appropriate amendment or supplement describing such
information shall be disseminated by Parent to the holders of the Company Senior Notes. To the extent that
the provisions of any applicable Law conflict with this Section 6.21, Parent and the Company shall comply
with the applicable Law and shall not be deemed to have breached their obligations under this Agreement
by such compliance. Parent and Merger Sub acknowledge and agree that neither the pendency nor the
consummation of any such Debt Offer is a condition to Parent’s or Merger Sub’s obligations under this
Agreement.
(b) If requested by Parent in writing, in lieu of Parent or any of its Subsidiaries commencing or closing a
Debt Offer for the Company Senior Notes, the Company shall, to the extent permitted by the indenture
governing the Company Senior Notes, take any actions reasonably requested by Parent to facilitate the
redemption, satisfaction and/or discharge of the Company Senior Notes pursuant to such indenture at the
Effective Time; provided, however, that prior to the Company being required to issue any irrevocable notice
of redemption with respect to the Company Senior Notes, which redemption cannot be conditioned upon
the occurrence of the Closing, Parent shall have, or shall have caused to be, deposited with the trustee
under such indenture sufficient funds to effect such redemption, satisfaction and discharge. If a conditional
notice is given, Parent shall ensure that at the Effective Time the Surviving Corporation has all funds
necessary in connection with any such redemption or satisfaction and discharge. It shall not be a default
under this Agreement or a failure of any condition to closing under Section 7.3 if the Company, immediately
prior to closing, does not have such funds necessary in connection with any such redemption or
satisfaction and discharge. Parent acknowledges and agrees that neither the pendency nor the
consummation of any such redemption, defeasance or satisfaction and discharge is a condition to Parent’s
obligations under this Agreement.
A-54
Table of Contents
(c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the Company and its Subsidiaries shall not be required
to take any action pursuant to clause (a) or (b) above if such action would result in a default, breach or loss
of benefit (whether with notice, lapse of time or otherwise) under any loan agreement, note, bond, mortgage,
indenture, lease, credit agreement or other contract or agreement to which the Company or any of its
Subsidiaries is a party or by which it or any of its Subsidiaries or its or their respective properties or assets
are bound. To the extent that any action required to be taken by the Company or any of its Subsidiaries
pursuant to clause (a) or (b) above would result in any such default, breach or loss of benefit, the parties
instead will use their reasonable best efforts to cooperate, including by keeping each other informed, to
obtain on a timely basis any consents or waivers to such actions, from the parties necessary to grant such
consents or waivers, sufficient to permit the Company to take such actions without giving rise to such
default, breach or loss of benefit; provided the Company will pay such fees or other amounts as necessary
to obtain such consents or waivers if and only if Parent agrees in advance to the amount of such fees or
other amounts; and provided further that the Company’s obligation to use reasonable best efforts shall not
include (x) any obligation to pay any fee or other amount to such parties to which Parent has not agreed in
advance or (y) any obligation to enter into any amendment, modification or waiver to any such applicable
loan agreement, note, bond, mortgage, indenture, lease, credit agreement or contract or other agreement
that imposes any additional obligation on, or results in the loss of any right or benefit of, the Company or
any of its Subsidiaries prior to the Effective Time. All reasonable fees and expenses (and all other fees and
expenses consented to by Parent, including, if so approved, all fees and other amounts referenced in the
second sentence of this paragraph), incurred by the Company in connection with the activities set forth in
this Section 6.21 shall be paid by Parent directly. Parent shall indemnify and hold harmless the Company,
its Subsidiaries and its and their respective Representatives for and against any and all losses, damages,
claims, costs or expenses suffered or incurred by them in connection with the Debt Offer and any
information contained in the Offer Documents in connection therewith, except (i) with respect to information
supplied by the Company, its Subsidiaries and its and their Representatives specifically for inclusion or
incorporation by reference in any Offering Document or (ii) to the extent such losses and damages arise
from gross negligence or willful misconduct of the Company, its Subsidiaries or any of its or their
Representatives. All Transfer Taxes incurred in connection with the Transactions shall be paid when due
by Parent or its Affiliates or, after the Closing, the Surviving Corporation.
ARTICLE VII
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
7.1 Conditions to Each Party’s Obligation to Consummate the Merger. The respective obligation of each
party to consummate the Merger is subject to the satisfaction at or prior to the Effective Time of the
following conditions, any or all of which may be waived jointly by the parties, in whole or in part, to the
extent permitted by applicable Law:
(a) Stockholder Approvals. The Company Stockholder Approval and the Parent Stockholder Approval shall
have been obtained in accordance with applicable Law and the Organizational Documents of the Company
and Parent, as applicable.
(b) Regulatory Approval. Any waiting period applicable to the Transactions under the HSR Act shall have
been terminated or shall have expired.
(c) No Injunctions or Restraints. No Governmental Entity having jurisdiction over any party shall have
issued any order, decree, ruling, injunction or other action that is in effect (whether temporary, preliminary
or permanent) restraining, enjoining or otherwise prohibiting the consummation of the Merger and no Law
shall have been adopted that makes consummation of the Merger illegal or otherwise prohibited.
(d) Registration Statement. The Registration Statement shall have been declared effective by the SEC under
the Securities Act and shall not be the subject of any stop order or Proceedings seeking a stop order.
A-55
Table of Contents
(e) NYSE Listing. The shares of Parent Common Stock issuable to the Company’s stockholders pursuant
to this Agreement shall have been authorized for listing on the NYSE, upon official notice of issuance.
7.2 Additional Conditions to Obligations of Parent and Merger Sub. The obligations of Parent and Merger
Sub to consummate the Merger are subject to the satisfaction at or prior to the Effective Time of the
following conditions, any or all of which may be waived exclusively by Parent, in whole or in part, to the
extent permitted by applicable Law:
(a) Representations and Warranties of the Company. The representations and warranties of the Company
set forth (i) in this Agreement (other than in Section 4.2 and Section 4.7(a)) shall be true and correct as of
the date of this Agreement and as of the Closing Date, as though made on and as of the Closing Date
(except that representations and warranties that speak as of a specified date shall have been true and
correct only as of such date), except where the failure of such representations and warranties to be so true
and correct (without regard to qualification or exceptions contained therein as to “materiality” or “Company
Material Adverse Effect”) would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a
Company Material Adverse Effect, (ii) Section 4.2 are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement and
as of the Closing Date, as though made on and as of the Closing Date (except that representations and
warranties that speak as of a specified date shall have been true and correct only as of such date), except
for any de minimis inaccuracies, and (iii) Section 4.7(a) are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement
and as of the Closing Date, as though made on and as of the Closing Date.
(b) Performance of Obligations of the Company. The Company shall have performed, or complied with, in all
material respects all agreements and covenants required to be performed or complied with by it under this
Agreement on or prior to the Effective Time.
(c) Compliance Certificate. Parent shall have received a certificate of the Company signed by an executive
officer of the Company, dated the Closing Date, confirming that the conditions in Sections 7.2(a) and
(b) have been satisfied.
(d) Tax Opinion. Parent shall have received the opinion of Sidley Austin LLP (or other counsel to Parent
reasonably acceptable to the Company, which the parties agree shall include Vinson & Elkins LLP for
purposes of this Section 7.2(d)), in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to Parent, dated as of the
date on which the Registration Statement is declared effective and on the Closing Date, to the effect that
(i) the Merger will qualify as a reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code and (ii) the
Company, Parent and Merger Sub will each be a “party to the reorganization” within the meaning of
Section 368 of the Code. In rendering the opinion described in this Section 7.2(d), Sidley Austin LLP (or
other counsel to Parent reasonably acceptable to the Company, which the parties agree shall include
Vinson & Elkins LLP for purposes of this Section 7.2(d)) shall have received and may rely upon the Parent
Tax Certificate and the Company Tax Certificate and such other information reasonably requested by and
provided to such counsel by the Parent or the Company for purposes of rendering such opinion.
(e) Upstream MLP GP PSA Closing. The transactions contemplated by the Upstream MLP GP PSA shall
have been consummated.
7.3 Additional Conditions to Obligations of the Company. The obligation of the Company to consummate
the Merger is subject to the satisfaction at or prior to the Effective Time of the following conditions, any or
all of which may be waived exclusively by the Company, in whole or in part, to the extent permitted by
applicable Law:
(a) Representations and Warranties of Parent. The representations and warranties of Parent and Merger
Sub set forth (i) in this Agreement (other than in Section 5.2 and Section 5.7(a)) shall be true and correct as
of the date of this Agreement and as of the Closing Date, as though made on and as of the Closing Date
(except that representations and warranties that speak as of a specified date shall have been true and
correct only as of such
Table of Contents
A-56
date), except where the failure of such representations and warranties to be so true and correct (without
regard to qualification or exceptions contained therein as to “materiality” or “Parent Material Adverse
Effect”) would not be reasonably likely to have, individually or in the aggregate, a Parent Material Adverse
Effect, (ii) Section 5.2 are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement and as of the Closing Date, as
though made on and as of the Closing Date (except that representations and warranties that speak as of a
specified date shall have been true and correct only as of such date), except for any de minimis
inaccuracies, and (iii) Section 5.7(a) are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement and as of the
Closing Date, as though made on and as of the Closing Date.
(b) Performance of Obligations of Parent and Merger Sub. Parent and Merger Sub each shall have
performed, or complied with, in all material respects all agreements and covenants required to be
performed or complied with by them under this Agreement at or prior to the Effective Time.
(c) Compliance Certificate. The Company shall have received a certificate of Parent signed by an executive
officer of Parent, dated the Closing Date, confirming that the conditions in Sections 7.3(a) and (b) have been
satisfied.
(d) Tax Opinion. The Company shall have received the opinion of Vinson & Elkins LLP (or other counsel to
Parent reasonably acceptable to the Company, which the parties agree shall include Sidley Austin LLP for
purposes of this Section 7.3(d)), in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Company, dated as
of the date on which the Registration Statement is declared effective and on the Closing Date, to the effect
that (i) the Merger will qualify as a reorganization within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Code and
(ii) the Company, Parent and Merger Sub will each by a “party to the reorganization” within the meaning of
Section 368 of the Code. In rendering the opinion described in this Section 7.3(d), Vinson & Elkins LLP (or
other counsel to Parent reasonably acceptable to the Company, which the parties agree shall include
Sidley Austin LLP for purposes of this Section 7.3(d)) shall have received and may rely upon the Parent Tax
Certificate and the Company Tax Certificate and such other information reasonably requested by and
provided to such counsel by the Company or the Parent for purposes of rendering such opinion.
7.4 Frustration of Closing Conditions. None of the parties may rely, either as a basis for not consummating
the Merger or for terminating this Agreement, on the failure of any condition set forth in Section 7.1, 7.2 or
7.3, as the case may be, to be satisfied if such failure was caused by such party’s breach in any material
respect of any provision of this Agreement.
ARTICLE VIII
TERMINATION
8.1 Termination. This Agreement may be terminated and the Merger may be abandoned at any time prior to
the Effective Time, whether (except as expressly set forth below) before or after the Company Stockholder
Approval or the Parent Stockholder Approval has been obtained:
(a) by mutual written consent of the Company and Parent in each case duly authorized by the Company
Board (or a committee thereof);
(b) by either the Company or Parent:
(i) if any Governmental Entity having jurisdiction over any party shall have issued any order, decree, ruling
or injunction or taken any other action permanently restraining, enjoining or otherwise prohibiting the
consummation of the Merger and such order, decree, ruling or injunction or other action shall have become
final and nonappealable or if there shall be adopted any Law that makes consummation of the Merger illegal
or otherwise prohibited; provided, however, that the right to terminate this Agreement under this
Section 8.1(b)(i) shall not be available to any party whose failure to fulfill any material covenant or
agreement under this Agreement has been the cause of or resulted in the action or event described in this
Section 8.1(b)(i) occurring;
Table of Contents
A-57
(ii) if the Merger shall not have been consummated on or before 5:00 p.m. Houston time, on December 15,
2016 (such date being the “End Date”); provided, however, that the right to terminate this Agreement under
this Section 8.1(b)(ii) shall not be available to any party whose failure to fulfill any material covenant or
agreement under this Agreement has been the cause of or resulted in the failure of the Merger to occur on
or before such date;
(iii) in the event of a breach by the other party of any representation, warranty, covenant or other agreement
contained in this Agreement which (A) would give rise to the failure of a condition set forth in Section 7.2(a)
or (b) or Section 7.3(a) or (b), as applicable, if it was continuing as of the Closing Date and (B) cannot be or
has not been cured by the earlier of 30 days after the giving of written notice to the breaching party of such
breach and the basis for such notice, and the date of the proposed termination (a “Terminable Breach”);
provided, however, that the terminating party is not then in Terminable Breach of any representation,
warranty, covenant or other agreement contained in this Agreement; or
(iv) if (A) the Company Stockholder Approval shall not have been obtained upon a vote held at a duly held
Company Stockholders Meeting, or at any adjournment or postponement thereof or (B) the Parent
Stockholder Approval shall not have been obtained upon a vote held at a duly held Parent Stockholders
Meeting, or at any adjournment or postponement thereof;
(c) by Parent:
(i) prior to receipt of the Company Stockholder Approval, if the Company Board or any committee thereof
shall have effected a Company Change of Recommendation;
(ii) prior to receipt of the Company Stockholder Approval, if the Company is in violation in any material
respect of its obligations under Section 6.5 or Section 6.6(a); or
(iii) prior to receipt of the Parent Stockholder Approval, in order to enter into a definitive agreement with
respect to a Parent Alternative Proposal (which definitive agreement shall be entered into concurrently with,
or promptly following, the termination of this Agreement pursuant to this Section 8.1(c)(iii)) if the Parent
Board (or a committee thereof) determines in good faith after consultation with its financial advisors and
outside legal counsel that such Alternative Proposal is a Parent Superior Proposal and that the failure to
terminate this Agreement would be inconsistent with its duties under applicable Law; provided, however,
that the termination right of Parent in this Section 8.1(c)(iii) shall not be available to Parent unless Parent
shall have contemporaneously with such termination tendered payment in full to Parent of the amount
specified in Section 8.3(h).
(d) by the Company:
(i) prior to receipt of the Company Stockholder Approval, in order to enter into a definitive agreement with
respect to a Company Superior Proposal in a manner permitted by Section 6.3(e) (which definitive
agreement shall be entered into concurrently with, or promptly following, the termination of this Agreement
pursuant to this Section 8.1(d)(i)); provided, however, that the termination right of the Company in this
Section 8.1(d)(i) shall not be available to the Company unless the Company shall have contemporaneously
with such termination tendered payment in full to Parent of the amount specified in Section 8.3(b);
(ii) prior to receipt of the Parent Stockholder Approval, if either Parent or Merger Sub is in violation in any
material respect of its obligations under Section 6.5 or Section 6.6(b); or
(iii) if the Parent Board or any committee thereof shall have effected a Parent Change of Recommendation.
8.2 Notice of Termination; Effect of Termination.
(a) A terminating party shall provide written notice of termination to the other party specifying with
particularity the reason for such termination, and, except as otherwise provided in Section 8.1(d)(i), any
termination shall be effective immediately upon delivery of such written notice to the other party.
Table of Contents
A-58
(b) Subject to Section 8.3(j), in the event of a valid termination of this Agreement by any party as provided in
Section 8.1, this Agreement shall forthwith become void and there shall be no rights or obligations of any
party, except that Article I, Section 6.7(b), Article VIII and Article IX shall survive any such termination;
provided, however, that notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, no such termination shall relieve
any party from liability for any damages for breaches of the Confidentiality Agreement.
8.3 Expenses and Other Payments.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each party shall pay its own expenses incident to
preparing for, entering into and carrying out this Agreement and the consummation of the Transactions,
whether or not the Merger shall be consummated.
(b) If (i) Parent terminates this Agreement pursuant to (A) Section 8.1(c)(i) or (B) Section 8.1(c)(ii) or (ii) the
Company terminates this Agreement pursuant to Section 8.1(d)(i), then the Company shall pay Parent the
Company Termination Fee in cash by wire transfer of immediately available funds to an account designated
by Parent. If the fee shall be payable pursuant to clause (i) of the immediately preceding sentence, the fee
shall be paid no later than three Business Days after notice of termination of this Agreement, and if the fee
shall be payable pursuant to clause (ii) of the immediately preceding sentence, the fee shall be paid
contemporaneously with such termination of this Agreement.
(c) If the Company terminates this agreement pursuant to Section 8.1(d)(ii), then Parent shall pay the
Company the Parent Termination Fee in cash by wire transfer of immediately available funds to an account
designated by the Company no later than three Business Days after notice of termination of this
Agreement.
(d) If either the Company or Parent, as applicable, terminates this Agreement pursuant to (i) Section 8.1(b)
(iv)(A), then the Company shall pay Parent the Parent Expenses or (ii) Section 8.1(b)(iv)(B), then Parent shall
pay the Company the Company Expenses, in each case no later than three Business Days after notice of
termination of this Agreement.
(e) If (i) (A) Parent or the Company terminates this Agreement pursuant to Section 8.1(b)(iv)(A), or (B) Parent
terminates this Agreement pursuant to Section 8.1(b)(iii), (ii) on or before the date of any such termination a
Competing Proposal shall have been announced, disclosed or otherwise communicated to the Company
Board, and (iii) within twelve (12) months after the date of such termination, the Company enters into a
definitive agreement with respect to a Competing Proposal or consummates a Competing Proposal, then
the Company shall pay Parent the Company Termination Fee less any Parent Expenses previously paid.
For purposes of this Section 8.3(e), any reference in the definition of Competing Proposal to “20% or more”
shall be deemed to be a reference to “more than 50%.”
(f) If the Company terminates this Agreement pursuant to Section 8.1(d)(iii), then Parent shall pay the
Company the Parent Termination Fee in cash by wire transfer of immediately available funds to an account
designated by the Company no later than three Business Days after notice of termination of this
Agreement.
(g) If (i) (A) the Company terminates this Agreement pursuant to Section 8.1(b)(iii), Section 8.1(d)(ii) or
Section 8.1(d)(iii) or (B) Parent or the Company terminates this Agreement pursuant to Section 8.1(b)(iv)(B),
(ii) on or before the date of any such termination an Alternative Proposal shall have been announced,
disclosed or otherwise communicated to the Parent Board, and (iii) within twelve (12) months after the date
of such termination, Parent enters into a definitive agreement with respect to an Alternative Proposal or
consummates an Alternative Proposal, then Parent shall pay the Company the Parent Alternative Proposal
Fee less any Parent Termination Fee or Company Expenses previously paid. For purposes of this
Section 8.3(g), any reference in the definition of Alternative Proposal to “20%” shall be deemed to be a
reference to “50%.”
(h) If Parent terminates this Agreement pursuant to Section 8.1(c)(iii), then Parent shall pay the Company
the Parent Alternative Proposal Fee in cash by wire transfer of immediately available funds to an account
designated by the Company contemporaneously with such termination of this Agreement.
Table of Contents
A-59
(i) In no event shall Parent be entitled to receive more than one payment of a Company Termination Fee or
more than one payment of the Parent Expenses. If Parent receives a Company Termination Fee, then
Parent will not be entitled to also receive a payment of the Parent Expenses. In no event shall the Company
be entitled to receive more than one payment of a Parent Termination Fee, more than one payment of the
Company Expenses or more than one payment of the Parent Alternative Proposal Fee. If the Company
receives a Parent Termination Fee or a Parent Alternative Proposal Fee, then the Company will not be
entitled to also receive a payment of the Company Expenses. If Parent or the Company is required to pay a
Parent Termination Fee or Company Termination Fee, as applicable, pursuant to Section 8.3(b)(i)(B) or
Section 8.3(c), as applicable, then the payment of such fees will be taken into account in any determination
of the damages with respect to any intentional and material breach of the applicable obligations under
Section 6.5 or Section 6.6 that give rise to the payment of damages in accordance with Section 8.3(j). The
parties agree that the agreements contained in this Section 8.3 are an integral part of the Transactions, and
that, without these agreements, the parties would not enter into this Agreement. If a party fails to promptly
pay the amount due by it pursuant to this Section 8.3, interest shall accrue on such amount from the date
such payment was required to be paid pursuant to the terms of this Agreement until the date of payment at
the rate of 8% per annum. If, in order to obtain such payment, the other party commences a Proceeding that
results in judgment for such party for such amount, the defaulting party shall pay the other party its
reasonable out-of-pocket costs and expenses (including reasonable attorneys’ fees and expenses)
incurred in connection with such Proceeding.
(j) The parties agree that the monetary remedies set forth in Section 8.1(d)(i) and this Section 8.3 and the
specific performance remedies set forth in Section 9.11 shall be the sole and exclusive remedies of (i) the
Company and its Subsidiaries against Parent and Merger Sub and any of their respective former, current or
future general or limited partners, shareholders, managers, members, Representatives or Affiliates for any
loss suffered as a result of the failure of the Merger to be consummated except in the case of intentional
fraud or an intentional and material breach of a covenant, agreement or obligation (in which case only
Parent shall be liable for damages for such intentional fraud or intentional and material breach), and upon
payment of such amount, none of Parent or Merger Sub or any of their respective former, current or future
general or limited partners, shareholders, managers, members, Representatives or Affiliates shall have any
further liability or obligation relating to or arising out of this Agreement or the transactions contemplated
hereby, except for the liability of Parent in the case of intentional fraud or an intentional and material breach
of a covenant, agreement or obligation; and (ii) Parent and Merger Sub against the Company and its
Subsidiaries and any of their respective former, current or future general or limited partners, shareholders,
managers, members, Representatives or Affiliates for any loss suffered as a result of the failure of the
Merger to be consummated except in the case of intentional fraud or an intentional and material breach of a
covenant, agreement or obligation (in which case only the Company shall be liable for damages for such
intentional fraud intentional and material breach), and upon payment of such amount, none of the Company
and its Subsidiaries or any of their respective former, current or future general or limited partners,
shareholders, managers, members, Representatives or Affiliates shall have any further liability or obligation
relating to or arising out of this Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby, except for the liability
of the Company in the case of intentional fraud or an intentional and material breach of a covenant,
agreement or obligation.
ARTICLE IX
GENERAL PROVISIONS
9.1 Schedule Definitions. All capitalized terms in the Company Disclosure Letter and the Parent Disclosure
Letter shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein except as otherwise defined therein.
9.2 Survival. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, none of the representations, warranties,
agreements and covenants contained in this Agreement will survive the Closing; provided, however, the
agreements of the parties in Articles I, II, III and X and the sixth sentence of Section 6.7(a), Sections 6.7(b),
6.9 and 6.10 will survive the Closing. The Confidentiality Agreement shall (i) survive termination of this
Agreement in accordance with its terms and (ii) terminate as of the Effective Time.
Table of Contents
A-60
9.3 Notices. All notices, requests and other communications to any party under, or otherwise in connection
with, this Agreement shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given (a) if delivered in
person; (b) if transmitted by facsimile (but only upon confirmation of transmission by the transmitting
equipment); (c) if transmitted by electronic mail (“e-mail”) (but only if confirmation of receipt of such e-mail
is requested and received); or (d) if transmitted by national overnight courier, in each case as addressed as
follows:
(i) if to Parent or Merger Sub, to:
Range Resources Corporation
100 Throckmorton, Suite 1200
Fort Worth, Texas 76262
Attention: General Counsel
Facsimile: 817-869-9154
Email: dpoole@rangeresources.com
with a required copy to (which copy shall not constitute notice):
Sidley Austin LLP
1000 Louisiana Street, Suite 6000
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: J. Mark Metts and Kevin P. Lewis
Facsimile (713) 495-7799
E-mail: mmetts@sidley.com and klewis@sidley.com
(ii) if to the Company, to:
Memorial Resource Development Corp.
500 Dallas St., Suite 1800
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: General Counsel
Facsimile: (713) 588-8301
E-mail: kroane@memorialrd.com
with a required copy to (which copy shall not constitute notice):
Vinson & Elkins LLP
1001 Fannin, Suite 2500
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: Douglas E. McWilliams and Stephen M. Gill
Facsimile (713) 615-5956
E-mail: dmcwilliams@velaw.com and sgill@velaw.com
9.4 Rules of Construction.
(a) Each of the parties acknowledges that it has been represented by counsel of its choice throughout all
negotiations that have preceded the execution of this Agreement and that it has executed the same with the
advice of said independent counsel. Each party and its counsel cooperated in the drafting and preparation
of this Agreement and the documents referred to herein, and any and all drafts relating thereto exchanged
between the parties shall be deemed the work product of the parties and may not be construed against any
party by reason of its preparation. Accordingly, any rule of law or any legal decision that would require
interpretation of any ambiguities in this Agreement against any party that drafted it is of no application and
is hereby expressly waived.
(b) The inclusion of any information in the Company Disclosure Letter or Parent Disclosure Letter shall not
be deemed an admission or acknowledgment, in and of itself and solely by virtue of the inclusion of such
information in the Company Disclosure Letter or Parent Disclosure Letter, as applicable, that such
Table of Contents
A-61
information is required to be listed in the Company Disclosure Letter or Parent Disclosure Letter, as
applicable, that such items are material to the Company and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, or Parent
and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, as the case may be, or that such items have resulted in a Company
Material Adverse Effect or a Parent Material Adverse Effect. The headings, if any, of the individual sections
of each of the Parent Disclosure Letter and Company Disclosure Letter are inserted for convenience only
and shall not be deemed to constitute a part thereof or a part of this Agreement. The Company Disclosure
Letter and Parent Disclosure Letter are arranged in sections corresponding to the Sections of this
Agreement merely for convenience, and the disclosure of an item in one section of the Company
Disclosure Letter or Parent Disclosure Letter, as applicable, as an exception to a particular representation
or warranty shall be deemed adequately disclosed as an exception with respect to all other representations
or warranties to the extent that the relevance of such item to such representations or warranties is
reasonably apparent from such item, notwithstanding the presence or absence of an appropriate section of
the Company Disclosure Letter or Parent Disclosure Letter with respect to such other representations or
warranties or an appropriate cross reference thereto.
(c) The specification of any dollar amount in the representations and warranties or otherwise in this
Agreement or in the Company Disclosure Letter or Parent Disclosure Letter is not intended and shall not be
deemed to be an admission or acknowledgment of the materiality of such amounts or items, nor shall the
same be used in any dispute or controversy between the parties to determine whether any obligation, item
or matter (whether or not described herein or included in any schedule) is or is not material for purposes of
this Agreement.
(d) All references in this Agreement to Exhibits, Schedules, Articles, Sections, subsections and other
subdivisions refer to the corresponding Exhibits, Schedules, Articles, Sections, subsections and other
subdivisions of this Agreement unless expressly provided otherwise. Titles appearing at the beginning of
any Articles, Sections, subsections or other subdivisions of this Agreement are for convenience only, do
not constitute any part of such Articles, Sections, subsections or other subdivisions, and shall be
disregarded in construing the language contained therein. The words “this Agreement,” “herein,”
“hereby,” “hereunder” and “hereof” and words of similar import, refer to this Agreement as a whole and not
to any particular subdivision unless expressly so limited. The words “this Section,” “this subsection” and
words of similar import, refer only to the Sections or subsections hereof in which such words occur. The
word “including” (in its various forms) means “including, without limitation.” Pronouns in masculine,
feminine or neuter genders shall be construed to state and include any other gender and words, terms and
titles (including terms defined herein) in the singular form shall be construed to include the plural and vice
versa, unless the context otherwise expressly requires. Unless the context otherwise requires, all defined
terms contained herein shall include the singular and plural and the conjunctive and disjunctive forms of
such defined terms. Unless the context otherwise requires, all references to a specific time shall refer to
Houston, Texas time.
(e) In this Agreement, except as the context may otherwise require, references to: (i) any agreement
(including this Agreement), contract, statute or regulation are to the agreement, contract, statute or
regulation as amended, modified, supplemented, restated or replaced from time to time (in the case of an
agreement or contract, to the extent permitted by the terms thereof and, if applicable, by the terms of this
Agreement); (ii) any Governmental Entity include any successor to that Governmental Entity; (iii) any
applicable Law refers to such applicable Law as amended, modified, supplemented or replaced from time to
time (and, in the case of statutes, include any rules and regulations promulgated under such statute) and
references to any section of any applicable Law or other law include any successor to such section; and
(iv) days mean calendar days.
9.5 Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in two or more counterparts, including via facsimile or
email in “portable document format” (“.pdf”) form transmission, all of which shall be considered one and
the same agreement and shall become effective when two or more counterparts have been signed by each
of the parties and delivered to the other parties, it being understood that all parties need not sign the same
counterpart.
9.6 Entire Agreement; Third Party Beneficiaries. This Agreement (together with the Confidentiality
Agreement, the other Transaction Documents and any other documents and instruments executed
pursuant
Table of Contents
A-62
hereto) constitutes the entire agreement and supersedes all prior agreements and understandings, both
written and oral, among the parties with respect to the subject matter hereof. Except for the provisions of
Article III (including, for the avoidance of doubt, the rights of the former holders of Company Common
Stock to receive the Merger Consideration) and Sections 6.9 and 6.10 (which from and after the Effective
Time are intended for the benefit of, and shall be enforceable by, the Persons referred to therein and by
their respective heirs and representatives), nothing in this Agreement, express or implied, is intended to or
shall confer upon any Person other than the parties any right, benefit or remedy of any nature whatsoever
under or by reason of this Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of Parent’s or Merger
Sub’s intentional and material breach of this Agreement or intentional fraud as a result of which damages
would be payable pursuant to Section 8.3(j), then the Company’s stockholders, acting solely through the
Company, shall be beneficiaries of this Agreement and shall be entitled to pursue any and all legally
available remedies, including equitable relief, and to seek recovery of all losses, liabilities, damages, costs
and expenses of every kind and nature, including reasonable attorneys’ fees; provided, however, that the
rights granted pursuant to this sentence shall be enforceable only by the Company, on behalf of the
Company stockholders, in the Company’s sole discretion, it being understood and agreed such rights shall
attach to such shares of Company Stock and subsequently trade and transfer therewith and, consequently,
any damages, settlements, or other amounts recovered or received by the Company with respect to such
rights may, in the Company’s sole discretion, be (a) distributed, in whole or in part, by the Company to the
holders of shares of Company Common Stock of record as of any date determined by the Company or
(b) retained by the Company for the use and benefit of the Company on behalf of its stockholders in any
manner the Company deems fit.
9.7 Governing Law; Venue; Waiver of Jury Trial.
(a) THIS AGREEMENT, AND ALL CLAIMS OR CAUSES OF ACTION (WHETHER IN CONTRACT OR TORT)
THAT MAY BE BASED UPON, ARISE OUT OF RELATE TO THIS AGREEMENT, OR THE NEGOTIATION,
EXECUTION OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS AGREEMENT, SHALL BE GOVERNED BY AND CONSTRUED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF DELAWARE, WITHOUT GIVING EFFECT TO THE
PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICTS OF LAW THEREOF.
(b) THE PARTIES IRREVOCABLY SUBMIT TO THE JURISDICTION OF THE COURT OF CHANCERY OF
THE STATE OF DELAWARE OR, IF THE COURT OF CHANCERY OF THE STATE OF DELAWARE OR THE
DELAWARE SUPREME COURT DETERMINES THAT, NOTWITHSTANDING SECTION 111 OF THE DGCL,
THE COURT OF CHANCERY DOES NOT HAVE OR SHOULD NOT EXERCISE SUBJECT MATTER
JURISDICTION OVER SUCH MATTER, THE SUPERIOR COURT OF THE STATE OF DELAWARE AND THE
FEDERAL COURTS OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA LOCATED IN THE STATE OF DELAWARE
SOLELY IN CONNECTION WITH ANY DISPUTE THAT ARISES IN RESPECT OF THE INTERPRETATION
AND ENFORCEMENT OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS AGREEMENT AND THE DOCUMENTS REFERRED
TO IN THIS AGREEMENT OR IN RESPECT OF THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY, AND
HEREBY WAIVE, AND AGREE NOT TO ASSERT, AS A DEFENSE IN ANY ACTION, SUIT OR PROCEEDING
FOR INTERPRETATION OR ENFORCEMENT HEREOF OR ANY SUCH DOCUMENT THAT IT IS NOT
SUBJECT THERETO OR THAT SUCH ACTION, SUIT OR PROCEEDING MAY NOT BE BROUGHT OR IS
NOT MAINTAINABLE IN SAID COURTS OR THAT VENUE THEREOF MAY NOT BE APPROPRIATE OR
THAT THIS AGREEMENT OR ANY SUCH DOCUMENT MAY NOT BE ENFORCED IN OR BY SUCH COURTS,
AND THE PARTIES IRREVOCABLY AGREE THAT ALL CLAIMS WITH RESPECT TO SUCH ACTION, SUIT
OR PROCEEDING SHALL BE HEARD AND DETERMINED EXCLUSIVELY BY SUCH A DELAWARE STATE
OR FEDERAL COURT. THE PARTIES HEREBY CONSENT TO AND GRANT ANY SUCH COURT
JURISDICTION OVER THE PERSON OF SUCH PARTIES AND OVER THE SUBJECT MATTER OF SUCH
DISPUTE AND AGREE THAT MAILING OF PROCESS OR OTHER PAPERS IN CONNECTION WITH SUCH
ACTION, SUIT OR PROCEEDING IN THE MANNER PROVIDED IN SECTION 8.3 OR IN SUCH OTHER
MANNER AS MAY BE PERMITTED BY LAW SHALL BE VALID AND SUFFICIENT SERVICE THEREOF.
Table of Contents
A-63
(c) EACH PARTY ACKNOWLEDGES AND AGREES THAT ANY CONTROVERSY WHICH MAY ARISE
UNDER THIS AGREEMENT IS LIKELY TO INVOLVE COMPLICATED AND DIFFICULT ISSUES, AND
THEREFORE EACH SUCH PARTY HEREBY IRREVOCABLY AND UNCONDITIONALLY WAIVES ANY
RIGHT SUCH PARTY MAY HAVE TO A TRIAL BY JURY IN RESPECT OF ANY LITIGATION DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT OR THE TRANSACTIONS
CONTEMPLATED BY THIS AGREEMENT. EACH PARTY CERTIFIES AND ACKNOWLEDGES THAT (I) NO
REPRESENTATIVE, AGENT OR ATTORNEY OF ANY OTHER PARTY HAS REPRESENTED, EXPRESSLY
OR OTHERWISE, THAT SUCH OTHER PARTY WOULD NOT, IN THE EVENT OF LITIGATION, SEEK TO
ENFORCE THE FOREGOING WAIVER; (II) SUCH PARTY UNDERSTANDS AND HAS CONSIDERED THE
IMPLICATIONS OF THE FOREGOING WAIVER; (III) SUCH PARTY MAKES THE FOREGOING WAIVER
VOLUNTARILY AND (IV) SUCH PARTY HAS BEEN INDUCED TO ENTER INTO THIS AGREEMENT BY,
AMONG OTHER THINGS, THE MUTUAL WAIVER AND CERTIFICATIONS IN THIS SECTION 9.7.
9.8 Severability. Each party agrees that, should any court or other competent authority hold any provision
of this Agreement or part hereof to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any jurisdiction, such invalidity,
illegality or unenforceability shall not affect any other term or provision of this Agreement or invalidate or
render unenforceable such other term or provision in any other jurisdiction. Upon such determination that
any term or other provision is invalid, illegal or unenforceable, the parties hereto shall negotiate in good
faith to modify this Agreement so as to effect the original intent of the parties as closely as possible in a
mutually acceptable manner in order that the transactions contemplated hereby be consummated as
originally contemplated to the greatest extent possible. Except as otherwise contemplated by this
Agreement, in response to an order from a court or other competent authority for any party to take any
action inconsistent herewith or not to take an action consistent herewith or required hereby, to the extent
that a party hereto took an action inconsistent with this Agreement or failed to take action consistent with
this Agreement or required by this Agreement pursuant to such order, such party shall not incur any
liability or obligation unless such party did not in good faith seek to resist or object to the imposition or
entering of such order.
9.9 Assignment. Neither this Agreement nor any of the rights, interests or obligations hereunder shall be
assigned by any of the parties (whether by operation of law or otherwise) without the prior written consent
of the other party. Subject to the preceding sentence, this Agreement will be binding upon, inure to the
benefit of and be enforceable by the parties and their respective successors and permitted assigns. Any
purported assignment in violation of this Section 9.9 shall be void.
9.10 Affiliate Liability. Each of the following is herein referred to as a “Company Affiliate”) (a) any direct or
indirect holder of equity interests or securities in the Company (whether limited or general partners,
members, stockholders or otherwise), and (b) any director, officer, employee, representative or agent of
(i) the Company or (ii) any Person who controls the Company. Except as expressly contemplated by the
Voting Agreement, no Company Affiliate shall have any liability or obligation to Parent or Merger Sub of any
nature whatsoever in connection with or under this Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby or
thereby, and Parent and Merger Sub hereby waive and release all claims of any such liability and obligation.
9.11 Specific Performance. The parties agree that irreparable damage, for which monetary damages would
not be an adequate remedy, would occur in the event that any of the provisions of this Agreement were not
performed in accordance with their specific terms or were otherwise breached by the parties. Prior to the
termination of this Agreement pursuant to Section 8.1, it is accordingly agreed that the parties shall be
entitled to an injunction or injunctions, or any other appropriate form of specific performance or equitable
relief, to prevent breaches of this Agreement and to enforce specifically the terms and provisions hereof in
any court of competent jurisdiction, in each case in accordance with this Section 9.11, this being in addition
to any other remedy to which they are entitled under the terms of this Agreement at law or in equity. Each
party accordingly agrees not to raise any objections to the availability of the equitable remedy of specific
performance to prevent or restrain breaches or threatened breaches of, or to enforce compliance with, the
covenants and obligations of such party
Table of Contents
A-64
under this Agreement all in accordance with the terms of this Section 9.11. Each party further agrees that
no other party or any other Person shall be required to obtain, furnish or post any bond or similar
instrument in connection with or as a condition to obtaining any remedy referred to in this Section 9.11, and
each party irrevocably waives any right it may have to require the obtaining, furnishing or posting of any
such bond or similar instrument.
9.12 Amendment. This Agreement may be amended by the parties, by action taken or authorized by their
respective Boards of Directors at any time before or after adoption of this Agreement by the stockholders
of the Company, but, after any such adoption, no amendment shall be made which by law would require the
further approval by such stockholders without first obtaining such further approval. This Agreement may
not be amended except by an instrument in writing signed on behalf of each of the parties.
9.13 Extension; Waiver. At any time prior to the Effective Time, the Company and Parent may, by action
taken or authorized by their respective Boards of Directors, to the extent legally allowed:
(a) extend the time for the performance of any of the obligations or acts of the other party hereunder;
(b) waive any inaccuracies in the representations and warranties of the other party contained herein or in
any document delivered pursuant hereto; or
(c) waive compliance with any of the agreements or conditions of the other party contained herein.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no failure or delay by the Company or Parent in exercising any right
hereunder shall operate as a waiver thereof nor shall any single or partial exercise thereof preclude any
other or further exercise of any other right hereunder. No agreement on the part of a party to any such
extension or waiver shall be valid unless set forth in an instrument in writing signed on behalf of such party.
Table of Contents
[Signature Page Follows]
A-65
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, each party hereto has caused this Agreement to be signed by its respective officer
thereunto duly authorized, all as of the date first written above.
Table of Contents
RANGE RESOURCES CORPORATION
/s/ Jeffrey L. Ventura
By:
Name: Jeffrey L. Ventura
Title:
Chairman, President and Chief
 
Executive Officer
MEDINA MERGER SUB, INC.
/s/ David P. Poole
By:
Name: David P. Poole
Title:
President
[Signature Page to Agreement and Plan of Merger]
A-66
MEMORIAL RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
CORP.
/s/ Jay C. Graham
By:
Name: Jay C. Graham
Title:
Chief Executive Officer
[Signature Page to Agreement and Plan of Merger]
A-67
Table of Contents
[Letterhead of Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC]
Annex B
May 15, 2016
Range Resources Corporation
100 Throckmorton Street
Suite 1200
Fort Worth, Texas 76102
Attention: Board of Directors
Members of the Board:
You have asked us to advise you in your capacity as the Board of Directors of Range Resources
Corporation (the “Acquiror”) with respect to the fairness, from a financial point of view, to the Acquiror of
the Exchange Ratio (as defined below) in the Merger (as defined below) pursuant to the Agreement and
Plan of Merger, dated as of May 15, 2016 (the “Agreement”), among the Acquiror, Medina Merger Sub, Inc., a
wholly owned subsidiary of the Acquiror (“Merger Sub”), and Memorial Resource Development Corp. (the
“Company”). We understand that, among other things, pursuant to the Agreement, Merger Sub will merge
with the Company (the “Merger”), each outstanding share of common stock, par value $0.01 per share
(“Company Common Stock”), of the Company will be converted into the right to receive 0.375 shares (the
“Exchange Ratio”) of common stock, par value $0.01 per share (“Acquiror Common Stock”), of the
Acquiror and the Company will become a wholly owned subsidiary of the Acquiror.
In arriving at our opinion, we have reviewed the Agreement and certain publicly available business and
financial information relating to the Company and the Acquiror, including, without limitation, information
regarding their respective net operating loss carry-forwards. We have also reviewed certain other
information relating to the Company and the Acquiror, including (A) financial forecasts and projected
production and operating data prepared by and provided to us by Acquiror management relating to the
Company under two alternative cases reflecting differing projected oil and gas development and operating
assumptions (the “Case 1 Acquiror Projections for the Company” and the “Case 2 Acquiror Projections for
the Company,” respectively, and, together, the “Acquiror Projections for the Company”), which were based
on certain oil and gas reserve information prepared by Company management regarding the Company’s
proved and unproven oil and gas reserves (the “Company Reserve Information”), as adjusted by Acquiror
management (the “Acquiror Reserve Information for the Company”); (B) financial forecasts and projected
production and operating data prepared by and provided to us by Acquiror management relating to the
Acquiror under two alternative cases reflecting differing projected oil and gas development and operating
assumptions (the “Case 1 Acquiror Projections for the Acquiror” and the “Case 2 Acquiror Projections for
the Acquiror,” respectively, and, together, the “Acquiror Projections for the Acquiror”), which were based
on certain oil and gas reserve information prepared by Acquiror management regarding the Acquiror’s
proved, probable and possible oil and gas reserves (the “Acquiror Reserve Information for the Acquiror”);
(C) riskings for the Company’s proved and unproven oil and gas reserves prepared by Acquiror
management (the “Acquiror Riskings for the Company”); (D) riskings for the Acquiror’s proved, probable
and possible oil and gas reserves prepared by Acquiror management (the “Acquiror Riskings for the
Acquiror”); (E) certain publicly available market data regarding future oil and gas commodity pricing (the
“Publicly Available Future Oil and Gas Pricing Data”) and certain alternative estimates regarding future oil
and gas commodity pricing prepared and provided to us by Acquiror management (the “Acquiror Projected
Oil and Gas Pricing Data” and, together with the Publicly Available Future Oil and Gas Pricing Data, the “the
Future Oil and Gas Pricing Data”); and (F) an estimate of the value of certain Company acreage prepared by
Acquiror management (the “Estimated Value of the Southern Extension”). We have also spoken with the
managements of the Company and the Acquiror and certain of their representatives regarding the business
and prospects of the Company and the Acquiror, and the Company’s and the Acquiror’s respective oil and
gas reserves and their respective oil and gas development and operating assumptions. We have also
considered certain financial and
Table of Contents
B-1
stock market data of the Company and the Acquiror, and we have compared that data with similar data for
other companies with publicly traded equity securities in businesses we deemed similar to those of the
Company and the Acquiror, respectively, and we have considered, to the extent publicly available, the
financial terms of certain other business combinations and other transactions which have been effected or
announced. We also considered such other information, financial studies, analyses and investigations and
financial, economic and market criteria which we deemed relevant.
In connection with our review, we have not independently verified any of the foregoing information, and we
have assumed and relied upon such information being complete and accurate in all respects material to our
analyses and this opinion. With respect to the Acquiror Projections for the Company that we have used in
our analyses, management of the Acquiror has advised us and we have assumed that such financial
forecasts have been reasonably prepared in good faith and reflect such management’s best currently
available estimates and judgments as to the future financial performance of the Company. With respect to
the Acquiror Projections for the Acquiror that we have used in our analyses, management of the Acquiror
has advised us and we have assumed that such financial forecasts have been reasonably prepared in good
faith and reflect such management’s best currently available estimates and judgments as to the future
financial performance of the Acquiror. With respect to the Company Reserve Information that we have
reviewed, management of the Company has advised us and we have assumed that such reserve
information has been reasonably prepared in good faith and reflects such management’s best currently
available estimates and judgments as to the Company’s proved and unproven oil and gas reserves. With
respect to the Acquiror Reserve Information for the Company that we have reviewed, management of the
Acquiror has advised us and we have assumed that such reserve information has been reasonably
prepared in good faith and reflects such management’s best currently available estimates and judgments
as to the Company’s proved and unproven oil and gas reserves. With respect to the Acquiror Reserve
Information for the Acquiror that we have reviewed, management of the Acquiror has advised us and we
have assumed that such reserve information has been reasonably prepared in good faith and reflects such
management’s best currently available estimates and judgments as to the Acquiror’s proved, probable and
possible oil and gas reserves. With respect to the Acquiror Riskings for the Company and the Acquiror
Riskings for the Acquiror, management of the Acquiror has advised us and we have assumed that such
riskings have been reasonably prepared in good faith and reflect such management’s best currently
available estimates and judgments as to the appropriate riskings for the Acquiror Reserve Information for
the Company and the Acquiror Reserve Information for the Acquiror, respectively. With respect to the
Estimated Value of the Southern Extension, management of the Acquiror has advised us and we have
assumed that such estimated value has been reasonably prepared in good faith and reflects such
management’s best currently available estimates and judgments as to the estimated value of certain
Company acreage.
We express no view or opinion with respect to the Acquiror Projections for the Company, the Acquiror
Projections for the Acquiror, the Company Reserve Information, the Acquiror Reserve Information for the
Company, the Acquiror Reserve Information for the Acquiror, the Acquiror Riskings for the Company, the
Acquiror Riskings for the Acquiror, the Publicly Available Future Oil and Gas Pricing Data, the Acquiror
Projected Oil and Gas Pricing Data, the Estimated Value of the Southern Extension or the assumptions
upon which any of the foregoing are based. At your direction we have assumed that the Acquiror
Projections for the Company, the Acquiror Projections for the Acquiror, the Acquiror Reserve Information
for the Company, the Acquiror Reserve Information for the Acquiror, the Acquiror Riskings for the
Company, the Acquiror Riskings for the Acquiror, the Publicly Available Future Oil and Gas Pricing Data,
the Acquiror Projected Oil and Gas Pricing Data and the Estimated Value of the Southern Extension are a
reasonable basis on which to evaluate the Company, the Acquiror and the Merger and have used and relied
upon such information for purposes of our analyses and this opinion.
In addition, we have relied upon, without independent verification (i) the assessments of the management of
the Acquiror with respect to the Acquiror’s ability to integrate the businesses of the Company and the
Acquiror and (ii) the assessments of the management of the Acquiror as to the Company’s and the
Acquiror’s existing technology and future capabilities with respect to the extraction of the Company’s and
the Acquiror’s oil and gas
Table of Contents
B-2
reserves and other oil and gas resources and associated timing and costs and, with your consent, have
assumed that there have been no developments that would adversely affect such management’s views with
respect to such technologies, capabilities, timing and costs. You have advised us and for purposes of our
analyses and our opinion we have assumed that, for U.S. federal income tax purposes, the Merger will
qualify as a “reorganization” within the meaning of Section 368(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended. We also have assumed, with your consent, that, in the course of obtaining any regulatory or third
party consents, approvals or agreements in connection with the Merger, no delay, limitation, restriction or
condition will be imposed that would have an adverse effect on the Company, the Acquiror or the
contemplated benefits of the Merger, that the Merger will be consummated in accordance with all applicable
federal, state and local laws, and that the Merger will be consummated in accordance with the terms of the
Agreement, without waiver, modification or amendment of any term, condition or agreement thereof that is
material to our analyses or this opinion. In addition, we have not been requested to make, and have not
made, an independent evaluation or appraisal of the assets or liabilities (contingent or otherwise) of the
Company or the Acquiror, nor have we been furnished with any such evaluations or appraisals other than
as set forth above.
Our opinion addresses only the fairness, from a financial point of view, to the Acquiror of the Exchange
Ratio in the Merger pursuant to the Agreement and, other than assuming the consummation of the
previously announced sale of Memorial Production Partners GP LLC by the Company to Memorial
Production Partners LP (the “MPPGP Sale”), does not address any other aspect or implication (financial or
otherwise) of the Merger or any agreement, arrangement or understanding entered into in connection
therewith or otherwise, including, without limitation, the MPPGP Sale, or the fairness of the amount or
nature of, or any other aspect relating to, any compensation or consideration to be received or otherwise
payable to any officers, directors, employees, securityholders or affiliates of any party to the Merger, or
class of such persons, relative to the Exchange Ratio or otherwise. Furthermore, we are not expressing any
advice or opinion regarding matters that require legal, regulatory, accounting, insurance, tax,
environmental, executive compensation or other similar professional advice including, without limitation,
any advice regarding the amounts of any company’s oil and gas reserves, the riskings of such reserves or
any other aspects of any company’s (including the Company’s or the Acquiror’s) oil and gas reserves. We
have assumed that the Company has or will obtain such advice or opinions from the appropriate
professional sources. The issuance of this opinion was approved by our authorized internal committee.
Our opinion is necessarily based upon information made available to us as of the date hereof and financial,
economic, market and other conditions as they exist and can be evaluated on the date hereof. We have not
undertaken, and are under no obligation, to update, revise, reaffirm or withdraw this opinion, or otherwise
comment on or consider events occurring or coming to our attention after the date hereof. In addition, as
you are aware, the financial projections and estimates that we have reviewed relating to the future financial
performance of the Company and the Acquiror reflect certain assumptions regarding the oil and gas
industry and future commodity prices associated with that industry that are subject to significant
uncertainty and volatility and that, if different than assumed, could have a material impact on our analyses
and this opinion. Our opinion does not address the relative merits of the Merger as compared to alternative
transactions or strategies that might be available to the Acquiror, nor does it address the underlying
business decision of the Board of Directors of the Acquiror (the “Board”) or the Acquiror to proceed with or
effect the Merger. We are not expressing any opinion as to what the value of shares of Acquiror Common
Stock actually will be when issued pursuant to the Merger or the price or range of prices at which Company
Common Stock or Acquiror Common Stock may be purchased or sold at any time. We have assumed that
the shares of Acquiror Common Stock to be issued to the holders of Company Common Stock in the
Merger will be approved for listing on the New York Stock Exchange prior to the consummation of the
Merger.
We have acted as financial advisor to the Acquiror in connection with the Merger and will receive a fee for
our services, a portion of which became payable to us upon the rendering of our opinion and the principal
portion of which is contingent upon the consummation of the Merger. In addition, the Acquiror has agreed
to reimburse certain of our expenses and to indemnify us and certain related parties for certain liabilities
and other items
Table of Contents
B-3
arising out of or related to our engagement. We and our affiliates have provided other financial advice and
services, and may in the future provide financial advice and services, to the Company, the Acquiror and
their respective affiliates including Natural Gas Partners (“NGP”), a group of private investment funds
managed by NGP Energy Capital Management, LLC, and a significant investor in the Company, and certain
entities affiliated or associated with NGP (collectively with NGP, the “NGP Group”) for which we and our
affiliates have received, and would expect to receive, compensation including, during the past two years,
(a) with respect to the Company, having acted as a co-managing underwriter of the initial public offering of
Company Common Stock in June 2014 and co-managing underwriter of a follow-on offering of Company
Common Stock in November 2014, (b) with respect to the Acquiror, having acted as joint bookrunning lead
managing underwriter of an offering of debt securities of the Acquiror in May 2015 and (c) with respect to
the NGP, having provided certain securities distribution services. In addition, we have had discussions with
representatives of a member of the NGP Group regarding and have been mandated to participate in a
potential offering of securities by such entity for which we would expect to receive compensation. We are a
full service securities firm engaged in securities trading and brokerage activities as well as providing
investment banking and other financial services. In the ordinary course of business, we and our affiliates
may acquire, hold or sell, for our and our affiliates’ own accounts and the accounts of customers, any
currency or commodity that may be involved in the Merger and equity, debt and other securities and
financial instruments (including bank loans and other obligations) of the Company, the Acquiror and any
other company that may be involved in the Merger, as well as provide investment banking and other
financial services to such companies and their affiliates.
It is understood that this letter is for the information of the Board (in its capacity as such) in connection with
its consideration of the Merger and does not constitute a recommendation to the Board with respect to the
proposed Merger or advice or a recommendation to any holder of Acquiror Common Stock as to how such
holder should vote or act on any matter relating to the proposed Merger.
Based upon and subject to the foregoing, it is our opinion that, as of the date hereof, the Exchange Ratio in
the Merger pursuant to the Agreement is fair, from a financial point of view, to the Acquiror.
Very truly yours,
/s/ Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC
CREDIT SUISSE SECURITIES (USA) LLC
Table of Contents
B-4
Board of Directors
Memorial Resource Development Corp.
500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800
Houston, TX 77002
Members of the Board of Directors:
Annex C
745 Seventh Avenue
New York, NY 10019
United States
CONFIDENTIAL
May 15, 2016
We understand that Memorial Resource Development Corp. (“Memorial” or the “Company”) intends to
enter into a transaction (the “Proposed Transaction”) with Range Resources Corporation (“Range”) and
Medina Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Range, pursuant to which (i) Merger
Sub will merge with and into the Company, with the Company surviving the merger as a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Range and (ii) upon the effectiveness of the merger, each share of common stock, par value
$0.01 per share, of the Company (“Memorial Common Stock”) then issued and outstanding and held by
holders other than Memorial, Range, Range Merger Sub or any wholly-owned subsidiaries of Range
(collectively, the “Excluded Holders”) will be converted into the right to receive 0.375 of a share (the
“Exchange Ratio”) of the common stock, par value $0.01 per share, of Range (“Range Common Stock”).
The terms and conditions of the Proposed Transaction are set forth in more detail in the Agreement and
Plan of Merger among Memorial, Range, and Merger Sub, dated as of May 15, 2016 (the “Agreement”). The
summary of the Proposed Transaction set forth above is qualified in its entirety by the terms of the
Agreement.
We have been requested by the Board of Directors of the Company to render our opinion with respect to
the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the Exchange Ratio provided for in the Proposed Transaction
to the Company’s stockholders (other than the Excluded Holders). We have not been requested to opine as
to, and our opinion does not in any manner address, the Company’s underlying business decision to
proceed with or effect the Proposed Transaction or the likelihood of consummation of the Proposed
Transaction. In addition, we express no opinion on, and our opinion does not in any manner address, the
fairness of the amount or the nature of any compensation to any officers, directors or employees of any
parties to the Proposed Transaction, or any class of such persons relative to the consideration to be
offered to the stockholders of the Company in the Proposed Transaction. Our opinion does not address the
relative merits of the Proposed Transaction as compared to any other transaction or business strategy in
which the Company might engage.
In arriving at our opinion, we reviewed and analyzed, among other things: (1) the Agreement, including all
ancillary documents thereto, and the specific terms of the Proposed Transaction; (2) publicly available
information concerning the Company and Range that we believe to be relevant to our analysis, including,
without limitation, the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015
and the Company’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2016, as well as
Range’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015 and Range’s Quarterly
Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2016; (3) certain financial and operating
information with respect to the business, operations and prospects of the Company furnished to us by the
Company, including financial projections of the Company prepared by management of the Company (the
“Memorial Management Projections”); (4) certain financial and operating information with respect to the
business, operations and prospects of Range furnished to us by Range, including financial projections of
Range prepared by management of Range (the “Range Management Projections”); (5) estimates of certain
proved, probable, and possible reserves (the “Memorial 3P Reserves”), as of April 1, 2016, for the Company
as prepared by management of the
Table of Contents
Page 2 of 4
C-1
Company (the “Memorial Reserve Report”); (6) estimates of certain proved, probable, and possible
reserves (the “Range 3P Reserves”), as of April 1, 2016, for Range as prepared by management of Range
(the “Range Reserve Report”); (7) a trading history of the Company’s common stock from June 13, 2014 to
May 13, 2016 and a comparison of that trading history with that of other companies that we deemed
relevant; (8) a trading history of Range’s common stock from June 13, 2014 to May 13, 2016 and a
comparison of that trading history with that of other companies that we deemed relevant; (9) a comparison
of the historical financial results and present financial condition of the Company and Range with each other
and with those of certain other companies that we deemed relevant; (10) a comparison of the financial terms
of the Proposed Transaction with the financial terms of certain other transactions that we deemed relevant;
(11) the pro forma impact of the Proposed Transaction on the future financial performance of the combined
company, including the amounts and timing of the cost savings and operating synergies expected by the
management of the Company to result from a combination of the businesses (the “Expected Synergies”)
and other strategic benefits expected by the managements of the Company and Range to result from a
combination of the businesses; (12) published estimates of independent research analysts with respect to
the future financial performance and price targets of the Company and Range; (13) the relative
contributions of the Company and Range to the future financial and operating performance of the
combined company on a pro forma basis and (14) commodity price assumptions and the outlook for future
commodity prices published by independent information service providers. In addition, we have had
discussions with management of both the Company and Range concerning their respective business,
operations, assets, liabilities, financial condition and prospects and have undertaken such other studies,
analyses and investigations as we deemed appropriate.
In arriving at our opinion, we have assumed and relied upon the accuracy and completeness of the
financial and other information used by us without any independent verification of such information (and
have not assumed responsibility or liability for any independent verification of such information) and have
further relied upon the assurances of the managements of the Company and Range that they are not aware
of any facts or circumstances that would make such information inaccurate or misleading. With respect to
the Memorial Management Projections, upon the advice of the Company, we have assumed that such
projections have been reasonably prepared on a basis reflecting the best currently available estimates and
judgments of the management of the Company as to the future financial performance of the Company and
that the Company will perform substantially in accordance with such projections. With respect to the
Memorial Reserve Report, we have discussed this reserve database with the management of the Company
and upon the advice of the Company, we have assumed that the Memorial Reserve Report is a reasonable
basis on which to evaluate the Memorial 3P Reserves. However, for purposes of our analysis, we also have
considered certain somewhat more conservative assumptions and estimates which resulted in certain
adjustments to the Memorial 3P Reserves. We have discussed these adjusted Memorial 3P Reserves with
the management of the Company and they have agreed with the appropriateness of the use of such
adjusted Memorial 3P Reserves in performing our analysis and we have relied upon such projections in
arriving at our opinion. With respect to the Range Management Projections, upon the advice of the
Company and Range, we have assumed that such projections have been reasonably prepared on a basis
reflecting the best currently available estimates and judgments of the management of Range as to the
future financial performance of Range and that Range will perform substantially in accordance with such
projections. With respect to the Range Reserve Report, we have discussed this reserve database with the
management of the Company and Range and upon the advice of the Company and Range, we have
assumed that the Range Reserve Report is a reasonable basis on which to evaluate the Range 3P
Reserves. However, for purposes of our analysis, we have also considered certain somewhat more
conservative assumptions and estimates, which resulted in certain adjustments to the Range 3P Reserves.
We have discussed these adjusted Range 3P Reserves with the management of the Company and they
have agreed with the appropriateness of the use of such adjusted Range 3P Reserves in performing our
analysis and we have relied upon such projections in arriving at our opinion. We assume no responsibility
for and we express no view as to any such projections or
Table of Contents
Page 3 of 4
C-2
estimates or the assumptions of the Company or Range on which they are based. Furthermore, upon the
advice of the Company, we have assumed that the amounts and timing of the Expected Synergies are
reasonable and that the Expected Synergies will be realized in accordance with such estimates. In arriving
at our opinion, we have not conducted a physical inspection of the properties and facilities of the Company
or Range and have not made or obtained any evaluations or appraisals of the assets or liabilities of the
Company or Range. Our opinion necessarily is based upon market, economic and other conditions as they
exist on, and can be evaluated as of, the date of this letter. We assume no responsibility for updating or
revising our opinion and expressly disclaim any responsibility to do so based on events or circumstances
that may occur after the date of this letter. We express no opinion as to the prices at which shares of
common stock of the Company would trade following the announcement or consummation of the
Proposed Transaction. Our opinion should not be viewed as providing any assurance that the market value
of the shares of common stock of Range to be held by the stockholders of the Company after the
consummation of the Proposed Transaction will be in excess of the market value of common stock of the
Company owned by such stockholders at any time prior to the announcement or consummation of the
Proposed Transaction.
We have assumed the accuracy of the representations and warranties contained in the Agreement and all
agreements related thereto. We have also assumed, upon the advice of the Company, that all material
governmental, regulatory and third party approvals, consents and releases for the Proposed Transaction
will be obtained within the constraints contemplated by the Agreement and that the Proposed Transaction
will be consummated in accordance with the terms of the Agreement without waiver, modification or
amendment of any material term, condition or agreement thereof. We do not express any opinion as to any
tax or other consequences that might result from the Proposed Transaction, nor does our opinion address
any legal, tax, regulatory or accounting matters, as to which we understand that the Company has obtained
such advice as it deemed necessary from qualified professionals.
Based upon and subject to the foregoing, we are of the opinion that, as of the date hereof, the Exchange
Ratio provided for in the Proposed Transaction is fair, from a financial point of view, to the Company’s
stockholders (other than the Excluded Holders).
We have acted as financial advisor to the Company in connection with the Proposed Transaction and will
receive a fee for our services, a portion of which is payable upon rendering this opinion and a substantial
portion of which is contingent upon the consummation of the Proposed Transaction. In addition, the
Company has agreed to reimburse a portion of our expenses and indemnify us for certain liabilities that
may arise out of our engagement. We have performed various investment banking services for the
Company and Range in the past, and expect to perform such services in the future, and have received, and
expect to receive, customary fees for such services. Specifically, in the past two years, we have performed
the following investment banking and financial services: (A) for the Company, we acted or currently act, as
applicable, (i) in September 2015, as sole bookrunner on the Company’s $243 million block trade; (ii) in
November 2014, as a bookrunner on the Company’s $790 million secondary offering; (iii) in June 2014, as
bookrunner on the Company’s $600 million senior secured notes offering; (iv) in June 2014, as an active
bookrunner on the Company’s $935 million initial public offering; and (v) as lender under the Company’s
existing credit facilities; and (B) for Range, we acted or currently act, as applicable, (i) in May 2015, as a
bookrunner on Range’s $750 million senior notes offering and (ii) as lender under Range’s existing credit
facility.
In addition, we and our affiliates in the past have provided, currently are providing, or in the future may
provide, investment banking services to NGP Energy Capital Management, L.L.C. (“NGP”), and certain of its
affiliates and portfolio companies and have received or in the future may receive customary fees for
rendering such services, including (i) having acted or acting as financial advisor to NGP and certain of its
portfolio
Table of Contents
Page 4 of 4
C-3
companies and affiliates in connection with certain mergers and acquisition transactions; (ii) having acted
or acting as arranger, bookrunner and/or lender for NGP and certain of its portfolio companies and affiliates
in connection with the financing for various acquisition transactions and (iii) having acted or acting as
underwriter, initial purchaser and placement agent for various equity and debt offerings by NGP and certain
of its portfolio companies and affiliates.
Barclays Capital Inc., its subsidiaries and its affiliates, engage in a wide range of businesses from
investment and commercial banking, lending, asset management and other financial and non-financial
services. In the ordinary course of our business, we and our affiliates may actively trade and effect
transactions in the equity, debt and/or other securities (and any derivatives thereof) and financial
instruments (including loans and other obligations) of the Company and Range for our own account and
for the accounts of our customers and, accordingly, may at any time hold long or short positions and
investments in such securities and financial instruments.
This opinion, the issuance of which has been approved by our Fairness Opinion Committee, is for the use
and benefit of the Board of Directors of the Company and is rendered to the Board of Directors in
connection with its consideration of the Proposed Transaction. This opinion is not intended to be and does
not constitute a recommendation to any stockholder of the Company as to how such stockholder should
vote with respect to the Proposed Transaction.
Very truly yours,
/s/ Barclays Capital Inc.
BARCLAYS CAPITAL INC.
Table of Contents
C-4
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC
1585 Broadway
New York, NY, 10036
CONFIDENTIAL
15 May 2016
Board of Directors
Memorial Resource Development Corp.
500 Dallas Street, Suite 1800
Houston, Texas 77002
Members of the Board:
Annex D
We understand that Memorial Resource Development Corp. (the “Company”), Range Resources
Corporation (the “Parent”), and Medina Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”), propose to enter into an
Agreement and Plan of Merger dated May 15, 2016 (the “Merger Agreement”), which provides, among other
things, for the merger (the “Merger”) of Merger Sub with and into the Company. Pursuant to the Merger, the
Company will become a wholly owned subsidiary of the Parent, and each issued and outstanding share of
common stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Company Common Stock”) of the Company, other than
shares held by the Company as treasury shares or shares held by the Parent or Merger Sub or by any
wholly owned subsidiary of the Parent, Merger Sub or the Company (collectively, the “Excluded Shares”),
will be converted into the right to receive 0.3750 shares (the “Exchange Ratio”) of common stock, par value
$0.01 per share, of the Parent (the “Parent Common Stock”). The terms and conditions of the Merger are
more fully set forth in the Merger Agreement.
You have asked for our opinion as to whether the Exchange Ratio pursuant to the Merger Agreement is fair
from a financial point of view to the holders of shares of the Company Common Stock (other than the
Excluded Shares).
For purposes of the opinion set forth herein, we have:
1) Reviewed certain publicly available financial statements and other publicly available business and financial
information of the Company and the Parent, respectively;
2) Reviewed certain internal financial statements and other internal financial and operating data concerning the
Company and the Parent, respectively;
3) Reviewed certain financial and operating projections prepared by the managements of the Company and the
Parent, respectively;
4) Discussed the past and current operations and financial condition and the prospects of the Company, including
information relating to certain strategic, financial and operational benefits anticipated from the Merger, with
senior executives of the Company;
5) Discussed the past and current operations and financial condition and the prospects of the Parent, including
information relating to certain strategic, financial and operational benefits anticipated from the Merger, with
senior executives of the Parent;
6) Reviewed the pro forma impact of the Merger on certain valuation multiples and financial ratios of the Parent;
Table of Contents
D-1
7) Reviewed the reported prices and trading activity for the Company Common Stock and the Parent Common
Stock;
8) Compared the financial performance of the Company and the Parent and the prices and trading activity of the
Company Common Stock and the Parent Common Stock with that of certain other publicly-traded companies
comparable with the Company and the Parent, respectively, and their securities;
9) Reviewed the financial terms, to the extent publicly available, of certain comparable acquisition transactions;
10) Participated in discussions among representatives of the Company and the Parent and their financial and legal
advisors;
11) Reviewed the Merger Agreement and certain related documents; and
12) Performed such other analyses; reviewed such other information and considered such other factors as we
have deemed appropriate.
We have assumed and relied upon, without independent verification, the accuracy and completeness of the
information that was publicly available or supplied or otherwise made available to us by the Company and
the Parent, and formed a substantial basis for this opinion. With respect to the financial and operating
projections, including information relating to certain strategic, financial and operational benefits anticipated
from the Merger, we have assumed that they have been reasonably prepared on bases reflecting the best
currently available estimates and judgments of the respective managements of the Company and the
Parent of the future financial and operating performance of the Company and the Parent. In addition, we
have assumed that the Merger will be consummated in accordance with the terms set forth in the Merger
Agreement without any waiver, amendment or delay of any terms or conditions, including, among other
things, that the Merger will be treated as a tax-free reorganization, pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended. Morgan Stanley has assumed that in connection with the receipt of all the necessary
governmental, regulatory or other approvals and consents required for the proposed Merger, no delays,
limitations, conditions or restrictions will be imposed that would have a material adverse effect on the
contemplated benefits expected to be derived in the proposed Merger. We are not legal, tax or regulatory
advisors. We are financial advisors only and have relied upon, without independent verification, the
assessment of the Parent and the Company and their legal, tax or regulatory advisors with respect to legal,
tax or regulatory matters. We express no opinion with respect to the fairness of the amount or nature of the
compensation to any of the Company’s officers, directors or employees, or any class of such persons,
relative to the consideration to be received by the holders of shares of the Company Common Stock in the
Merger. We have not made any independent valuation or appraisal of the assets or liabilities of the
Company or the Parent, nor have we been furnished with any such valuations or appraisals. Our opinion is
necessarily based on financial, economic, market and other conditions as in effect on, and the information
made available to us as of, the date hereof. Events occurring after the date hereof may affect this opinion
and the assumptions used in preparing it, and we do not assume any obligation to update, revise or
reaffirm this opinion.
Our opinion is limited to the fairness, from a financial point of view, of the Exchange Ratio to be received by
the holders of shares of the Company Common Stock (other than Excluded Shares) pursuant to the Merger
Agreement and does not address the relative merits of the transactions contemplated by the Merger
Agreement as compared to other business or financial strategies that might be available to the Company,
nor does it address the underlying business decision of the Company to enter into the Merger Agreement
or proceed with any other transaction contemplated by the Merger Agreement.
We have acted as financial advisor to the Board of Directors of the Company in connection with this
transaction and will receive a fee for our services, which is contingent upon the closing of the Merger. In the
two years prior to the date hereof, we have provided financing services for the Company and have received
fees in connection with such services. Morgan Stanley may also seek to provide financial advisory and
financing services to the Company, the Parent and their respective affiliates in the future and would expect
to receive fees for the rendering of these services.
Table of Contents
D-2
Please note that Morgan Stanley is a global financial services firm engaged in the securities, investment
management and individual wealth management businesses. Our securities business is engaged in
securities underwriting, trading and brokerage activities, foreign exchange, commodities and derivatives
trading, prime brokerage, as well as providing investment banking, financing and financial advisory
services. Morgan Stanley, its affiliates, directors and officers may at any time invest on a principal basis or
manage funds that invest, hold long or short positions, finance positions, and may trade or otherwise
structure and effect transactions, for their own account or the accounts of its customers, in debt or equity
securities or loans of the Parent, the Company, or any other company, or any currency or commodity, that
may be involved in this transaction, or any related derivative instrument.
This opinion has been approved by a committee of Morgan Stanley investment banking and other
professionals in accordance with our customary practice. This opinion is for the information of the Board of
Directors of the Company and may not be used for any other purpose or disclosed without our prior written
consent, except that a copy of this opinion may be included in its entirety in any filing the Company is
required to make with the Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with this transaction if such
inclusion is required by applicable law. In addition, this opinion does not in any manner address the prices
at which the Parent Common Stock will trade following consummation of the Merger or at any time and
Morgan Stanley expresses no opinion or recommendation as to how the shareholders of the Company
should vote at the shareholders’ meeting to be held in connection with the Merger.
Based on and subject to the foregoing, we are of the opinion on the date hereof that the Exchange Ratio
pursuant to the Merger Agreement is fair from a financial point of view to the holders of shares of the
Company Common Stock (other than the Excluded Shares).
Table of Contents
100 THROCKMORTON STREET
SUITE 1200
FORT WORTH, TX 76102
Very truly yours,
MORGAN STANLEY & CO. LLC
By:   /s/ Jonathan Cox
Jonathan Cox
Managing Director
D-3
VOTE BY INTERNET - www.proxyvote.com
Use the Internet to transmit your voting instructions
and for electronic delivery of information up until 11:59
P.M. Eastern Time the day before the cut-off date or
meeting date. Have your proxy card in hand when you
access the web site and follow the instructions to
obtain your records and to create an electronic voting
instruction form.
VOTE BY PHONE - 1-800-690-6903
Use any touch-tone telephone to transmit your voting
instructions up until 11:59 P.M. Eastern Time the day
before the cut-off date or meeting date. Have your
proxy card in hand when you call and then follow the
instructions.
VOTE BY MAIL
Mark, sign and date your proxy card and return it in
the postage-paid envelope we have provided or return
it to Vote Processing, c/o Broadridge, 51 Mercedes
Way, Edgewood, NY 11717.
TO VOTE, MARK BLOCKS BELOW IN BLUE OR BLACK INK
AS FOLLOWS:
KEEP THIS PORTION FOR YOUR RECORDS
THIS PROXY CARD IS VALID ONLY WHEN SIGNED AND DATED.
DETACH AND RETURN THIS PORTION ONLY
The Board of Directors recommends you vote FOR
proposal 1 and 2.
  
  
 
1.
To approve the issuance of shares of Range Resources Corporation common
stock, par value $0.01 per share, to Memorial Resource Development Corp.
stockholders in connection with the merger contemplated by the Agreement
and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 15, 2016, by and among Range
Resources Corporation, Memorial Resource Development Corp. and Medina
Merger Sub, Inc. (the “Range Stock Issuance Proposal”).
To approve the adjournment of the Range Resources Corporation special
meeting to a later date or dates, if necessary or appropriate, to solicit
additional proxies in the event there are not sufficient votes at the time of the
special meeting to approve the Range Stock Issuance Proposal.
2.
For     Against     Abstain      
  ¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
¨
For address change/comments, mark here.
(see reverse for instructions)
¨
Please indicate if you plan to attend this meeting
Yes  No  
   ¨
¨
Please sign exactly as your name(s) appear(s) hereon. When signing as attorney, executor, administrator, or
other fiduciary, please give full title as such. Joint owners should each sign personally. All holders must sign. If a
corporation, LLC or partnership, please sign in full corporate, company or partnership name, by authorized
officer.
Signature [PLEASE SIGN WITHIN BOX]
Date      Signature (Joint Owners)
Date
Table of Contents
YOUR VOTE AND PARTICIPATION IN RANGE RESOURCES CORPORATION’S AFFAIRS ARE IMPORTANT
TO ENSURE THAT YOUR SHARES ARE REPRESENTED AT THE SPECIAL MEETING, PLEASE VOTE IN
ONE OF THESE WAYS:
•   USE THE TOLL-FREE NUMBER 1-800-690-6903;
•   VISIT THE WEBSITE (www.proxyvote.com) to vote via the internet;
•   MARK, SIGN, DATE AND PROMPTLY RETURN the enclosed proxy card in the postage-paid envelope, or
return it to Vote Processing, c/o Broadridege, 51 Mercedes Way, Edgewood, NY 11717; or
•   VOTE IN PERSON by appearing at the special meeting and submitting a ballot.
Important Notice Regarding the Availability of Proxy Materials for the Special Meeting: The Notice of Special
Meeting and Joint Proxy Statement/Prospectus is/are available at www.proxyvote.com
RANGE RESOURCES CORPORATION
Special Meeting of Stockholders September 15, 2016
Proxy Solicited on Behalf of the Board of Directors
The undersigned hereby appoint(s) Jeffrey L. Ventura, David P. Poole and Roger S. Manny, and each
of them, as proxies, each with the power to appoint his substitute, and hereby authorizes them to
represent and vote, as designated on the reverse side of this proxy, all of the shares of Common Stock
of Range Resources Corporation that the undersigned is entitled to vote at the special meeting of
stockholders to be held at 10:00 a.m., Central Daylight Time, on September 15, 2016, at The
Worthington Hotel, Live Oak V - Room, 200 Main Street, Fort Worth, Texas 76102, and any
adjournment or postponement thereof.
THIS PROXY, WHEN PROPERLY EXECUTED, WILL BE VOTED IN THE MANNER DIRECTED
HEREIN BY THE UNDERSIGNED STOCKHOLDER. IF NO SPECIFIC DIRECTION IS GIVEN, THE
PROXY WILL BE VOTED “FOR” EACH OF THE PROPOSALS SET FORTH ON THE REVERSE
SIDE.
The proxies are authorized to vote in their discretion upon such other matters as may properly
be brought before the special meeting of stockholders or any adjournment or postponement of
it.
Address change/comments:
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
(If you noted any Address Changes and/or Comments above, please mark corresponding box on the
reverse side.)
Continued and to be signed on reverse side