
8th Floor, 100 University Avenue
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2Y1
www.computershare.com
Security Class
Holder Account Number
Form of Proxy - Annual General and Special Meeting to be held on September 26, 2016
This Form of Proxy is solicited by and on behalf of Management.
Notes to proxy
1.  Every holder has the right to appoint some other person or company of their choice, who need not be a holder, to attend and act on their behalf at the meeting or any 
adjournment or postponement thereof. If you wish to appoint a person or company other than the persons whose names are printed herein, please insert the name of 
your chosen proxyholder in the space provided (see reverse).
2.  If the securities are registered in the name of more than one owner (for example, joint ownership, trustees, executors, etc.), then all those registered should sign this proxy. If you are 
voting on behalf of a corporation or another individual you must sign this proxy with signing capacity stated, and you may be required to provide documentation evidencing your power 
to sign this proxy.
3. This proxy should be signed in the exact manner as the name(s) appear(s) on the proxy.
4. If this proxy is not dated, it will be deemed to bear the date on which it is mailed by Management to the holder.
5.  The securities represented by this proxy will be voted as directed by the holder, however, if such a direction is not made in respect of any matter, this proxy will be voted
as recommended by Management.
6.  The securities represented by this proxy will be voted in favour or withheld from voting or voted against each of the matters described herein, as applicable, in accordance with the
instructions of the holder, on any ballot that may be called for and, if the holder has speciﬁ ed a choice with respect to any matter to be acted on, the securities will be voted accordingly.
7.  This proxy confers discretionary authority in respect of amendments or variations to matters identiﬁ ed in the Notice of Meeting or other matters that may properly come before the
meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof.
8. This proxy should be read in conjunction with the accompanying documentation provided by Management.
Proxies submitted must be received by 10:00 a.m., (ADT) on September 22, 2016.
VOTE USING THE TELEPHONE OR INTERNET 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK!
Fold
Fold
To Vote Using the Telephone
To Vote Using the Internet
•
Call the number listed BELOW from a touch tone 
telephone.
1-866-732-VOTE (8683) Toll Free
•  Go to the following web site: 
   www.investorvote.com
•  Smartphone?
  Scan the QR code to vote now.
If you vote by telephone or the Internet, DO NOT mail back this proxy.
Voting by mail may be the only method for securities held in the name of a corporation or securities being voted on behalf of another individual.
Voting by mail or by Internet are the only methods by which a holder may appoint a person as proxyholder other than the Management nominees named on the reverse of this proxy. 
Instead of mailing this proxy, you may choose one of the two voting methods outlined above to vote this proxy.
To vote by telephone or the Internet, you will need to provide your CONTROL NUMBER listed below.
CONTROL NUMBER
019KZB
Appointment of Proxyholder
I/We, being holder(s) of NWEST ENERGY CORP. hereby appoint(s): 
Kevin Aylward, or failing him Bill Fleming
OR
Print the name of the person you are 
appointing if this person is someone 
other than the Management Nominees 
listed herein.
as my/our proxyholder with full power of substitution and to attend, act and to vote for and on behalf of the shareholder in accordance with the following direction (or if no directions have been 
given, as the proxyholder sees ﬁ t) and all other matters that may properly come before the Annual General and Special Meeting of shareholders of NWest Energy Corp. to be held at 24-260 
Brownlow Ave, Dartmouth, Nova Scotia B3B 1V9, on September 26, 2016 at 10:00 (ADT) and at any adjournment or postponement thereof.
VOTING RECOMMENDATIONS ARE INDICATED BY HIGHLIGHTED TEXT OVER THE BOXES.
For
Against
1. To Set the Number of Directors at 3
2. To Set the Number of Directors of the Corporation to be elected following the Change of Board Time (as deﬁ ned in the accompanying Management Information Circular) at 5.
3. Election of Directors
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
Fold
01.  Brett James
02.   Bill Fleming
03. Kevin Aylward
4. Election of Directors
To elect the following directors to serve from the Change of Board Time (as deﬁ ned in the accompanying Management Information Circular):
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
For
Withhold
01.  Brett James
04.  Bill Fleming
02.  Bharat Parashar
05.  Kevin Aylward
03.  George Smitherman
5. Appointment of Auditors 
Appointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, Halifax, Nova Scotia as Auditors of the Corporation for the ensuing year and authorizing the Directors to ﬁ x their remuneration.
For Withhold
For
Against
6. Consolidation 
To consider, and, if deemed appropriate, to pass, a special resolution approving the consolidation of the issued and outstanding common shares of the Corporation at a ratio of one post-
consolidation common share for up to every seven pre-consolidation common shares.
7. Constating Documents Amendment 
To consider, and, if deemed appropriate, to pass, a special resolution approving an amendment to the by-laws and Articles of the Corporation to allow for the appointment of additional directors 
to the board by the directors in between annual general meetings.
Fold
8. Name Change Resolution 
To consider, and, if deemed appropriate, to pass, a special resolution approving an amendment to the Articles of the Corporation to change the name of the Corporation to “Ceylon Graphite 
Corp.”, or such other name as may be determined and acceptable to the board of directors and the applicable regulatory authorities.
9. Stock Option Plan Resolution 
To consider, and if deemed appropriate, to pass, an ordinary resolution, re-approving the stock option plan of the Corporation.
Signature(s)
Date
Authorized Signature(s) - This section must be completed for your 
instructions to be executed.
I/We authorize you to act in accordance with my/our instructions set out above. I/We hereby revoke any 
proxy previously given with respect to the Meeting. If no voting instructions are indicated above, this 
Proxy will be voted as recommended by Management.
MM / DD / YY
Interim Financial Statements – Mark this box if you 
would like to receive Interim Financial Statements and 
accompanying Management’s Discussion and Analysis 
by mail.
If you are not mailing back your proxy, you may register online to receive the above ﬁ nancial report(s) by mail at www.computershare.com/mailinglist.
Annual Financial Statements – Mark this box if 
you would NOT like to receive the Annual Financial 
Statements and accompanying Management’s Discussion 
and Analysis by mail.
Information Circular – Mark this box if you would like 
to receive the Information Circular by mail for the next 
securityholders’ meeting.
T R G Q
019L0C
2 0 6 2 4 9
A R 2