
A
( QDRUCDBRE
OROCOBRE LIMITED
ABN 31112 589 910
FINANCIAL REPORT

FOR THE YEAR ENDED

30 JUNE 2013
l


Contents Page
Corporate Intormation 3
Directors' Report 4
Remuneration Report 19
Auditore‘ Independence Declaration 33
Corporate Governance Statement 39
Financial statements 46
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 47
Consolidated statement of Financial Position 43
Coneolldeted Statement oi Cash Flows 49
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 50
Notes to the Financial Statements:
NOTE 1: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies 51
NOTE 2: Result tor the Period 64
NOTE 3: Proﬁt/(Less) tor the Year 64
NOTE 4: Income Tax Expense 54
NOTE 5: Earnings Per Share 65
NOTE 6: Auditors' Remuneration 66
NOTE 7: cash and Cash Equivalents 53
NOTE 8: Trade and Other Receivables se
NOTE 9: Inventory 67
NOTE 10: Other Assets 67
NOTE 11: Financial Assets 67
NOTE 12: Property, Plant and Equlpment 37
NOTE ‘3: Exploration, Evaluation and Development Asset 68
NOTE 14: Investment in Joint Venture 55
NOTE 15: Trade and other Payables 69
NOTE 16: Loans and Borrowings 69
NOTE 17: Provisions 69
NOTE 13: Business Combinations 70
NOTE 19: Issued Capital 71
NOTE 20: Reserves 71
NOTE 2‘: Cash Flow Information 72
NOTE 22: Related Party Transactions 72
NOTE 23: Commltments 73
NOTE 24: Contingent Items 74
NOTE 25: Key Management Personnel Compensation 81 Equlty 74
NOTE 26: Share Based Payments 76
NOTE 27: Financial Risk Management 77
NOTE 26: Segment Reporting 61
NOTE 29: Subsequent Events 82
NOTE 30: Parent Emlty Iniormation 82
NOTE 31: Controlled Entities 83
NOTE 32: Company Details 83
Directors' Declaration 84
Independent Auditors‘ Report 85
ASX Additional Intormation 87
Technical Inlormetion, Competent Persons' and Qualified Persons' statements 98
7


Corporate Information
Directors Mr James Calaway (Non-Executive Chairman)
Mr Richard Seville (Managing Director)
Mr John Gibson (Non-Executive Director)
Mr Courtney Pratt (Non~Executive Director)
Mr Fernando Oris cte Roa (Non-Executive Director)
Mr Federioo Nicholson (Non-Executive Director)
Mr Robert Hubbard (Non-Executive Director)
Secretary Mr Neil Kaplan
Registered Ofﬁce Level 1
349 Coronation Drive
MILTON, OLD 4064
AUSTRALIA
Ph: (+617) 3571 3935
Fax: (+617) 3720 8983
Email: rneil@oroobre.com
Website: www.crocobrecom
ACN 1 12 589 910
Auditors Ernst & Young Australia
Level 51,
111 Eagle Street
Brisbane, QLD 4000
AUSTRALIA
Legal Advisers Hemming+Hart McCarthy Tetrault LLP
Level 5 Suite 5300 TD Bank Tower
807 Queen Street Toronto Dominion Centre
BRISBANE QLD 4000 66 Wellington Street West
AUSTRALIA TORONTO ON MSKI E6
CANADA
Saravia Frias Cornejo Abogados
Rivadevia 378
(A4400EITH)
SALTA
ARGENTINA
Share Registries Boardroom Pty Limited Equity Financial Trust
Level 7 Company
207 Kent Street 200 University Avenue
SYDNEY NSW 2000 Suite 400
AUSTRALIA TORONTO ON M5H4H1
CANADA
3


q ‘ El R C! B D B R E
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
4


0_rocobre Limited

Directors' Report

Your Directors present their report and financial statements of the Group, being the Company and its controlled
entities for the financial year ended 30 June, 2013. Directors have been in office since the start of the ﬁnancial year to
the date of this report unless indicated otherwise.

Information on Directors

The Company‘s Directors have significant public company management experience. together with a strong
background in mineral exploration and management, project development. financial markets. accounting and
iinance. Their experience covers many resource sectors in Australia and internationally. The names and
qualifications of the current Directors are summarised as follows:

James D. Calaway BA — Economic, MA- Politics, Philosophy & Economics

Non-Executive Che/Tine”

Mr Calaway was appointed a Director in May 2009. Mr Calaway is a respected business and civic leader in Houston.
Texas. He has considerable experience and success in building young companies into successful commercial
enterprises. Mr Calaway and his family have played major roles in the development of both public and private
companies in the United States. including companies engaged in oil and gas exploration and production. and
commercial wind-iarm development. Mr Calaway currently serves as Chairman of the Board of DataCert Inc. the
global leader in legal operations management, and has served as a Director on several other U.S. corporate boards.
Mr. Calaway currently serves as the Chairman of the Board of the Center for Houston's Future. the Houston region's
“think tank". Mr Calaway is a graduate of the University of Texas and University of Oxiord. He is a member oi the
Remuneration Committee.

Directors/ups held in otherASX listed companies /n the last three years: Elementos Limited

(Jan 2011»present)

Richard P, Seville BSc. MEngSc, MAusIMM, ARSM

Managing Director and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer

Mr Seville was appointed a Director in April 2007. Mr Seville is a mining geologist and geotechnical engineer with
over 30 years’ minerals sector experience covering exploration, mine development and mine operations. He has
had significant corporate experience. having had many years in the role of Operations Director and/or CEO in
ASX/AIM listed mining companies. Mr Seville is a graduate of the Royal School of Mines. Imperial College and
James Cook University North Queensland.

Directly/amps held /n other ASX listed companies in the /ast three years: Leyshon Resources Ltd

(Feb 2007-present)

Neil F. Stuart (Retired, November 2012) MSc.. FAusJMM, MMICA. MAJG

Non-EXecut/Ve Director
Mr Stuart was a founding shareholder and was a Director since its incorporation . He has over 40 years‘ experience
in the minerals industry and is a Fellow of The Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy and a Member of The
Australian institute of Geoscientists. He has considerable experience in many commodities including gold. base
metals. coal and uranium and he has been heavily involved in project delineation and acquisition in Australia. Mexico
and Argentina. He has held executive Director roles with a number of ASX listed companies in the past. Mr. Stuart is
a graduate of the University of Melbourne and James Cook University of North Queensland. Mr Stuart retired from
the Board in November 2012.
Directors/7605 he/d/n olhe/ASX listed companies in the last three years:
Bowen Energy Limited (Jul 2006»Feb 2013) ; Axiom Mining Limited (Mar Zoos—April 2013); OGL Resources Limited
(Dec 2009-present); Elementos Limited (Dec 2009 — Nov 2011).

5


Drooobre Limited _
Directors' Report (continued)

John W. Gibson Bachelor of Geology, Masters Degree in Geology

Nonvexecutive Director

Mr Gibson was appointed a Director in March, 2010. Mr Gibson. is a recognised leader in the energy technology
and services industn/ with more than 25 years oi global energy experience. Mr. Gibson currently serves as the
President and Chief Executive Ollicer oi Tervita Corporation, a major Canadian environmental and oil iield services
company.

Prior to joining Tervita, Mr Gibson served as Chiei Executive Oilicer oi an enterprise software solutions company
sewing oil and gas industry clients and has held senior positions with the Halliburton Group oi Companies, most
recently as President of Halliburton‘s Energy Services Group.

Mr. Gibson serves on the Boards oi Directors for Tervita, Blue Spark Energy Inc., and l-Pulse Inc. He is a member oi
the University of Houston Energy Advisory Committee, and Houston Baptist University Board oi Trustees.

Mr Gibson holds a Bachelor oi Science from Auburn University and a Master of Science irom the University oi
Houston and is a member oi several proiessional societies. He is a member oi the Audit Committee

Directorsh/ps held in other ASX listed companies in the last three years: Nil

Courtney Pratt

Non-Executive Director/Lead Independent Director

Mr Pratt was appointed a Director in March 2010. Mr Pratt has enjoyed a 40-year career at the helm oi some of
Canada's top industrial businesses, particularly in the energy, minerals, and mining sectors. From 2004 to 2006, he
was President and CEO oi Stelco. a major Canadian steel producer, guiding it through a court supervised
restructuring, and then served as Stelco's Chairman until the company's sale to the US Steel Corporation in 2007.
Earlier. Mr Pratt serves as the President and CEO oi Toronto Hydro, North America's largest municipally owned
electricity distributor. He also sen/ed as President and subsequently as Chairman of Noranda Inc., a global
diversiﬁed natural resource company headquartered in Toronto. In this capacity he served as a Director of Noranda
Minerals Inc., Falconbridge Ltd, Battle Mountain Gold Company, Noranda Forest Inc., (Chairman). Noroen Energy
Resources Limited and Canadian Hunter Exploration Limited.

Mr Pratt served as Chairman and Chiei Executive Oificer of the Toronto Region Research Alliance to March 2010. He
is also Chairman oi Knightsbridge Human Capital and a Director oi Moosehead Breweries Limited, 407 International
Inc. and CMA Holdings, the physician services arm of the Canadian Medical Association. Mr Pratt was awarded the
Order of Canada in January 1999. He is Lead Independent Director. Chairman of the Remuneration Committee and
was previously a member oi the Audit Committee.

Directors/ups held in other ASX listed dampen/es in the last three years; Nil

Fernando Orls de Floa Masters of Public Administration

Non-Executive Director

Mr Oris de Floa was appointed a Director in June 2010, Mr Oris de Floa is a highly successiul business leader with a
history oi developing and operating large enterprises in Argentina and with a reputation tor integrity and social
responsibility in his business life. Mr Oris de Roa began his 23 year career with large trading company Continental
Grain in 1970, working in USA, Spain, Switzerland. Brazil and Argentina and rose through the ranks to be
responsible ior all oi Latin America. As Chiei Executive, he is widely credited with turning S.A. San Miguel into the
largest and most proiitable lemon and lemon products company in the world. The process oi restructuring included
listing S.A. San Miguel on the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange in 1997,

Mr Oris de Roa was Chiet Executive and significant shareholder oi Avex S,A. from 2004 to 2012. He has also held
the role oi Director of Patagonia Gold Ltd. He holds a Masters of Public Administration from The Kennedy School oi
Government at Harvard University. He is a member at the Audit Committee and was previously a member of the
Remuneration Committee.

Directorsh/ps held in other/13X listed companies in the last three years: Nil

6


Oyooobre Limited .
Directors‘ Report (continued)

Federico Nicholson Bachelor oi Law

Non-Executive Director

Mr. Nicholson was appointed Director in September. 2010. From 1991, Mr. Nicholson has sewed as Executive
Director of Ledesma S.A.A.I. (Ledesma), a diversitied Argentine agroindustrial producer oi sugar, alcohol,
bioethanol, paper, notebooks, corn symps and starches, fruits, juicesI livestock and grains.

Mr. Nicholson was Vice President of the Argentine Industrial Union (UIA), the country‘s leading business advocacy
group, lor fourteen consecutive years (1999-2013) and currently serves as President of the Argentine North Regional
Sugar Centre. Other positions held during his career include, Vice President of the Argentine Pulp and Paper
Association, Deputy Secretary of the Food Industries Association, President of the National Industrial Movement and
Vice President of the Argentine Corn Starch and Syrups Chamber.

Mr. Nicholson is a law graduate from the University of Buenos Aires, Argentina. He is a member 01 the Remuneration
Committee.

D/‘Iecrolsh/ps held in ctherASX llisted companies in the last three years: Nil

Robert Hubbard BA (Hons), FCA, MAICD

Non-Executive Director

Mr. Hubbard was appointed a Director in November 2012. Mr Hubbard brings a wealth of experience and pertinent
knowledge to the Orocobre Board, having served for over 20 years as a partner at PricewaterhouseCoopers. During
his time as a HMO partner, he served as auditor for some of Australia's largest resource companies with activities
throughout Australia, Papua New Guinea, West Africa and South America. His experience has covered a range of
commodities including base metals, gold, oil and gas and thermal and metallurgical coal. As an adviser, Mr Hubbard
has also provided accounting and due diligence services for acquisitions, divestments, capital raisings and public
takeovers.

Mr. Hubbard also serves as a non-executive Director in various community and commercial Iocussed organisations.
He is currently Chairman of Opera Queensland and Multiple Sclerosis Australia and a Director of U0 Health Care Pty
Ltd, MS Research Australia. MS International Federation and Council member of the University of the Sunshine
Coast. Mr Hubbard is also a non-executive Director of Bendigo and Adelaide Bank Ltd.

Mr Hubbard chairs the Company’s Audit Committee.

Direclolshgos held in other/15X listed companies in the last three years: Bendigo and Adelaide Bank Ltd

(Apr 2013-present)

Company Secretary

Paul Crawford held the position of Company Secretary at the end of the financial period. Mr Crawford served as
Company Secretary of the Company since its incorporation and also as a Director in its Iirst two years as an ASX
listed company. Effective 1'l July 2013. Paul Crawiord resigned and Mr Neil Kaplan was appointed Company
Secretary oI the Company, Mr Kaplan Is also Chief Financial Officer,

7


Oyooobre Limited .
Directors' Report (continued)
Dividends
No dividend has been proposed or paid since the start of the yeart
Shares and Share Options
The relevant interest ol each Director held directly or indirectly in shares and options issued by the Company at the
date of this report is as follows:-
J Calaway 8,574,000 150,000
RP Seville 4,976,500
dweibson m 
FNacnoIson — 
nwubbard ——
Pertormance Rims and Otions
— Fertormance Hi 2 his
RP Seville 140.792 301,092
Share options and performance rights
unissued shares
As at the date of this report, there were 1,901,092 unissued ordinary shares under options and 140,792 unissued
ordinary shares under periormance rights (PR).
Refer to the remuneration report for further details of the options outstanding.
Option and PR holders do not have any right, by vinue oi the instrument, to participate in any share issue of the
Company or any related body corporate.
Snares issued as a result of the exercise of options
During the financial year. employees and executives have not exercised any options.
Directors
The Directors otthe Company at any time during or slnce the end oi the linanciel year are listed below. During the
year there were 6 Board meetings. The Board and Committee meetings attended by each Director were:
. . Remuneration
 m cm
mm
James Caleway 6 6 - - 4
Richard Seville 6 6 . . _
Neil Stuart“l 3 a - - -
John Gibson 6 6 5 5 -
Courtney Pratt‘?’ 6 6 2 2 4
Fernando Oris de Floam 6 6 5 5 2
Federico Nioolsonl‘l e 4 . . o
Flobert HubbardIsl 8 3 3 8
8


Drooobre Limited .
Directors‘ Report (continued)

(1) Neil Stuart retired as a Director in November 2012

(2) Courtney Pratt was a member of the Audit Committee until December 2012

(3) Fernando Oris de Roe was a member of the Remuneration Committee in addition to his duties as a member

of the Audit Committee until the appointment of Frederico Nicholson as a member of the Remuneration
Committee in December 2012I effective 1" January 2013.

(4) Federico Nicholson’s meeting attendance was compromised due to illness that has now been resolved.

(5) Robert Hubbard was appointed as a Director in November 2012.
Committee Membership
At the date of this report the Company had an audit committee and a remuneration committee.

Audit Committee Remuneration Committee
F. Oris de Roa F. Nicholson
(c) Designates the chairman of the committee
Indemnification of officers
During the linancial year the Company paid an insurance premium in respect oi a contract insuring the Company‘s
past, present and future Directors. secretary or officer of the company against liabilities arising as a result of work
performed in their capacity as Director, secretary or officer oi the Company. The Directors have not included details
of the nature of the liabilities covered or the amount of the premium paid in respect of Directors and officers liability
insurance contracts as such disclosure is prohibited under the terms of the contract. The Company Constitution also
contains an indemnity provision in favour 01 each Director, Company Secretary and executive officers (or former
officers) against liability incurred in this capacity, to the extent permitted by law.
Principal Activities
The principal activities of the Group during the year were the finalisation of the project funding arrangements and
subsequent construction of the company's ﬂagship Olaroz lithium project, resource definition at Cauchari, long term
pumping test results at Salinas Grandes, and the acquisition in August 2012 of, and subsequent the operations at.
Borax Argentina SA. .
Operating and ﬁnancial Review
The groups operating profit for the year, after applicable income tax and non-controlling interests was $95,684,677
(2012:($2,830,028)). Group exploration and evaluation expenditure for the year totalled $7,650,575 (2012:
$15,200.189).
During the year the Company executed an agreement with Toyota Tsusho Corporation Ltd ("T'I'C") for a joint venture
to develop the Olaroz Project located in the Province oi Jujuy, northern Argentina. Prior to the transaction the Group
owned a 100% interest in the Olaroz Project.
The Olaroz Project Joint Venture is operated through Sales de Jujuy S,A. ('SDJ SA") a 91.5% owned subsidiary of
Sales de Jujuy Pte Ltd (“SDJ PTE"), a Singaporean company that both Orooobre (72.68%) and 170 (27.32%) are
shareholders in directly and indirectly respectively. The effective Olaroz Project equity interest is Orooobre 66.5%,
TI'C 25.0% and Jujuy Energia y Mineria Sociedad del Estado ("JEMSE") 8.5%. A diagram of the joint venture is
contained in the Review of Operations.
9


orocobre Limited _
Directors' Report (continued)
Since the creation of the joint venture between the Company and TI’C, Orocobre has recognised its interest in the
joint venture as an equity accounted investment. Prior to this date, the Company consolidated the assets, liabilities,
revenue and expenses of the project as a 100% owned subsidiary. Under the equity method of accounting.
Orocobre's interest in the joint venture is recognised on the balance sheet at fair value. This carrying amount ls then
adjusted for subsequent equity investments, the Company's share of the post acquisition profit or loss of the joint
venture and any dividends received. As a result capital expenditure by the joint venture and draw downs on the
project financing facility will not be recognised directly in the Groups financial statements.
The Company recorded its remaining interest in the project at fair value and recorded a non cash and non taxable
profit of $101.963,338 in the December half year accounts as a result of the transaction. The remaining investment in
the project has been accounted for as ajoint venture using the equity method of accounting.
The other signiﬁcant event for the year was the acquisition of Borax Argentina S.A. The consideration for the
purchase was US$81 million of which US$5.5million was paid in August 2012. There is a further US$1.0m payable
annually for 2 years on each anniversary of the acquisition, and a final payment of $629k on the third anniversary of
the acquisition. The consideration comprises US$3.13 million for all of the issued shares of Borax Argentina and
US$4.8 million paid to Borax Europe Ltd, a Rio Tinto PLC company as consideration for the assignment of a loan
made by it to Borax Argentina.
Financial Position
The net assets of the Orocobre group increased to $184,205.59 (2012:$50,230,890) during the year to 30 June
2013. including cash balances of $10,609,081 (2012:$16,40o.515). The cash balance includes $3,657,977 of Borax
Argentina loan funds for the upgrading and relocation of the borax refining plant. The reduction in cash balance has
resulted largely from the equity contributions made to Sales de Jujuy Pte Ltd. A definitive joint venture operating
agreement with Toyota Tsusho Corporation Ltd and the related project financing agreements with Mizuho Corporate
Bank and JOGMEC were executed in October and December 2012 respectively. The equity contributions oi the
partners for the construction of the project were completed by 30 June 2013. Initial draw down on the debt facilities
is expected in the second quarter FY2014.
Significant changes in the state of affairs
Other than matters mentioned in this report, there were no significant changes in the state of affairs of the Company
during the financial year.
Significant Events after balance date
Subsequent to years end, 'l'l’C and Orocobre have been working together with Mizuho Corporate Bank and
JOGMEC to make minor amendments to the finance documents for the Olaroz Project so they comply with certain
detailed aspects of Argentine foreign currency regulations regarding accounts management so as to allow the
project debt repayments to be made directly from export proceeds in the future. The revised documentation has
been finalised and approved in principal by all parties. It is anticipated that the amended finance documents will be
executed shortly with initial loan drawdown to occur in November 2018.
in the interim and to ensure that the Olaroz project construction remained on schedule, ‘I'I’C arranged for Sumitomo
Mitsui Bank to provide standby letters of credit in order for SDJ SA to secure local Argentinian funding of US$50m
equivalent. This funding has allowed the project construction to continue on schedule and will be repaid out of the
proceeds of the initial drawdown from the Mizuho Corporate Bank Facility.
Likely developments and expected results
Likely developments in and expected results of the operations of the Company are discussed in the Review of
Operations.
10


Oyocobre Limited I
Directors' Report (continued)
Review of Operauons
Orocobre has interests in a portfolio oi large target brine exploration groupings in Argentina and mines and
processing plants lor boron minerals. The company's brine assets can be split into two groups. The first group of
properties is held by 66.5% (etlective) owned Argentine operating company. Sales de Jujuy SA and contain those
properties associated with its flagship Salar de Olaroz Lithium-Potash Project. Orocobre's partners in Sales de Jujuy
. m#r—rvvr—_I—+
. .,E_  ' 7 .Gnayatayod 0 we-
:1 , ,I . I V k
a 1 .0'3“ . r o Mummqu‘m:
ril. {' ‘43,. v' 3 , mmm
\‘r ' . .4 . ‘_ I , m
A u .r .3 '1 I m.wm
 .C‘t‘ﬁm“  O l . Bunxkthlﬂill
“)4 1r Pmiupiani 'j 'saimmrios m
=5: mammojg rattles) I; 7'“‘
, 1.  " V’  7: .  ;"‘ V4451 
a: .1 ,r y   
i ~:‘ 1’ v f)" i @516 f-‘s' ~-
. 7‘ f 3.. ,, .v,.V
.4” I x 3,16 .21.- i .
’ Pgﬂf' 2'; l ..; ' ' I:
; J ,3” , I W.  ','  ;‘-‘>\'.’“'.'. "I
. r. . m , ,w 3  (m
“‘5 : sun‘s-mam ", . ” zap-pg. 
“009105 SitsP'M" ‘  A ‘1‘ we” . ‘ ,- 1’
,1 .- u . “iii, sl-Iénﬁr, L a";
r; Sijcs-Mantomnllo ?, . - . 3:9.“ LA £5
.., J.-'I-fvr-,*"
’ 31v] ,3: 1 ‘L ’t: "3 '-’ ‘
I  HT“  :9?  > Ouijano'wﬂ.  -‘
'/ .,, 7 :,,  4,; <1 u n ';.-_- _
flv ‘ ;'--’.‘ . ram-j
Runn- ~- kg! N, ’., ) ;.' x. i
new \ -' y  was ,. ' ';'
.v » » ;»» v n 
«my; “1'33”. 4_, .e "  ’,  '
. 7' ‘ _'  " -! Ir 
are 'I'I'C (25%) and JEMSE (8.5%). The ownership structure is explained in the next section. The second group oi
brine assets is held by 85% (effective) owned South American Salar S.A which is exploring for minerals associated
with salars (salt lakes) including lithium, potash and boron and has properties in fourteen salars. These include the
Salar de Cauchari lithium-potash project and Salar de Salinas Grandes potash-lithium project. The company's boron
mineral assets are held through its 100% owned subsidiary, Borax Argentina SA
Olaroz Project (Orocobre 56.5%}
The Olaroz Project, located in the Puna region of Jujuy Province of northern Argentina approximately 230 kilometres
northwest of the capital city ol Jujuy at an altitude of 3,900 metres above sea level, is the Company‘s ﬂagship project.
Together with partners. Toyota Tsusho Corporation (‘T‘I’C") and Jujuy Energia y Mineria Sociedad del Estado
(“JEMSE”). Orocobre is building the first large scale “green fields" lithium brine project in approximately 20 years
with a design capacity of 17.500tpa of battery grade lithium carbonate. The project is currently under construction
with ﬁrst production scheduled to commence at the end of 02 2014.
The Olaroz Project Joint Venture is operated through the operating company, Sales de Jujuy S.A. (“SDJ SA“). The
shareholders are Sales de Jujuy Pte Ltd (a Singaporean company that is the joint venture vehicle for Orocobre and
T'I'C) and Jujuy Energia y Minera Sociedad del Estado (“JEMSE”). the mining investment company owned by the
provincial government of Jujuy. Argentina. The effective Olaroz project equity interest is Orocobre 66.5%, TTC 250%
and JEMSE 8.5%.
l l


O_rocobre Limited I
Directors' Report (continued)
Orocobre Toyota Tsusho
(Australia) (Japan)
1 00%
72.53% SPC -Toyotsu Lithium PTE.Lt1l.
(Singapore)
,, ,V_1__.-, V,
27.32%
Holding Company - Sales do Jujuy Pie. Lid.
(Singapore)
Lender
1; De“ (Mizuho)
Project Company - Sales do Jujuy SA
(Jujuy,Argentina)
7 ~  Guarantor
Guaianlee (JOGMEC)
Olaroz Resource Estimate
In 2011 , the Company announced a measured and indicated resource of 1,752 million cubic metres of brine at 690
mg/L Lithium, 5.730 rug/L Potassium and 1,050 mg/L Boron at the Olaroz Project which is equivalent to 6.4 million
tonnes of lithium carbonate and 19.3 million tonnes of potash (potassium chloride) based on 5.32 tonnes of lithium
carbonate being equivalent to 1 tonne of lithium and 1.91 tonnes oi potash being equivalent to one tonne oi
potassium
Details oi the measured and indicated resources are given in the table below.
Concentraﬂon Tonnes oi Contained Metal
"'9'" Brine
Resource Category Area Thickness :peoilic volume thhium Potassium Boron Lithium Potassium Boron
yield
sq , Million Million Million
kins "was % cub” “"5 "W" "‘3’" "‘g/L Tonnes Tonnes Tonnes
Measured Resource 93 54 8 4% 0 42 632 4930 927 o 27 2 as n 39
indicated Reeouroe 93 143 10 0% 1 33 708 5030 1100 o 94 13 02 1 46
Meawred and ,
Project Progress
Construction of the Olaroz lithium project oﬂicially began on 21 November. 2012. Progress has been to plan. Sinclair
Knight Merz. with the assistance of lNFA, a well-respected Argentine engineering group. completed detailed
engineering tor all areas oi the operation, including brine extraction, transport and evaporation, the lithium carbonate
plant and key areas of the re-purilication and micronizing circuits The procurement process was well advanced prior
12


Otocobre Limited I
Directors‘ Report (continued)

to the official construction start date and was a key factor in the success of the construction program to date which is

proceeding on time and within budget.

The achievements in construction since November have been significant and include the clearing and recycling oi

4.2 sq km oi vegetation to allow the construction of evaporation ponds, the construction of evaporation ponds

including the earthworks, lining and commencement at filling of the first pond, establishment of a long term water
supply, fuel supply and storage, telecommunications, access roads on the salar to the bore fields, drilling of two
thirds oi the planned deep brine bores, construction of MV overhead electrical reticulation. completion of the brine

pipeline, construction of the first stage camp and oiiices, concrete plant installation, earthworks and foundations for
the Iimlng plant and construction of the lime plant conveyor. silos. tanks and other facilities. Earthworks on site are
now well in excess of 50% complete.

A milestone was reached at the beginning of August 2013, some 4 weeks early, with the filling of the first evaporation
pond at Olaroz with lithium brines from the commercial well-fields. This signals the commencement of the first step in
the production of lithium carbonate. the evaporation of brine and also signals the end of a very intensive construction
period with many concurrent activities in progress

The project implementation is through EPCM (EngineeringI Procurement and Construction Management) with a high
proportion of local involvement through construction and supply contracts and local employment. This “Jujuy First"
strategy coupled with a community and shared value policy continues as a key success iactor.

The construction remains on schedule and within budget.

Project Scope

Following completion of detailed engineering studies the design capacity of the operation was increased to 17.500
tonnes per annum of lithium carbonate from 16,400 in the Feasibility Study. In addition, there is an option to produce
approximately 20,000 tpa. increased from 10.000tpa in the Feasibility Study, of potash subject to a later investment
decision. The capital cost estimate was revised to US$229 million from US$207 million in the Feasibility Study. The
revised estimate included US$22m of contingency, The largest component oi the increase was higher Orocobre
holding costs due to delays in the approval process for the project,

Toyota Tsusho Corporation Equity and Project Financing

In October 2012, the Joint Venture Agreement between Orocobre Limited and Toyota Tsusho Corporation ("‘I'I'C“) to
finance and build the flagship Olaroz lithium project was signed. The companies executed the finance
documentation for the Olaroz lithium project in December 2012,

Under the terms of the Joint Venture Agreement. TTC and Orocobre have contributed project equity of US$828
million (inclusive of JEMSE contribution), equating to approximately 30% of maximum project funding if the project
financing facility is iully drawn. Tl’C’s investment in the project was approximately US$55 million net of adjustments
made to take into account financing support arrangements to be provided by 'I'I'C to Orocobre prior to completion oi
construction. Orocobre has lunded JEMSE through an interest lree loan for its capital contribution and will be re-paid
with one-third of the anticipated dividend stream to JEMSE. With these equity contributions now complete 'l'l'C has a
25% indirect interest in the Olaroz project, JEMSE 8.5% and Orocobre 66.5%.
1T0. as pan of its obligations under the January 2010 agreement also arranged project debt funding for the Olaroz
Project. The finance documents were executed in December 2012 and provide a maximum facility of US$191.9
million incorporating a primary debt facility of US$146.3 million and additional iacilities oi US$456 million. The term
is 10 years with a 2 year grace period on principal repayments and the borrower may pay dividends bi-annually after
meeting debt sewice provisions to Mizuho Corporate Bank Ltd. Upon completion, JOGMEC will provide guarantees
for 82.4% of the outstanding debt. Initial drawdown is expected in November 2013. The construction remains on
schedule and within budget.

[3


O_rocobre Limited
Directors' Report (continued)
Terms oithe Shareholder Agreement
The joint venture with ‘I'I’C is being operated as an incorporated joint venture through the Singaporean holding
company, Sales de Jujuy Pte Ltd. The board oi the holding company will be responsible for the Project‘s delivery.
Both parties can appoint three board members with Orocobre appomting the Chairman. Voting on normal matters is
according to equity shareholding interest. The agreement also provides for certain matters which are "Fleserved
Matters" and require more than 80% of the vote. or l'I'C approval. whilst there is a liability under any guarantee. The
agreement includes various mechanisms ior budget approvals, budget variations and for deadlock. The agreement
also provides the parties with preemptive rights on each other‘s interests in the event oi a sale.
Existing management in the Argentine operating company, Sales de Jujuy S.A. ("SDJ"). operates the Olaroz Project
according to set authorisation limits and reports regularly to the joint venture company's Chairman. In addition.
Orocobre has entered into a service arrangement with Sales de Jujuy SA. (“SDJ”),
WC acts as exclusive agent to market the lithium carbonate production lrorn the development,
‘P/o'ecf Dmcob <
calms” / f [955%] if  at: "t'i‘j- :  it- in i
V j» ; :; r e . i
In addition to progress at the ﬂagship Olaroz project. progress 214‘ a / ‘ '57,}  
continuesto be made in advancing the Company‘s other lithium- f" ' 7 -‘ ' _.,.'
potashinterests in Cauchari and Salinas Grandes. “3&5 _ J.  
g--  . n I "<44:
Through South American Salar. the company holds an 85% interest  ‘ .j‘l‘: 3.1:, it if)  m'
in the Cauchari Project which is located immediately south oi the 1 c  9g  if" Lute? 
Olaroz Project. The Company considers Cauchari and Olaroz to be Li - 1 - II; “.1 Liv}- .‘\'-- lief”
part of the same basin. with similar brine chemistry and to iorm a r )5 5‘ , :  ' $541 I 'l
single geological systemThe Company does not anticipate  ‘5 E 3%“?  ‘1‘? i
developing a separate operation at the Cauchari Project but that it  I. ._  i g g 7'2} 
would be integrated into Olaroz subject to agreement with its Olaroz w? I“; ,  9‘!“
partners. This development strategy would require a capadty ‘ __ 1‘ «mugs-3 3‘ ' 
expansion oi the Olaroz processing facilities beyond the currently jﬁj’ v 12:  r":’f g
planned rate of 17,500 tonnes per year oi battery-grade lithium if  i"  . .~ ’
carbonate.  '33 I" ' V
iii-flag;  j"L v i;
The Cauchari Lithium-Potash Project has an interred resource I V; ‘ #1 3:553 ' a i ;
estimated to contain approximately 470,000 tonnes of lithium 55%? . ;g.,;_’-= .G'Zr,,ée. r1 
carbonate equivalent and 1.6 million tonnes ol potash based on 5.32 I W “.5 :gjs 9’ 1‘:  _ 3
tonnes ol lithium carbonate being equivalent to one tonne oi lithium '   v» ab
and 191 tonnes of potash being equivalent to one tonne of i7 4 ‘ “V4 "* 
potassium. Details are given in the table below. i ' ‘ £2”,-   '~.
5" ,"v " T"; ' ' .. -f‘i‘
“iatt‘aitﬁ, we)
Average resource concentralions
Brine
Inierred Resource Area Average Mean volume Lithium Potassium Boron .
thicknes specitic Lithium Potassium Boron
Area kmz MIIIan mgil mg/l mgll
s in yield % "‘3
IE]
um
--
-----_—_
The maiden resource is based on five diamond holes in Orocobre's eastern Cauchari properties and is only to an
average depth oi 170m in the northern resource area and 50m in the southern resource area.
14


orocobre Limited .
Directors' Report (continued)
Lithium and potassium mineralisation was encountered to the base of drilling at 249m in hole OAU001 D. An adjacent
property owner. Lithium Americas Corp (T SX:LAC), drilled to a 464m depth and theretore future Orocobre drilling is
likely to substantially increase the maiden resource.
An exploration target of between 0.2 million and 2.6 million tonnes ol lithium carbonate equivalent and 0.5 million
and 9.2 million tonnes of potash has been estimated beneath the maiden resource based on a range of porosity and
grade possibilities to between 220m and 350m depth.
Whilst lower grade than Olaroz. the brine chemistry is similar to that at Olaroz, with an attractive low Mg/Li ratio (2.8)
and high K/Li ratio (10). Initial evaluation 01 the process route suggests the brine could be processed In an expanded
Olaroz plant. Cauchari lies approximately 20 kms south of the planned Olaroz processing plant.
Considering the similarities between the Cauchari and Olaroz projects and their close proximity, there are compelling
synergies between the projects including the expected use of shared infrastructure and processing plants and the
likelihood that any future development 0! the Cauchari brines would use the Olaroz facilities at a relatively low
incremental capital cost and with simple development. Consequently. the company considers the Cauchari project
and its brine body to be part of the larger Olaroz project.
i
W e
mu‘wwn Gulch-Ii mil-Limmmbrtne N at!”
5qu r.» 5 mm“ s ,9. Fa'n'ltiw
w.  14.x...
54's I cI-ﬂ
: mam.
nan mm Mn
mu. . V I
a is “3512"  1.37.3 6&1 I 22139
'—‘— Am 530. usemvwgm. I is can) sum
kllometetl I
a u nuns m w
Salinas Glandes Foressr'unrt/Wum Pro/ed (Dmc'abre 85%)
Salinas Grandes is located 70 kilometres southeast of the Company‘s flagship Olaroz project. Through South
American Salar. Orocobre holds an 85% interest in the project. The project is located in Salta province. The
proximity of Salinas Grandes to the flagship Olaroz project provides potential operating synergies. including the
option to process concentrated Salinas Grandes lithium brine at an expanded lithium carbonate plant at Olaroz.
During the year, long term pump testing was completed on five test-production wells and the results were issued in
June 2013. The pump testing shows that brine volumes can be extracted from wells from the shallow potassium-
lithium resource at a sufficient rate and concentration to support modest potash and lithium production. Brine grades
stabilised during the pumping tests with some variation in average grade between holes. Test work since 2010
suggests the attractive brine chemistry with a low Mg/Li ratio, high K/Li ratio and low sulphate and calcium levels will
result in high recoveries of potassium and lithium. Internal studies are undenNay to develop the strategy for lurther
project advancement.
Salinas Grandes has an inferred resource. to a depth ot 13.3m, estimated to contain 56.5 million cubic metres of
brine at 795 mg/L lithium and 9.550 mg/L potassium, which is equivalent to 239,200 tonnes of lithium carbonate and
1.03 million tonnes of potash (potassium chloride) based on 5.32 tonnes of lithium carbonate being equivalent to 1
tonne of lithium and 1.91 tonnes of potash being equivalent to one tonne of potassium. Details are provided in the
table below.
15


Qrocobre Limited _
Directors' Report (continued)

- Brine body parameters Average resource concentrations Tonnes contained meta
Resource Area Average Mean specmc Brine volume Lithium Potassrum Boron Lﬂh‘um Boron
Category km2 thickness in yield °/o Million In3 nigll mgll mg/l
interred
resource 115 2 13 3 41% 565 795 9 547 253 44.960 539.850 12.100

The shallow brine body has attractive grades and excellent chemistry with a low magnesium to lithium ratio of 2.5, a

high potassium to lithium ratio oi 12.5 and a low sulphate to lithium ratio oi 5,8 in the central area oi drilling. rising to

10,6 tor the area covered by all the company properties over the salar. Test work since late 2010 suggests high

recoveries of both potassium and lithium could be expected using a simple. low operating cost. process route.

Laboratory scale testing has produced potassium (82-59% KCI). prior to washing to obtain +95% KCl.

The low sulphate levels of the Salinas Grandes brine indicate that potash recovery would be high as a co»product oi

lithium carbonate production wrth potentially eight tonnes oi potash produced for each tonne oi lithium carbonate

produced.

The completion of the long-term pump tests is an important milestone for the Salinas Grandes project. The work

completed at Salinas Grandes to date coniirms the potential that brine can be extracted irom the shallow resources

at potentially commercial rates and wrth stable grades that could allow ior modest annual production ot potassium
and lithium to augment the Olaroz project.

To better understand the potential for Salinas Grandes the company has initiated an internal study which will

determine the strategy for advancing the project iurther.

BamAIya/iﬁna

The Borax Argentina business was acquired from global miner Rio Tinto in August 2012 after an extensive due

diligence and negotiation process.

Borax Argentina‘s operations. including three open pit mines, concentrators. refining capacity and signiiicant land

holdings. solidifies Orocobre's presence and operational experience in northern Argentina. The mining operations

are located in Tincalayu. Porvenir and Sijes. The deposits contain significant mineralisation described as historical
estimates and announced at the time oi the purchase. The company is in the process at converting these historical
estimates into JORC compliant resources.
The refining (chemical) plant is currently located in Campo I: '7 . .. ,1 '  ' 1"“:  2 
Ouijano 30 km outside of Salta city. The borax plant is in the , V y' / I : t :‘V - 1
process of being relocated from Campo Quiiano to the A , ‘ _,' ’ A F‘ r ’7; ‘ ‘
Tincalayu mine site over the next seven months. This 'I’   ' 17:3" ,"  [gr/j
initiative will signilicantly lower the cost at production oi ’ 7 "'f" ’ ‘2 / I, 
Borax chemical products. Work on expanding the V I ' ,i  . 1 ,f .  v: 
geographic diversity at the customer base and bringing the '\ ‘ ‘  :f’  f I .,';"  V
tincal mineralisation historical estimate in line with JORC .A. ‘,  4' ; 1' r; , '13" ,
compliance is well advanced, . "I f . ii    fl, - V
  ,  J  1-3,,
i . . . ‘ 4 - . r. A '11 ' .r
Borax Argentina has operated in the Salta—Juiuy region for v 7; I ‘ :3 [I .: V r .351
over 50 years and is well established as a reliable supplier of  g" 3.1:.» - ‘ ‘3; -' ; 
reiined boron minerals and chemicals to the industrial and ' -~ We" ' l ,- , [I t“ “I” -'
agricultural sectors in Brazil, Argentina and Chile. This , ' i Mug ’4’ '. ‘ ii if" 'iﬁr».
acquisition represented the type of operating business that is / I!" r   if, '1 j' V ‘  I
complementary to our pre-existing regional assets in terms of if , 'F - ' _".‘ ' ’5 ' a t“-
both the minerals and the experience on the land base. i -_->' ' i l' I: . nut] I” " I
Orocobre considers that Borax Argentina has promising 'l'w‘” .l a » Tamara _  _.I
organic growth prospects given its large asset base. strong "‘ I" ‘ "n ‘ ' V
16


O_rocobre Limited '
Directors' Report (continued)
production infrastructure and a capable management team. The healthy long-term market outlook for boron related
minerals is a strategic fit with the long-term plan to be the Argentine leader in the lithium, boron and potash
industries.
The products produced by Borax Argentina can be divided into three groups being minerals, reiined products and
boric acid. The minerals produced are ulexite, colemanite and hydroboracite. Ulexite is used predominantly as a
feedstock tor the production at boric acid whereas colemanite is supplied predominantly into the ceramic market,
Hydroboracite is a mineral unique to Argentine and possesses some perlormance characteristics that make it
attractive for use in certain applications in the ceramic and agriculture markets. The relined products comprise borax
pentahydrate, borax decahydrate and borax anhydrous. These refined products have applications in a wide range ol
markets from agriculture. ceramics, glass, insulation iibreglass. textile fibreglass. gold assay and smelting iluxes,
wood protection and a number of specialty applications. The production ot boric acid is achieved through the
acidilication of ulexite using sulphuric acid. The quality of the ulexite ore lends itseli to the production at high quality,
high purity products.
Combined product sales volume by quarter:
W
Sep- 72 .9, 761 ‘
mow
’Orocobre acquired Borax Argentina in August 2012.
Borax Argentina also owns the tenure on all or parts oi the lithium projects being progressed by other lithium
exploration companies, including Lithium Americas Corporation Ltd. (T SX:LAC) at Salar de Cauchari. Rodinia
Lithium Ltd. (TSX-V: RM) at Diablillos, and Galaxy Resources Ltd (ASX:GXY) at Sal cle Vida, (formerly thhlum One's
project). As one of the conditions to extract brines, these companies are required to make payments to Borax
Argentina either as fixed annual payments or a royalty related to production. The terms of these agreements are
detailed below.
Rev-"y
Project Par"; Typoor NImIluhg mm. mm?!“
Meow (mum) owner thy-mm onhnru mm mm")
oxluclcd
5200.000 Der-Mum pay-hie until ‘8 May 2m
Lithium Anmlcn .«especm oi production Rem ammu period at
Camila! “whirl «Maw Usuruci “300.000 None 154mm zeyeeu andsmamm
syr Emlomlian
nun! mu option
Rodlnla Lllhlulllt Diahlll05 2700 M-Jan—iu tn UIM'NM Nona
Ruyeiiycan be pumased at anytime lcr
Mam
Cenlenario
and Royaltycan be puidtased by Roam lo:
mini: Lilttiuim Raiones M43040 Pumhiie l 0% $900,000
Royalty can be purchased by Rodlnla tor
Lo! 51.000900 aoramgenuna has me iighlto
mm. umium Ralones sou iA-Jamiﬂ Purchase mine borales
Gui-xy
Ruwicewlhlum Ewlomuon and Royallycan be pumaeed byGllaxyloi
0m Salaevm moo 6-Jul-io unmua 10% indeﬁan 31.000900
Royallycan De warmed by Miles tor
:moomo soux Mgenllni has me right lo
Lithulnc Females 2,433 1445mm Indeﬁnite mine tier-[es
'Usuiruct 7 legal right aﬂorded to a person or party that centers the temporary right to use and derive income or beneﬁt irom
someone else's property,
17


orocobre Limited I
Directors‘ Report (continued)
Immediate Focus and Outlook
Likely developments in and expected results of the operations oi the Company are discussed generally in the
Review oi Operations. The main area oi focus is the completion oi construction. commissioning and production at
the Olaroz Lithium Protect. First production is targeted for the end of 02 2014. Secondly, the relocation of the Borax
Argentina reiining plant to the Tincalayu mine is also due to be complete by the end of 02 2014. Thirdly, there are
further development and expansion opportunities of existing assets to be considered. In addition to the rights held at
the Olaroz, Salinas Grandes and Cauchari Projects, the Company (through South American Salar) holds the rights to
properties (or the applications ior properties) at other salars in the Salta. Catamarca and Jujuy Provinces in northern
Argentina. A number oi these salars have been exploited in the past for Borates and Sodium SulphaterThe Company
intends to iunher evaluate this project pipeline and to develop an overall portfolio analysis oi such pipeline as iurther
information is obtained. This effort may lead to additional sampling and evaluation, or to the disposition oi properties
to other panies.
Orocobre’s business faces cenain risks that could affect the success of the strategies and the outlook for future
financial years. These include but are not limited to the completion oi construction at Olaroz and the timing thereof,
the construction cost relative to the estimated capital cost, the design production rate for lithium carbonate and
potash, the expected brine grade and the expected operating costs at the Olarcz Project and the comparison oi
such costs to expected global operating costs, the drawdown of finance and the ongoing working relationship
between Orocobre and the Province of Jujuy (JEMSE), ‘I'I'C and Mizuho Corporate Bank. Other risks include
Argentina sovereign risk, changes in government regulationsI policies or legislation, fluctuations or decreases in
commodity prices and currency. risks associated with weather patterns and the impact on production rate.
The Company has in place risk management policies and systems that manage these risks including monitoring
ongoing exploration results. monthly construction progress against timeframes and cost, monthly review of
operational results for Borax Argentina SA and continued discussions with JV partners and the government of
Argentina. Within its' operations in Argentina, the Company has instituted ISO 31000, Risk Management, to act
comprehensively on all its areas of activity.
Environmental Regulation and Performance
The Company has operations in two provinces in Argentina, Jujuy and Salta.
In Salta, the applicable legislation is Provincial Constitution (art.30), Environmental Protection Provincial Law No.
7070 and Provincial Decree No 3097/00 and 1587/03, Provincial Law No 7141 of the Mining Procedure Code,
National Constitution (art 41), General National Environmental Law No. 25.675 and National Law 24,585
The applicable authority in Salta is the Mining Secretary of the Province of Salta and Environmental Secretary oi the
Province of Salta
In Juiuy there are both provincial and national environmental regulations: Provincial Constitution (art.22) , Provincial
Environmental Law No. 5063. National Constitution (art 41), General National Environmental Law No. 25.675 and
National Law 24.585
The applicable authority in Jujuy is the Provincial Directorate of Mining and Energy Resources (Direccion Provincial
de Mineria y Recursos Energeticos.)
There have been no known signiiicant breaches oi the regulations in Jujuy or Salta.
Within Its' operations in Argentina, the Company has instituted ISO 31000, Risk Management, to act
comprehensively on all its areas of activity. This compliments ISO 9001. Quality Assurance, ISO 14001
Environmental Management . BS OHSAS 18001 Occupational Health and Safety Management System which had
already been implemented in FV2012. Borax Argentina is already accredited under ISO 9001.
Non—audit Services
The Group's auditor. Ernst 8. Young (Australia), did not undertake any non»audit services for Orocobre Limited
during the current or prior year.
Auditor Independence
A copy oi the auditor's independence declaration as required under section 3070 of the Corporations Act 2001 is set
out on page 38 of the report.
[8


0rocobre Limited
Directors' Report
Remuneration Report
Remuneration Report — Chairman‘s Letter
30 September 201 :3
Dear shareholder,
We are writing this letter to provide some introductory comments to this year‘s Remuneration Report. We want to
begin by acknowledging the shareholder dissatisfaction with our2072 Remuneration Report. More than 25 % of
eligible shareholders voted “no” in respect of Resolution 2 Mppro val ot the Remuneration Report) at the 21712 A GM.
While this resolution is advisory only, should more than 25 96 of eligible shareholders vote against the resolution this
year, then we will incura “second strike‘i A second strike would lead to a disruptive process, which could include a
Board spiil. We have heard your message very clearly and have treated it with the utmost seriousness. We hope that
this is evident in this years report We believe and hope that the extensive work undertaken by your Board and its
Remuneration Committee over the past year will address the issues and concerns of shareholders and will have your
support.
Fol/omng the 2012 AGM your Board undertook a comprehensive review of the 2012 Remuneration Report, including
Board and executive KMP remuneration, to identifv the key issues ol concem to shareholders and to institute
change, as appropriate This review included, amongst other things, a survey of shareholder and proxy advisors to
identity those areas of specific concam. Details of the changes implemented in response to this review are set out in
Section A o/ the Remuneration Report
We are and always have been firmly committed to communicating Board and executive KMP remuneration
arrangements in a simple, clear and transparent manner, but concede that our pre vious Remuneration Reports have
failed to deliver clarity in some aspects of disclosure in response to shareholder concerns and the comprehensive
re view process we have, as a result, significantly redesigned our report format We have done this by streamlining
the Remuneration Report, where appropnate, into summary tables which Will, we hope, provide the ’why and how’ of
the new strategic framework, including an explanation of material variations or items of an unusual nature. We trust
that our new report format i7lustrates our commitment to clarizv and continuous quality improvement in remuneration
disclosure.
0rocobre ’s approach to remuneration is founded on a desire to pro vrde competitive rewards that motivate
executives and employees to deliver superior results in a complex operating environment, as directed by the Board.
As you may be aware, Orocobre is at an exciting stage of its development and the multiple tasks and skills
demanded of executives and employees are often difficult to reduce to a scorecard of results.
We assure you that the responsiber tor governance in remuneration lies with the Board supported by the
Remuneration Committee and the objectives of this govemance are to ensure that the practices and processes are
sound and driven by our guiding principles to deliver a world class, low cost resource company for the benefit of all
our shareholders and other key stakeholders.
The Remuneration Report to shareholders for 2013 follows this letter, The report forms part of the Directors' Report
and has been audited in accordance with section 3175(0) of the Corporations Act 200 7. in addition to the statutory
reporting requirements, sections summarizing remuneration for the financial year ended June 30, 2013 and
anticipated changes [or the ﬁnancial year ending June 317, 2074 have been included where appropn‘ate.
The Board believes that shareholders wrll find this report easier to read than the 2012 report and that it now contains
all of the information they require.
777e Board is committed to ensuring that the company’s remuneration policies and practices are fair, competitive and
responsible and that we communicate these remuneration arrangements with lull transparency and clarity. We are
also aware that executive KMP remuneration practices are continually evolving and therefore our practices remain
under constant review.
own u “w
\
Courtney Pratt James Calaway
Non-executive Director Non-executive Chairmen
Chairman. Remuneration Committee
19


Orocobre Limited
Directors' Report
Remuneration Report (audited)
Remuneration Report (Audited)
This Remuneration Report outlines the overall remuneration strategy, framework and practices adopted by
Oroocbre Limited. It has been prepared in accordance with section 300A oi the Corporations Act 2001.
Details of remuneration are disclosed ior Directors and ior other Key Management Personnel (collectively
reierred to as ‘KMP'). In addition to the Directors. the executive KMP had the authority and responsibility ior
planning, directing and controlling the activities of Orocobra LimitedI directly or indirectly, during the year
ended 30 June 2013.
The remuneration report is set out under the ioilowing main headings:
A Remuneration overview
B Role oi the Remuneration Committee
0 Non-executive Director's Remuneration
D Managing Director and other executive KMP remuneration
E Relationship of incentives to Orocobre operating and ﬁnancial perlormance
F Service agreements
G Details oi remuneration
H Share-based compensation issues to the Managing Director and other executives
| Additional information
The format oi this Remuneration Report has been modified from previous years to improve readability and to
facilitate shareholder understanding. In particular:
0 A “question and answer" iormat has been adopted. This provides a mechanism by which the
Company can answer questions which have been asked previously by shareholders and
other stakeholders.
- Remuneration iniormation for executive KMP is reported in A3.
A, Remuneration overview
Orocobra's remuneration philosophy is articulated in Orooobre's Remuneration Committee Charter
which provides that the Remuneration Committee will in accordance with clause 3.1 .3(a) of this
Charter, ensure that the remuneration policies:
- motivate executives to pursue the long-term growth and success oi Orocobre;
0 demonstrate a clear relationship between periormance and remuneration;
- involve an appropriate balance between iixed and incentive remuneration, and
o relate the short and long» term periormanoe objectives to Orocobre's circumstances and
goals.
The Remuneration Committee undertook a detailed evaluation of its remuneration practices during FY
2013 and engaged the services of CRA Plan Managers Pty Limited (ORA) to advise on all aspects oi
Board and executive KMP remuneration, including equity incentive strategies.
Key initiatives included:
0 an independent assessment and evaluation oi the FY 2012 Remuneration Report
a an independent survey oi shareholders to better understand the reasons for the relatively high
‘no’ vote on the 2012 Remuneration Report; and
0 an independent benchmarking review of Board and executive KMP remuneration.
Following this comprehensive review process a number oi changes have been adopted this year. A
summary of these changes are as follows:
1) The Remuneration Repon has been reiormatted with improved disclosure;
2) The use of options and periormance rights ior executive LTl has been introduced:
3) Appropriate periormanoe conditions are now an integral component of all executive KMP LTI;
4) Minimum three (a) years service vesting condition has been introduced ior executive KMP LTI;
20


orocobre Limited _
Directors' Report (continued) ,
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)

5) STI awards for executive KMP have been changed from being assessed on a calendar year to
financial year basis. The change is efiective from January 2013 and therefore the next assessment
will be based on an 18 month period.

6) Non-executive Directors will no longer participate in any incentive programs including the LTI
program;

7) Non-executive Director iees remain unchanged in FY2013; and

8) The key periormance indicators (KPI) applied to the CEO STI have been disclosed.

Orocobre endeavours to adopt a fair and equitable approach to all remuneration decisions. mindful oi the
complexities of retaining and motivating an experienced team operating across diverse geographies in a
complex operating environment. In implementing this philosophy. Orocobre needs to consider many
variables. including:

(a) the remuneration paid by the Company's peers (by reference to industry and market

capitalisation);
(b) the Company's performance over the relevant period;
(c) how to link remuneration to successful implementation oi the Company's strategy, including
the annual targets which need to be achieved to implement that strategy;

(d) internal relativities and differentiation of pay based on performance;

is) the size. scale. location and complexity of the operations of the Company: and

(i) market developments and changes in remuneration practices.
In particular FY 2013 saw major changes in Orocobre with the successful completion of the Toyota
Tsusho Corporation (Tic) joint venture, ﬁnancing oi the Olaroz project. the commencement of
construction and the acquisition of Borax Argentina. Collectively these represented a watershed year lor
Orooobre and resulted in an expansion of the Executive Management Team and a comprehensive review
oi the Orocobre remuneration strategies.
B. Role oi the Remuneration Committee
in accordance with best practice. the Remuneration Committee is comprised oi Non-executive Directors oi
which a majority are independent. It is chaired by an Independent Non»executive Director other than the
Chairman. The membership of the committee is comprised oi Mr Courtney Pratt — Committee Chair. Mr
James Calaway and Mr Federico Nicholson as detailed on page 9 of the Directors’ Report.
The Remuneration Committee's role and interaction with the Board. internal and external advisors, are further illustrated
below:

The Board
Reviews. applies judgment and. as appropriate. approves the Remuneration Committee‘s
The Remuneration Committee
The Remuneration Committee opurates under the delegated authority oi the Board
The Remuneration Committee is abie to source internal resources and to obtain independent professional
ant/ice it Considers necessary to enatnril ii to make recarririiehdatichs to the Board on the i'niiriimrrg

- Remuneration Policy. strategy. quantum and mix 01 remuneration lcii EXECUINE KMP

- Remuneration poiicy for Nanaxecutiiie Directors

- People ariu talent management, VENUES and practices

- Superannuath arrangements

- Perrormarice target setting and measurement rm executive KMP

- DESign and apprmai of erripioyee and executive short and long fern) incEnV‘ve programs

External consultants 21 Internal Resources


O_rocobre Limited
Directors' Report (continued) ,
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
For each annual remuneration review cycle, the Remuneration Committee considers whether to appoint a
remuneration consultant and, it so. their scope of work. The table below provides details with respect to the
remuneration consultant who provided remuneration recommendations and other remuneration related advice
in relation to the remuneration outcomes set out in this Remuneration Report.
Did a remuneration Ian Crichton, remuneration consultant, with ORA Plan Managers Pty Limited (ORA)
consultant provide a provided remuneration recommendations and remuneran'on related advice to the
remuneration Remuneration Committee, including in relation to: the structure oi remuneration
recommendation in packages, the proportion of different components of remuneration, benchmarking
relation to any of the KMP against the Company‘s peers, the maximum aggregate iee pool for Non—executive
torthe financial year? Directors, valuation of long term incentives and advice on markettrends relating to
remuneration practices.The Remuneration Consultant has advised that there was
no undue influence from any Committee Member or executive KMP on any of their
work during the year.
What was the remuneration CRA was paid a total of A2333.077.
consultant paid by the
Company lor remuneration
related services?
Did the remuneration ORA provided otheradvioe to the Company.
consultant provide any
other advice to the
Company/.7
What was the remuneration ORA was paid A347,537 for other services during the period when ORA Plan
consultant paid by the Managers Pty Ltd was providing remuneration related services in relation to KMP
Company for other advice for the iinancial year. These services related to the provision of
("m 'e'a‘e.“ "‘9 - Valuation report in respect of option and performance rights lor AGM
'em“"e'e"°")' - The preparation or an “Invitation and Explanatory” booklet
- Analysis. survey and report on ORE 2012 Remuneration Report
- Share Based Payment valuation reports required under IFRS-2
What arrangements did the The Company made the iollowing arrangements:
gznﬁgnéﬂiﬁgggswe - The recommendations are solely made by the Remuneration Committee
remuneraﬁon With liaison With CRA and the CEO.

. o The Company implemented a procedure requiring the Remuneration
recommendation would be . . . . . .
ﬂee from undue inﬂuence Committee to have direct contact With ORA tor procuring advice relating
by‘he KMP? to KMP remuneration. The procedure contained a process whereby the

Remuneration Committee was responsible for the engagement oi any
remuneration consultants, the provision of information to the
remuneration consultant, and the communication of remuneration
recommendations,

- The remuneration oonsultant agreed to adhere to the protocol
procedures and was required to advise the Remuneration Committee
whether or not it had been subjected to undue inﬂuence.

Is the Board satisﬁed that Ves, the Board is satisfied, The reasons are as follows:

:Zzorﬁ‘ﬂ'mgti'g: was "as c The protocol with respect to the procurement oi remuneration related
"om any such undue advice was adhered to, including With respect to engagement of the
inﬂuence? What are the remuneration consultantI the provision at iniormation to the

reasons for the Board remuneration consultant and the oommunication oi remuneration
being so satisﬁed? recommendations.

- The Remuneration Committee consulted on several occasions with the
remuneration consultant in the absence oi the executive KMPs. There
were no concerns raised by the remuneration consultant with respect to
any undue irriiuence being exerted by the executive KMP.

- The Remuneration Committee did not observe any evidence that undue
iniiuence had been applied,

22


orooobre Limited _
Directors' Report (continued) _
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
0. Non—executive Director’s Remuneration
Objective
The objective is to set remuneration at a level which attracts and retains Non-executive Directors of the
requisite expertise and experience at a cost acceptable to shareholders.
Structure
The maximum aggregate remuneration of Non-executive Directors is determined by the shareholders at a
general meeting. At the 2012 Annual General Meeting, shareholders approved an increase to the maximum
aggregate tee pool from A$4DODOO to A$600,000. Despite the election to increase the maximum aggregate
iee pool, the fee structure for the Nonexecutive Directors has not changed lor the 2013 year.
The Chairman is paid in addition to his Director remuneration elixed lee 01A$125.000 per annum which
includes remuneration for the performance of special lunctional duties on behall oi and at the request oi the
Chief Executive Officer. These duties include corporate development and investor relations services,
particularly in North America where the Company is listed and has substantial shareholder and analyst
coverage, and supporting the Managing Director in government liaison in Argentina and relations with
Toyota Tsusho Corporation. Services in addition to those covered by this iixed lee are remunerated at a per
diem rate oi A31 ,300
Other Non-executive Directors are paid a base fee only.
In FY 2013 the Board decided that in iuture Non-executive Directors would not participate in any short or
long term incentive schemes, including the LTI. oi the Company.
On appointment to the Board, all Non-executive Directors enter into a service agreement with the
Company in the iorm 01 a letter of appointment which details remuneration arrangements.
Fees
Annualised fees tor the relevant periods were as follows:
From 1 From 1 July
July 2012 2011 to 30 June
to 30 June 2012
201 3
Position — Non-executive Directors
Chairman A$75,000 A$75,00D
Other Non-executive Directors A340,000 A$40.000
Committee fees
Committee Chairman A$NIL A$N|L
Committee member A$NlL A$NIL
Additional Fees
Chairman A$125,000' “125,000
Additional Services Fee A$5.200 A$64.930
' The additional fees paid to the Chairman is to compensate Mr James Calaway for his time, skills and
expertise in undertaking a range oi tasks on behalf oi Orocobre, including:

1. In FY2012, Mr Calaway was resident in Argentina for a significant part otthe year and played a
crucial role working with the executive management team in obtaining the critical approvals and
agreements in Argentina that allowed the Olaroz project to proceed. Since then, Mr Calaway has
continued to be the principal relationship for the Company with a number oi key government
officials.

2. In addition, due to the lact that the company is dual listed in Canada and Australia, Mr. Calaway
has been the primary investor relations person supporting the North American markets. Given

23


orocobre Limited _

Directors' Fteport (continued) _

Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
Mr‘Calaway's extensive knowledge of the CompanyI and his proximity to North American markets.
this has allowed the Managing Director to spend considerably less time and expense to support
the company's dual listing while having a principal interlaoe with this important market.

3, Mr. Calaway has also engaged in a variety of problem solving eﬂorts that would normally be
undertaken by a management team, As the management team is more iully developed and the
company is now moving tonlvard with its project, Mr. Calaway can tocus more attention on the
growing demands of Chairmanship and to continue to support North American investor relations.

These tasks are in addition to Mr Calaway‘s responsibilities as Chairman. It is expected that as the
Executive Management Team continues to mature and the Company grows that the need to rely on
services from non-executive Chairman will decline.
The total remuneration paid to each Non—executive Director tor the year ended 30 June 2013 is detailed in
section G of this report.
The table below provides further information in relation to tees paid to Nonexecutive Directors and other
relevant issues.
Question Response
Why was the maximum The aggregate fee pool was ﬁrst established at the August 2007 AGM at
aggregate fee pool increased a value of A$200.000. This was reviewed and increased to A$4oo,ooo at
"0m “40% m'”'°” “3 the November 2010 AGM. Since then, the Com any has graduated into
A$600k7 p
' the S&P/ASX 300 Index, expanded in South America through the
acquisition of Borax Argentina SA, commenced a joint venture
partnership with Toyota Tsusho and continued to advance a number oi
existing projects in South America, The previous tee pool limit ot
A3400.000 left no room tor an increase in Non-executive Director tees or
for the appointment oi additional directors based on existing tees.
Has there been an increase No, there has not been an increase in Nonexecutive Director tees.
in the fees paid to Non-
executive Directors
considered since the
increase to $600,000?
How does the Company The Company obtained external advice from a remuneration consultant.
determine the appropriate CRA Plan Managers Pty Ltd. in relation to Non-executive Director tees.
level oi tees? The Board also considered the tees paid by selected relevant comparator
group companies and concluded that the tees were below market.
Why is the Chairman‘s lee The Chairman‘s tee also incorporates duties which are considered more
more than We base fee '0' onerous than a Non-executive Director. The Non»executive Chairman
N°”'°xs°u"ve D'rec‘c’rs’? assists in the corporate development and investor relations services of
the company as well as relationship management with key Argentine
project stakeholders. The time commitments of the other Non-executive
Directors are substantially smaller than those oi the Chairman.
Are the Non»executive The Non-executive Directors were not entitled to any short term
Directors paid any incentive incentives. long term incentives. equity based remuneration or
or equity based payments or termination/retirement benelits in FY 2013.
te'm'ﬁat'onl “suremen‘ The Chairman was allocated a onoecft bonus oi A$100,000 as a result
bend“? of the successful signing oi the Agreement with Jujuy Energia y Mineria
Sociedad del Estado (JEMSE) in 2012. This was accrued and reported
in FY 2012 and paid in FY 2013.
During the 2012 year the Non-executive Directors received equity based
performance remuneration as approved by the shareholders.
The Non-executive Directors will not participate in any schemes in the
tuture.
24


orooobre Limited _
Directors' Report (continued) _
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
Question Response
If Non-executive Directors From time to time, Non-executive Directors may be requested to provide
are paid additional fees, how additional services. in any such case, these additional fees are paid to
are these additional fees the Non-executive Director in accordance with the expected additional
calculated? days deemed necessary to perform these services and only after
approval.
Are Non-executive Directors' No. There are no plans to increase the director's tees in this year.
fees going to increase in
201 4'?
Is Superannuation included Statutory superannuation is paid to Australian resident Nonexecutive
in Non-executive Director Directors and included in total fees paid.
tees?
Are Non-executive Directors Non-executive Directors received a grant of options in FY2012, partly as
entitled to participate in compensation for under market fees paid and are in line with North
Orocobre's equity incentive American practice where the Company is also listed. The Board is aware
schemes? that the provision of equity incentives is contrary to the ASX Corporate
Governance guidelines. AccordinglyI no lunher offers of equity incentives
to Non-executive Directors are contemplated by your Board. If
circumstances change and equity incentives were considered necessary
then approval would be sought trom shareholders at the time,
What other benefits are Non—executive Directors receive reimbursement for any costs incurred
provided to Non»executive directly related to Orocobre business.
Directors?
D. Managing Director and other executive KMP remuneration
Objective
As indicated on page 21. Orocobre's obiective in structuring its remuneration for executive KMPs is to cultivate
a performance based culture where competitive remuneration, benefits and rewards are aligned with Orocobre's
objectives and where merit forms the basis of performance based pay and promotion In addition, Orocobre
seeks to attract, engage and retain high—calibre employees to meet the Company’s current and future business
needs.
Structure
Remuneration consists of the tollowing key elements:
(i) Fixed Remuneration (FR):
(ii) Short Term Incentive (STI): and
(iii) Long Term Incentive (LTI).
The amount and relative proportion of Fixed Remuneration (which includes superannuation contributions),
STI and Hi is established for each executive following consideration by the Remuneration Committee of
market levels of remuneration for comparable executive roles and the internal relativities between executive
roles.
For the annual remuneration review which resulted in the outcomes detailed in this remuneration report. the
Remuneration Committee received expert advice from its external remuneration consultant, CFlA Plan
Managers Pty Ltd.
25


0_rocobre Limited .
Directors' Report (continued) _
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
Objectives
Orocobre's executive KMP remuneration objeaives and their interactions can be illustrated as follows:
Oroccbre execulivr: KMF‘ Remuneration objectives
» . , . Amel, mouvale and
Shaveholde, value Ari ePPIDFiIale'balanee Reward dillerenllelion to Mam exemves
oi lixed and at llSk drive peﬂormsnce. m , .-
creation eepe e o epere mg
componsnls values and behaviours across dwem,
geographies
Taiai Iarget remuneration (rm) lS sei by reference
to the relevant markets and geographies
ma
Fixed ramunerauon (FR) Short-mm Ineemivee (811) mmerm incentives (LTI)
FR '3 59‘ in??? 0" fem?” ma’ke‘ $11 is set as a 96 or n: wilt: LTI 'n sales a % oi FR wiin eqtu
relaéwmfﬁv Medina peﬂovmanoe criteria determined by allocations. smear la speciﬁed
resggnspilmes, peﬂavmancer the Board at me etnn oi the service and performance cmeria set
qualillcaﬂons, expenenae end panama” m, by ",5 Bean, each Yea,
geographic location
Remuneration will be delivered as:
E I ﬁ d Long term equﬂy incenlives will be
if“ 33 “Y “"5 W "9 Paid in cash mm and cm. wowed as om‘ms end/or
awances reiaieci to local . n - m A" v v
mavkeis plus superannuation or "mm mm“ PM” W “meme "9 ’ “my '5
I , “mlnm Em awn”... held subject to sum and
their iocai market equivalents venom,“ maﬁa s,‘ a. me m
or grant. The equny is ai risk uniii
vesting.
Strategic Imem and market positioning
FR will generally be posmoned et Shun ierrn incentives Ire aimed  '°"“[:n°’ffe°"":"e
Ihe median lo 625'" percentile in whim"; 50.", .ppm mm aligned” shy 9 my
oompared to relevant market argon uni yearmat mm “a” 9515 m ano ealm M“
based data considering expeniee market oinammnm and be aimed mmwm‘ market
and pcriormenee in the rdie oracoiare'a siege o1 dmiapmem. P“ expe‘mons
Total target remuneration
1TH IS intended to be paeitianed in the a“ quartile compared to relevant market benchmark comparisons. 4'" quamle 1'”!
may rceuit ii superior outaenormanoe is achieved.
26


orocobre Limited _
Directors' Report (continued) I
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
Remuneration Mix
As set out in the remuneration objectives above Orooobre intends to provide an appropriate mix oi
remuneration components balanced between fixed and ‘at risk' components. The broad remuneration
composition mix for Orocobre executive KMP in FY2013 and proposed for FY2014 can be illustrated as
lollows:
Current Remuneration Mix — FY2013
Position FR STI LTI
Other executives
"This is not based on a full year, the options and performance rights were expensed since 21 March 2015 only
Proposed Remuneration Mix — FY2014
Position FR STI LTI
35 - 50% 20 v 35% 25 a 45%
Other executives 50 80% 10 v 25% 10 a 25%
The remuneration mix will be assessed each year to ensure an appropriate weighting between fixed and
variable elements and to ensure executive KMP remuneration is aligned to Orocobre‘s short, medium and
long term objectives. Other executives were appointed in 2013 and will not participate in the incentive
schemes until FY 2014.
An explanation of the individual elements of executive KMP remuneration is as follows:
(I) Fired Hemline/aria”
At Orocobre, the purpose of Fixed Remuneration is to provide a base level of remuneration which is market
competitive and appropriate. Fixed Remuneration is exclusive of superannuation. Executive KMP are given
the opportunity to receive their Fixed Remuneration as either base salary (if based overseas) or base salary
and superannuation.
Fixed Remuneration is reviewed annually. Any adjustments to the Fixed Remuneration for the Managing
Director and executive KMP must be approved by the Board which considers the recommendations of the
Remuneration Committee.
(it) She)” Term Incentives (37/)
The table below contains a summary of the key features of the STI plan.
Question Response
What is the STI? The STI is the annual cash component of the “at-risk" reward opportunity,
based predominantly on a mix of Company, operational and individual
targets. The purpose is to link the achievement of the Company's annual
targets with the remuneration received by the responsible executive KMP.
When is the STI grant The 2012 STI was calculated based on a calendar year and the resulting
pald? value of the STI was payable in February 2013 to all eligible participants who
satisfied specific performance measures and hurdles set for calendar Yr12.
How does the The STI strengthens the link between pay and performance. Annual targets
COMPET‘Y'S _ST| WUCTUI’G are established by reference to the Company‘s strategy of: growth through
supp“ acmevemem °' discovery, acquisition and development, operations that meet performance
the Company‘s strategy? . . .
targets, optimisation of shareholder value and adherence to core values.
How are the performance At the beginning of each financial year, a number of critical tasks linked to the
conditions determined? Company's strategy, including financial and non-financial measures of
performance, are identified. During the construction phase of Olaroz
measures of performance will be more linked to completion of the project on
time and on budget. The extent that those targets are achieved determines the
amount of STI paid.
2 7


Crocobre Limited

Directors' Report (continued) _

Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)

ls a portion of STI No. At this stage, the Board does not consider it appropriate to defer a

deferred? Has the Board portion of the STI. This is because key performance indicators are largely

considered proposing objective, However, the matter is considered on an annual basis. For similar
claw»back provisions? reasons, the Board has thus far considered it unnecessary to include any
claw-back arrangements.

What were the The STI performance hurdles (and weighting %) for FY 2012 were:

Sigmaengligrdmons Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer

executive KMP in 1- Olaroz Prolem (50%)

Calender year 2012? - Permitting of Olaroz Project — Jujuy Government issued
Project approval, mining leases were granted and EIS was
confirmed.

0 Financing of Olaroz Project — TI’C JV executed and Debt
Financing Agreement executed with Mizuho Bank.
2. Growth Strategy (15%)
o The Olaroz Project production capacity was increased from
16,400 tpa to 17,500 tpa.
o The acquisition of Borax Argentina was completed.
5. Management Structure (15%)
0 Corporate 7 appointment of CFO and Business
Development Manager. This provides improved capacity
and liberation of CEO time.
0 Operational — appointment and promotion of staff within
Sales de Jujuy and Borax as well as the appointment of
INFA as the construction managers for the Olaroz Project,
4. Systems (10%)
- ISO Qualification process started for Quality (ISO 9001),
Environmental (ISO 14001) and Occupational Health and
Safety (OHAS 15001) quality assurance within Sales de
Jujuy.
~ Procurement Procedures for Sales de Jujuy implemented.
a Approval Procedures and Authority Matrix implemented for
Sales de Jujuy.
o Policies for the Group in HR. HSE. Donations, Risk Control,
Procurement, and Documentation Control have commenced
development.
0 SAP and associated financial reporting systems for Sales
de Jujuy have been selected for implementation in 2013.
5. Share Performance (10%)
- Orooobre had a positive performance of approx. +7% and
has outperformed all of its peers over the 12 months (2012)
with the exception of Canada Lithium
How are actual results For each performance hurdle the Remuneration Committee assesses the
measured against the actual performance against the set targets and allocates the achieved
performance hurdles? percentage. Further information is provided in the table on page 32.
ﬂ/ﬂ Long Term Incentives (L77)
The LTI is the equity component of the at-risk reward opportunity of total remuneration, The objective of the
LTI is:
o to provide an incentive to executive KMPs which promotes both the long term performance and
growth of the Company:
0 encourages the retention of the Company's executives ,and
o the attraction of new executives and/or officers to the group.
For FY 2013, the Company provided the LTI to executive KMPs through the Penormanoe Rights and Option
Plan (PROP) for the first time. This plan was approved by shareholders at the 2012 Annual General Meeting.
2 8


Oyooobre Limited .

Directors‘ Report (continued) _

Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)

In FY 2013 the Managing Director was the only executive KMP to participate in the PROP.

The tables in section H provide details of LTI grants to executive KMPs. The tables also detail the value,
vesting periods and lapses under the PROP. The table below summarises the key features of the LTI issued
to the executive KMPs for the year ended 30 June 201 a.

What is the PROP? Introduced in November 2012. the PROP is a contemporary equity incentive
plan which allows the Company to provide either performance rights or options
to eligible and invited employees, subject to the terms of the plan. PROP is
supported by the Orocobre Employee Share Scheme Trust which has been
established to facilitate and manage the issue or acquisition oi shares on the
settlement of vested rights or options.

The 2013 issue of options and performance rights to the Managing Director
were approved by the shareholders at the 2012 Annual General Meeting.

How does the PROP The PROP links rewards for executives to the Company's strategy which

align the interests of drives the creation of long term shareholder wealth — the greater the

shareholders and performance of the Company. the greater the return to the executives; and

executives? vesting of shares only occurs with the successful completion of performance
requirements and time based conditions as determined by the Board.

How does the PROP An objective of offering equity incentives under the PROP is to assist in the

SUPPOR the retention 0' reward, retention and motivation of eligible and invited key executives. If an

execunves? executive resigns they would forfeit the benefit of those unvested rewards
unless the Board determines otherwise.

What are the principal There were two performance conditions applying to issues to the Managing

terms of the issue made Director under the PROP in 2013.
“me; me PROP ‘n 1. Share Options were granted subject to a Total Shareholder
2018. Return (T SR) outperformance condition; and
2. Performance Rights were granted subject to achievement of
set Milestones.
The options and rights were granted on 21 March 2013. The vesting date for
the options is 393 days from the commencement date that the instruments
were granted. (:31 August 2015).
Vesting of the March 2013 options is subject to ORE outperformance
against the component companies of the S&P/ASX 300 Index over the
vesting period. TSR is the total return achieved by a shareholder in relation
to shares. including any increase in share price including dividends
reinvested. The table below provides the matrix of outcomes:
ORE TSR Ranking Percentage of Options to Vest
Less than or at 50‘" percentile
Is at me 50". percenme 50% of Performance Rights vest
50% + 2% for each percentile
Between the 50'“ and 75‘" percentile point above the 50m psrcenms
At or above the 75'“ percentile 100% V93“
29


orocobre Limited ,
Directors' Report (continued) _
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
Vesting oi the March 2013 Performance Rights is based on Internal
Performance conditions applicable to the performance rights (Milestones). The
table below provides the matrix of outcomes:
as of Panamanoe Performance Conditions
Rights to Vest
75% Complete construction at the Olaroz Project
within 10% of the Development Budget as
set out in the Shareholder Agreement,
25% Achieve audited Net Profit alter Tax of $5M
or more in the 2015 financial year,
The maximum number of Performance Rights and Options which may be
granted under the plan must not exceed 5% oi the total issued capital of the
Company at the time of the grant.
The participants are required to pay the exercise price upon the exercise of the
options or rights, if any.
Can performance No. Performance conditions will be tested at the vesting date and if the
conditions be retested? performance conditions have not been met, the options and/or rights will lapse.
Cari participants secure No. Participants cannot secure, mortgage or create lien in respect of their
or mortgage rights or interests in PROP.
options under PROP?
Does the executive No. Options and performance rights are not entitled to dividends or other
obtain the benefit of distributions. Shares acquired on vesting and exercise of performance rights
dividends paid on or options will be ordinary securities and entitled to dividends. if any. No
shares issued under the dividends apply betore vesting and exercise.
PROP?
In what circumstances Unless the Board otherwise determines, the rights and options will lapse on the
would the PROP earlier of;
g‘églifgims be 1. The cessation of the employment of the participant.
' 2. The vesting conditions are not achieved or incapable of being
achieved by the participant.
3. The Board determines that the vesting conditions have not been met
prior to the expiry date.
4. The expiry date (last exercise date)
What happens to LTl If the capital of the Company is reconstructed the LTl entitlements will be
Tnt'eme?‘s “Ft”? ’5 m treated in accordance with the Listing Rules of the ASX, whether or not those
c angeo conro in e ..
Company? Listing Rules apply to the Company.
The Board has the discretion to approve a pro rata vesting in the event of a
change in control
Do shares issued under The issue of shares can have a small dilutionary impact upon other
“19 PROP d'l'fte 93'sglng shareholders. However. the number of shares issued under all PROP must
Shareholders aqu'w' not exceed 5% of the total shares on issue at the time an offer to a participant
is made, excluding unregulated otters.
Are the shares issued Shareholder approval was provided for the 2013 grant of options and rights to
0" PXel'c'Se 0‘ °P1l°ns be settled irom a new issue, it any. Whether the Company settles options or
gg'ggﬁotgﬁgr rights from a new issue or by on-market purchase will be determined by the
mama? Board. at the time.
30


Orocobre Limited I

Directors‘ Report (continued) I

Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)

Questlon Response

What other rights does Subject to the conditions and restrictions attaching to the shares. acquired on
the “glde’ 0' "‘9 Shares vesting and exercise of rights and options, the holder of the shares has the
have' same rights as any other holder oi ordinary shares. This includes voting

rights. a right to dividends, dividend reinvestment, bonus shares, rights issues
and notice of meetings.

Does the Company The Company does not have a formal policy requiring executives to own
have Executive Share shares,

Ownership Guidelines’,7

Can executive KMP No. All executive KMP have been advised that under section 206] of the
“Edge 1° Ensure mi!“ Corporations Act it is an offence for them to hedge unvested grants made
they obtain a benefit under the PROP

from unvested LTl's? '

E. Relationship of Incentives to Orooobre's operating and financial performance

The fundamental aim of Orocobre is to create benefit for shareholders by establishing operations that
produce high quality products from relatively low capital and operating cost operations. The Company is
equally committed to achieving excellence in sustainability practices; ensuring the safety. health and
wellbeing of its employees; and responsibly managing the impacts to the communities and the
environment within which it operates. Accordingly, remuneration is linked to sustainability performance at
all levels of the organisation to reinforce sustainability as a core value.

In terms of Orocobre’s performance over the course of FY2013. the following should be noted:

0 Orocobre's share price fluctuated over the course of FY2013, ending the year at A$1.89 per share
and the 52 week closing share price ranged from A$1 .05 to “2.37 per share.0rocobre
successfully acquired Borax Argentina SA

- Orocobre successfully commenced construction of the Olaroz project under a joint venture
agreement with Toyota Tsusho Corporation (T'I'C) and Jujuy Energia y Mineria Sociedad del
Estado (JEMSE).

The table below shows the performance of the Company as measured by its share price and
market capitalisation over the last five financial years.
30-Jun-08 30-Jun-09 swun-io swim-11 30~Jun-12 30-Jun-13
A$ Per share 3046 $0.59 $1 70 $2.06 31 85 $1.39
As market capnalisation 19,230,290 39,409,100 154,761,924 212291.021 190,910,804 163,665,745
Basic Earnings/Loss Fer Share
. 2 , , .
(Epswur $(I 04) S( 5) 3(5 56) $(l 88) 3(2 74) $85 36
AS profit/(loss) ('DDO) 3(435) $(1486) 3(4164) 3(1790) 3(2830) $97,329
5&PASX 30° 5219 3949 4293 4608 4084 4759
' Basic EPS is calculated as net profit/ (Loss) after tax and non-controlling interests (statutory profit/
(loss)) divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares.
Relationship of executive KMP remuneration and performance
The Managing Direaor, Mr Richard Seville is the only executive KMP who received performance based
remuneration during FY2013.
Changes in Mr Seville‘s remuneration and the relationship to Company performance are explained as
follows:
1. Fixed remuneration
The Managing Director received an increase of 4.5% in base salary to $347,650 during FY2013 to
reflect the growth and increasing complexity of the Company. Based on independent external
remuneration benchmark assessments this fixed salary was in the bottom quartile of comparable
31


0rocobre Limited I

Directors' Fteport (continued) .

Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)

resource company CEO's, independently assessed based by CFlA on MCAP. number ol employees
and organisational complexity.

2. Short Term Incentive
The Managing Director in accordance with his employment agreement is provided with the
opportunity to earn up to a maximum oi 75% oi the annual iixed base salary. For the Calendar Year
2012 assessed STI the Managing Director received payment amounting to $228,000' paid in FY2013.
This represented an across the board 39% achievement against the periormance targets set. The
Managing Director also was allocated a once»oii bonus oi A$100,000 as a result ol the successlul
signing of the agreement with JEMSE This bonus was paid in FY 2013. The combined FR + STI oi
$675,650 positioned the Managing Director in the 3'“ quartile oi comparator company CEO's. The
Board is satisfied with this positioning based on ORE’s periormance ior the year.
STI targets and results summarised are set out in the table below
Targets Calendar Year 2012 assessment highlights

Olaroz Project - Permitting oi Olaroz Project— JuJuy Government issued Project approval,
mining leases were granted and EIS was coniirmed.

o Financing oi Olaroz Project — 'l'rC JV executed and Debt Financing Agreement
executed with Miluho Bank.

Growth Strategy 0 The Olaroz Project planned production capacity was increased irom 16.400 tpa
to 17.500 tpa,

. The acquisition oi Borax A - entlna was com . leted.

Management Structure - Corporate — appointment oi CFO and Business Development Manager. This
provides improved capacity and liberation oi CEO time.

o Operational — appointment and promotion of stair within sales as JuJuy and
Borax as well as the appointment oi INFA as the construction managers for the
Olaroz Pro eci,

Systems I ISO Qualiﬁcation process staned tor Quality (ISO 9001), Environmental (ISO
14001) and Occupational Health and Saiety toms 18001) quality assurance
within Sales de Jujuy.

o Procurement Procedures ior Sales de JuJuy implemented,

- Approval Procedures and Authority Matrix implemented ior Sales de Jujuy.

- Policies tor the Group in HR. HSE, Donations. Ftisk Conuol. Procurement, and
Documentation Control have commenced development.

- SAP and associated ﬁnancial reporting systems ior Sales de Jujuy have been
selected ior Im iernentatton in 2013,

Share Perlormance o Orocobre has a positive performance of approx. +7% in FY 2013 and has

oulerlormed all but one oi its eor comanies over the 12 months 2012 ,

3 Long Term Incentive

An amount oi $33,455 has been accrued as the accounting expense under lFRS-2 ior LTI ior FY2013.
This notional expense is calculated based on an independent valuation. Whether any benefit will be
derived by the Managing Director in respect oi the LT| will be determined subject to the Managing
Director satisfying the speciiied service and periormance conditions set out. In addition, ior the
option portion oi this LTI award the ORE share price will need to exceed the exercise price set. The
Board ls satisiied that a monetary beneiit will only accrue to the Managing Director ii shareholders
are better oil over the duration of the award period and that the LTI is appropriately balanced on a
risk adiusted basis.

F. Servlce agreements

Remuneration and other key terms oi employment ior the Managing Director and other executive KMP are
formalised in service agreements. The table below provides a high level overview oi conditions relating to
the term oi the contract, the notice period to terminate and the termination beneiit.

32


Drooobre Limited _
Directors' Report (continued) I
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
, Term of Notice Period by 1 .
Name and hue Eimer Party Termination Beneﬁt
Richard Seville, Managing Director m 12 m f, d ‘1
and Chief Executive Ofiicer 3 mo" 5 mo" S be remunera on
Neil Kaplen, Chiei Financial Oiiicer a months iixed remuneration
David Hall, Business Development . .
Terms oi agreement and associated benefits were agreed at the time the executive KMP commenced with
Orocobre or upon promotion.
G. Details of remuneration
Details at the nature and amount of each major element of the remuneration oi each KMP stated in A3 is
es loliows:
Nonwh beneﬁts
Short-term em lo 5 Dancing accrued
Retirement Annual Emmy
Directors' Short Term beneﬁta/ leave] 53mm
Fees] Em incentive Superannu can Termination ovum-(s Long Term Touil
Salary A: «non beneﬁts beneﬁts A; incentives Ramuneratlo
As (1) 45 received AS 45 m A: As
1 1 1 I l | l 3 (1)
IVOII-GKBCUt/W
Dilaclb/s
ames Calaway 2013 205.200 - - 205,200 2 40.173 ~ 245.373
2012 234,930 ‘DDDDD - 364,930 - 39,034 - 403364
ounney Pratt 2013 40,000 - - 40,000 - 26.782 - 68,782
2012 40.000 2 . 40,000 - 23,023 - 00023
cm Gibson 2013 40.000 - - 40,0“? - 261752 - 66,782
2012 40.000 - - 40.000 ~ 20.02:; - 66.023
gggam" ori‘ “'9 R°a 40.000 - - 40,000 - 20,702 - 06.702
2012 40,000 - 2 40,000 - 26,023 2 00.023
Federico Nichoiszgqa 40,000 _ _ 40,000 _ 25,752 . 86.782
2012 40,000 - - 40,000 2 20.023 - 66.023
oben Hubbard 2013 23,333 - 2.100 25.433 - ‘ ~ 25.4%
(Appointed 30
N0v'2012)
2012 2 2 . . . . . .
r all Stuart 2013 16.067 - - 16,667 » 10.592 - 35.359
(Retired 30 Nov'2012)
2012 40.000 2 . 40,000 - 20,023 - 66.023
33


orocobre Limited .
Directors' Report (continued) .
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
- Non-cash benefits
Short-term emit; a 05119111: Sub-total amod
Directora'
Fm/ Short Rethemant Cash Annual lam Equity
Base term benenu/ 05119111: [Termination settled 1mg Term Total
Salary Incemlim Superannuation received beneﬁts Options Incentives Remuneration
As A3 A: As A: A‘ A: As
1 1 1 1 1 r 1‘) 1 9 1
--_-_--_
Non-
mum
Dims
2015 405.200 9 2,100 407.500 155,999 573,290
464,930
2012 iv 100,000 - 534,930 159,149 7:14.079
WW
PM
Richard
Seville 2013 347.550 325,000 22,950 590.000 2,822 754,577
2012 332.500 215,000 29,925 577,425 39,095 617,320
other
a):me
KMP
Paul
Crawlord (vi
2013 116,100 115,100 115,100
2012 144.075 144.075 144,075
Neil Kaplan
2013 145.161 155225 10015 150241
[Appointed 7
Jan 201 :1)
2012 - . ~ -
David Hall
201:: 145.129 156.551 3.995 135,513
(Appomted 7
Jan 2013)
2012 - , , .
Total
2013 1.150.240 225.000 45.557 1.535507 21.572 155.996 33.455 1,757,527
2012 941.505 315,000 29.925 1.205430 39.995 150.149 » 1.495.474
Notes to previous tables:
(i) Payments to the Nonexecutive Directors. the Managing Director and other senior
executives are paid in Australian dollars
(ii) Annual leave and termination benefits represent amounts provided lor leave and
termination entitlements during the year ended 30 June 2013. Termination beneﬁts
are those referred to under Section F Service Agreements ol this Remuneration
Report. Termination beneﬁts are payable when an executive KMP leaves the
employment of the Company (other than ior gross misconduct) are included in the
table.
(iii) The value for Long Term Incentives presented in the tables above is calculated in
accordance with AASB 2 Share Based Payments and represents securities issued
34


orocobre Limited ,
Directors' Fteport (continued) .
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
under the LT! equity plans that have been expensed during the current year. Reter to
the tables on pages 36 & 37 tor lull details ofthe (air As value at the grant date tor long
term incentive securities issued by the Company to the executive KMP in this, previous
or iuture reporting periods and the number oi securities issued to those senior
executives during the reporting period. The fair values of long term incentives have
been calculated by an independent third party. More intormation can be found in
section H of this report.
(iv) The $64,930 in excess 01 the fee limit set in 2012 related to additional tees paid to the
Chairman for services in excess of his tixed fees.
(v) Paul Crawlord was paid through a company "Cambridge Business 8. Corporate
Services" as the Company Secretary. Mr Crawford resigned as Company Secretary as
at 1 July 2013 and Mr Neil Kepian was appointed as his replacement as of this date.
The table below shows the proportion of the total actual remuneration that is linked to performance and
the proportion that is lixed:
Fixed . .
Name 2012 2012 2012 2013 2012
% % % S $
—
James
Celewa 54% 66% 0% 25% 16% 10% 100.00% 10000%
John
Courtney
Pratt 61% 0% 40% 100.00% 100.00%
Fernando
Oris de Floa 60% 61% 0% 0% 40% 39% 100.00% 100.00%
Federico
Nicolson 60% 61% 0% 0% 40% 39% 100.00% 100.00%
Rob
Mammy Weaver --
Richard
Seville 51% 65% 44% 35% 5% 0% 100.00% 100.00%
awesome/(MP _—
Nell Kalan m 100.00%
0.0.0 Hall m 100.00%
3 5


0_rocobre Limited _
Directors' Fteport (continued) _
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
H. Share-based compensation issues to the Managing Director and other executives
The table below highlights the movement in rights ior the Managing Director and other executives in 2013.
w
ngnu mm; . h an..." n d d
1"" $13.13 2372' my)“ 3357:)“ 33.3 m; 3‘43"" 22:75.15. 3.73m
3 A
' ‘ INS/200 Optical 3mm: 3mm 301092
zvna/zoo ngym' «0.792 mm: «0.732
uuu uuu «Mu
“2..” nun 222,":
*Section 300(1) oi the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth) requires additional disclosure tor the five most highly
remunerated executives.

(i) No amounts are unpaid on any shares issued on the exercise oi options.

(ii) The value at grant date reﬂects the iair value of the right multiplied by the number of rights granted
during the period converted using the rate at the date oi grant.

(iii) The value at exercise date oi the securities that were granted as part of remuneration and were
exercised during the year, being the value of the share at the date of exercise less the exerciSe
price and less the iair value ofthe right at grant date multiplied by the number oi rights exercised
convened using the rate at the date of exercise.

(iv) The value at lapse date oi the securities that were granted as part oi remuneration and that lapsed
during the year because a vesting condition was not satisiied.

(v) The iair values of long term incentives have been calculated by an independent third party. This
table summarises the details oi the grants and assumptions that were used in determining the fair
value oi PROP, options and rights on the grant date.

3 6


orooobre Limited .
Directors' Report (continued) .
Remuneration Report (audited) (continued)
, Pertormanoe
Gram date 21/06/13 21/03/13
Date vested and exercisable 31 (08/ 15 31/05/15
Btpll‘y date 30/09/15 30/09/15
Fair value per share at grant date A$ $03365 $1 .3607
Share price at grant date A$ $13607 $13607
Exercise prloe A$ $220 “
m“
Dividend yield
Risk-tree interest rate 303% 3,03%
Estimated volatility (standard deviation)
The Director's Report incorporating the Remuneration Report is signed in accordance mm a resolution of the
Board of Directors
1 /
%¢.» 0 («9123/  l‘
/
James D Celaway Richard P Seville
Chairman Managing Director
Signed: 30th September 2013
37


EY (um. .una 1elnnnounn
m up: Shem YIIHSI non mo
mum on) women-m um]...
um...“ can Magnum: on: not
wrung ma
Audltor's Independence Declaratlon to the Directors of Orocohre Limlted
In relation to on r an all of the lhantlal rep or! 0| Orncobre Limited lorth e llnantial yea r ende d 30 June
2013, to the best at my kndwledge and helieﬂ, there hale heen no to mraventlnns nnhe auditor
Independence requlremeht: Mthe CorporationiActzooi or any applicable (Me at prntesslonal (ondutt.
ELM-at vi 
Ernst & Vnung
Mark Hayward
Partner
30 Septemberzola
1 “mum. aE-nxah-qcam um...
null-v mu r. mm mm. mum’s-mum mam;-
38


Orocobre Limited
Corporate Governance Statement

Corporate Governance Statement
This Corporate Governance Statement outlines the key principles and practices of Orccobre Limited
("Orocobre" or the “Company"). which represents its system of governance. The Company‘s Board is
committed to implementing best practice corporate governance procedures and has adopted ASX‘s
Coma/ate Governance Principles and Recommendations as released by the ASX Corporate Governance
Council (the “Principles") as the basis for its corporate governance policies.
In viewing this Statement, shareholders are reminded that the Company is transitioning from a “junior
explorer" into a signiﬁcant operating company committed to developing its governance principles and
practices to support that rapid growth while maintaining a lean and efficient corporate management structure
appropriate for its stage in development. The Company advises that where its practices are not entirely
consistent with the ASX Principles this is because the Board considers some ol the recommendations are not
applicable to the Company's size and the nature of its current operations, However, the Board and
management of the Company are committed to the progressive Implementation of the Principles. appropriate
to each stage of the Company's development.

A summary of compliance with the Principles are provided below.

PRINCIPLE 1 : LAY SOLID FOUNDATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT AND OVERSIGHT

Lay Solid foundations for management and oversight

The Board's role is to govern the Company and to ensure that it represents effectively the interests of all

shareholders. In governing the Company. the Directors must act in the best interests of the Company as a

whole. The Managing Director and executive management manage the day to day activities of the Company

in accordance with the directions and delegations of the Board whilst the Board oversees the activities of the

Managing Director and executive management in carrying out these delegated duties.

In carrying out its governance role, the main task of the Board is to drive the performance of the Company

consistent with its values and articulated procedures and practices. The Board must also ensure that the

Company complies with all of its contractual, statutory and any other legal obligations. including the

requirements of any regulatory body, The Board has the final responsibility for the successful operations of

the Company.

1‘1 Companies should establish the functions resewed lo the board and those delegated to senior executives

and disclose these functions.

The Company has developed a Board Charter which documents the respective roles and responsibilities of

the Board and senior executives, In general, the Board is responsible for, and has the authority to determine,

all matters relating to the policies. practices, management and operations of the Company. It is required to
do all things that may be necessary to be done in order to carry out the objectives of the Company.

To assist the Board in fullilling its duties and responsibilities, the following Committees have been established:

(3) Audit Committee, which is responsible Ior monitoring and advising the Board on the Company internal
and external audit, risk management and regulatory compliance policies and procedures;

(b) Remuneration Committee, which is responsible for overseeing the remuneration policies and practices of
the Company , advising the Board on the composition of the Board and its Committees, reviewing the
performance of the Managing Director and reviewing the performance reviews of senior executives
undertaken by the Managing Director.

The Board is collectiver responsible for:

- input into the development and approval of corporate strategy including financial objectives;

I the appointment and removal ol the Managing Director. Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary;

- oversight of control and accountability systems;

- evaluating and approving the annual operating budget and business plans and holding management
accountable for delivery of same;

- evaluating, approving and monitoring the progress of major capital and operating expenditure. capital
management and all major corporate transactions:

- monitoring compliance with all legal and regulatory and ethical obligations;

- reviewing any risk management system (which may be a series of systems established on a per-project
basis) and internal compliance and controls;

- with the assistance of the Remuneration Committee. approving remuneration policies and the
employment terms for non-executive Directors, the Managing Director. and senior executives;

39


Orocobre Limited _

Corporate Governance Statement (continued)

- with the assitance of the Remuneration Committee, establishing criteria for and monitoring performance
of the Managing Director and senior executives;

- approving and monitoring financial and other reporting to the market. shareholders, employees and other
stakeholders;

- determining Orocobre's dividend policy, the operation of dividend re-investment plan (it any) and the
amount and timings of all dividends; and

- appointing the Chairman oi Orocobre.
The Board will convene regular meetings as may otherwise be required to deal with urgent matters which
might arise between scheduled meetings,
Newly appointed Directors will be provided with formal appointment letters setting out the key terms and
conditions regarding their appointment. Similarly, senior executives including the Managing Director are
provided with formal job descriptions and letters of appointment clearly stating their term of office. duties.
rights and responsibilities, and entitlements on termination.
1.2 Companies should disclose the process for evaluating the performance of senior executives.
Senior executive performance is reviewed against a range of quantitative and qualitative measures
Remuneration reviews also take into account length of service, particular experience of the individual
concerned, overall perlormanoe oi Orocobre and the individual and market practice with respect to
comparable positions.
The Remuneration Committee reviews the Managing Director's performance and the Managing Director
reviews other executives' performance. The results oi the Managing Director's periormance reviews of senior
executives are reported to the Remuneration Committee for information and approval of any incentive
payments. The performance of senior executives is reviewed on a formal basis annually. The Remuneration
Committee‘s review of the Managing Director's performance and the Managing Directors review of senior
executive's performance were undertaken during the year.
For more information please refer to the Remuneration Report within the Directors Report.
PRINCIPLE 2: Smucrune THE BOARD TO ADD VALUE
Structure the board to add value
To add value to the Company, the Board has been formed so that it has effective composition. size and
commitment to adequately discharge its responsibilities and duties. The Board of Orocobre currently
comprises seven Directors. Mr Richard Seville who is the Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer is
considered an executive Director. The remaining six Directors are considered non-executive Directors. Five oi
these non-executive directors are independent, Further details of the Directors such as their qualifications and
experience along with their terms oi office are set out in the Directors' Report.

Within the cost limits appropriate for a company ol Orocobre‘s size. the Board has been structured to provide

optimum experience and oversight of the Company's operations. The Board considers that the existing

Directors bring the range of skills, knowledge and experience necessary to govern the Company effectively.

The Board regularly reviews its composition, skill base and effectiveness oi the Board.

2.1 A maiority of the board should be independent directors.

Orocobre had a majority of independent directors throughout the year. As at the date of this Annual Report,

the Board consists of a majority of independent directors. The Board comprises one executive Director and

six non-executive Directors. There are five nonexecutive Directors that are independent. The Non-Executive

Chairman of the Board, Mr James Calaway. is not independent as he is the Managing Member of a Limited

Liability Company with a substantial shareholding in the Company. The ﬁve non-executive Directors that are

independent and meet the criteria for independence proposed by the Principles are: Mr Courtney Pratt, Mr

John Gibson, Mr Oris de Roa. Mr Federico Nicholson and Mr Robert Hubbard,

Whlle determining the independent status of Directors, the Board has considered whether the Director:

a) holds less than five percent of the voting shares oi the Company (in conjunction with their associates); or
is an officer of the Company, or otherwise associated directly with a shareholder of more than five percent
of the voting shares of the Company;

b) has within the last three years. been employed in an executive capacity by the Company or another
group member:

c) has within the last three years been a principal of a material proiessional adviser or a material consultant
to the Company or another group member, or an employee materially associated with the service
provided. In this context, the relationship with the professional adviser or consultant shall be deemed to
be material if payments from the Company exceed 10% of the Company's annual expenditure to all

40


Orocobre Limited _

Corporate Governance Statement (continued)
professionals and consultants or exceed 10% of the recipient‘s annual revenue for advison/ or
consultancy services:

d) is a material supplier or customer of the Company or another group member, or an officer of or otheMise
associated directly or indirectly with a material supplier or customer. In this context. the relationship with
the supplier or customer shall be deemed to be material if annual payments to or from that supplier or
customer exceed 10% of the annual consolidated gross revenue of either the Company or that supplier or
customer: and

e) has a material contractual relationship with the Company or other group member other than as a Director
of the Company.

2.2 The chair should be an independent director.
Orccobre is not compliant with this Recommendation as Mr Calaway is not an independent Director as
detailed in 2.1. However, at this time in the Company's stage of development, the Board considers that the
most suitable person to fulfil the role of Chairman is Mr Calaway. To manage any potential conflicts of
interest. Mr Pratt has been appointed as a lead independent Director. In this capacity Mr Pratt will lead board
discussions in the event that there Is a perceived conflict of interest for the Chairman. chair Board in-camera
sessions and liaise with the Company's Managing Director on any matters relating to the Chairman.

2.3 The roles of chairperson and chief executive officer should not be exercised by the same person.

Orocobre is compliant with this Recommendation The Chairman is not the Chief Executive Oflicer nor does

he perform Chief Executive Officer functions. The Company’s Managing Director, Mr Seville is the Chief

Executive Officer. The Managing Director is responsible for running the affairs of the Company under

delegated authority of the Board, including the implementation of the policies and strategy set by the Board.

There is a clear division of responsibilities between the Chairman and the Chief Executive Officer.

2.4 The board should establish a nomination committee.

The Company does not comply with this recommendation currently because the function of the nomination

committee is undertaken by the full Board. The size and nature of the Company’s activities do not currently

justify the establishment a separate committee at this time. The Board regularly reviews the composition, skill
base and effectiveness of the Directors of the Board.

25 Companies should disclose the process for evaluating the performance of the board, its committees and

Individual directors.

The Company undertook a formal performance review process of the Board and the Chair during the financial

year. A third pany organisation was contracted to undertake a confidential survey of Directors on board

composition. dyanamics and performance, performance of committees and of the Chairman, Since year's

end the data has been analysed and the process completed.

Induction & Education

New Directors will undergo an induction process in which they will be given a full briefing on the Company.

Where possibleI this includes meetings with key executives, tours of the premises, an induction package and

presentations. Information conveyed to new Directors includes:

0 details of the role and responsibilities of a Director;

- formal policies on Director appointment as well as conduct and contribution expectations:

- details of all relevant legal requirements;

0 access to a copy of the Board Charter;

- guidelines on how the Board processes function;

- details of past, recent and likely future developments relating to the Board;

a background information on and contact information for key people in the organisation;

0 an analysis of the Company;

o a synopsis of the current strategic diremion of the Company including a copy of the current strategic plan
and annual budget; and

o a copy of the Constitution of the Company.

In order to achieve continuing improvement in Board performance, all Directors are encouraged to undergo

continual protessional development.

Access to lnfomtation and Independent Professlonal Advice

Each Director has the right of access to all Company information and to the Company's executives, Further.

each Director and the Board collectively, subject to informing the Chairman, has the right to seek independent

professional advice from a suitably qualiﬁed advisor at the Company’s expense. up to specified limits to assist

4 1


Orocobre Limited ,
Corporate Governance Statement (continued)
them to carry out their responsibilities. Where appropriate a copy of this advice is to be made available to all
other members of the Board.
PRINCIPLE a: PROMOTE ETHICAL AND RESPONSIBLE DECISION MAKING
3.1 Companies should establish a code of conduct and disclose the code or a summary of the code.
The Board requires high standards of conduct and responsibility from Directors and officers. As part of its
commitment to recognising the legitimate interest of stakeholders, the Company has developed a Code of
Conduct to guide compliance with legal and other obligations to stakeholders, which include employees.
clients, customers, government authorities, creditors and the community. Directors are required to adhere to
industry standards in conduct and dealings and promote a culture of honesty. fairness and ethical behaviour
in its internal compliance policy and procedures as well as in its dealings with stakeholders.
The Company is committed to implementing this Code of Conduct. A copy of the Code is given to all relevant
personnel, including Directors and each individual is accountable for such compliance
Any breach of applicable laws, accepted ethical commercial practices or other aspects of the Code of
Conduct will result in disciplinary action. Depending on the severity of the breach. such disciplinary action
may include reprimand, formal waming, demotion or termination of employment/engagement (as the case
may be),Disciplinary action may be taken against any manager who directly approves of such action or has
knowledge of the action and does not take appropriate remedial action.
Breach of applicable laws or regulations may also result in prosecution by the appropriate authorities. The
Company will not pay, directly or indirectly. any penalties imposed on any personnel as a result of a breach of
law or regulation.
Personnel are expected to report any instances of suspected non—compliance and these will be investigated
lairly. Individuals who report suspected noncompliance in good laith will be appropriately protected.
Company Securities Trading Policy
The Company has a Securities Trading Policy pursuant to ASX Listing Rule 12.9. According to this policy, all
Directors, senior executives, employees, contractors and consultants, whilst in possession of material, non-
public, market price sensitive information, are subject to three restrictions:
0 they must not deal in securities where they are in possession oi inside information:
- they must not cause or procure anyone else to deal in those securities: and
o they must not communicate the information to any person if they know or ought to know that the other
person will use the information, directly or indirectly, for dealings in securities,
Directors, senior executives. employees, contractors and consultants are required to advise the Chairman and
Company Secretary of their intentions prior to undertaking any transaction in the Company's securities. If a
Director. senior executive, employee, contractor or consultant is considered to possess material, non-public,
market price sensitive information, they will be precluded lrom making a security transaction until after the
time of public release of that information.
The Company also has nominated “Trading Windows". No trading in Orocobre Securities may occur by
Directors or senior executives (being direct reports to the Managing Director and those persons' direct
reports) outside of nominated Trading Windows without the permission of the Chairman.
Unless the Board otherwise directs. in its absolute discretion, Trading Windows will be opened at the following
times:
(a) for a period of 4 weeks following the public release by Orocobre ol its quarterly reports,
including Appendix 40, to the ASX (commencing on the second trading day after such release);
(b) for a period of 4 weeks following the public release by Orocobre of its annual and half year
results to the ASX (commencing on the second trading day after such release);
(c) for a period of 4 weeks following the Orocobre Annual General Meeting (commencing on the
second trading day after the AGM):
(d) for a period of 2 weeks following the release of Material Non-Public information to the ASX
(commencing on the second trading day after such release); and
(e) during any offer period for long as it remains open under a disclosure document (prepared in
accordance with Chapter SD of the Corporations Act and released to the ASX) issued by
Orocobre offering Securities.
42


Orooobre Limited _
Corporate Governance Statement (continued)
The Board may also. in its absolute and unfettered discretion. determine that a trading window be
opened commensurate with the vesting oi securities granted under any Orocobre equity based
remuneration scheme.
3.2 Companies should establish a policy concerning diversity and disclose the policy or a summary oi that
policy.
The Diversity Policy is a commitment by the Company to actively seek to maintain a diverse workforce, to
create a workplace that is lair and inclusive, applies iair and equitable employment practices and provides a
working environment that will allow all employees to reach their full potential.
33 Companies should disclose in each annual report the measurable objectives for achieving gender
diversity set by the Board in accordance with the Diversity Policy and progress towards achieving them.
The Company is of the view that any measurable statistical objectives on a diverse workforce must be fit for
purpose, in line with the Company strategic objectives and ensure the Company is in compliance with all
relevant legislative requirements. As at the date of this Annual Report. the Company is of the opinion that
measurable objectives are not appropriate at its present stage of developmentI however, the Company will
consider implementation of measurable objectives in future.
3.4 Companies should disclose in each annual report the proportion of women employees in the whole
organisaﬂon, women in senior executive positions and women on the Board
Due to the size and scale of operations of the Company. the Board believes that a longer term gender
diversity objective is more appropriate.
As at the date of this Annual Report, 0% of the Board. 10% of employees and 20% of senior executives are
women. In Australia. 83% of employees are women while in Argentina the figure is 9.5%. All senior executive
roles performed by women are based in Argentina. These figures include the Sales de Jujuy SA employees
responsible tor the management of the Olaroz project as well as employees of Borax Argentina SA.
The Company will look to increase gender diversity at a Board and senior executive level in future years as the
Company progresses from exploration and construction to operations/production.
PRINCIPLE 4: SAFEGUAHD INTEGle IN FINANCIAL REPORTING
4.1 The board should establish an audit committee.
The Board has established an Audit Committee to assist the Board. Details of the Members oi the Audit
Committee and their attendance at Committee Meetings are set out in Directors‘ Report.
4. 2 The structure ctthe audit committee.
The Audit Committee consists of three non-executive Directors. There is a majority of independent directors
on the Audit Committee and the Chairman is Mr Robert Hubbard, who is an independent non-executive
Director. The other members oi the Audit Committee are Mr Gibson and Mr Oris de Roa.
4.3 The audit committee has atormal charter.
The responsibilities otthe Audit Committee are set out in a formal charter approved by the Board.
External auditor
After a recommendation has been made by the Audit Committee, the Board is responsible for the initial
appointment of the external auditor and the appointment oi a new external auditor when any vacancy arises.
Any appointment made by the Board must be ratified by shareholders at the next annual general meeting of
the Company. Candidates tor the position of the extemal auditor of the Company must be able to
demonstrate complete independence from the Company and an ability to maintain independence through the
engagement period. Further, the successful candidate must have arrangements in place for the rotation of the
audit engagement partner on a regular basis.
The Board may select an external auditor based on criteria relevant to the business of the Company such as
experience in the industry in which the Company operates, references. cost and any other matters deemed
relevant by the Board. The Board reviews the performance of the external auditor on an annual basis.
43


Orocobre Limited .
Corporate Governance Statement (continued)
PRINCIPLE 5: MAKE TIMELVAND BALANCED DiscLosuRE
5.1 Policy for compliance with continuous disclosure
The Board has adopted a policy and rules to ensure the Company complies with its obligations under the ASX
Listing Rule 3.1 7 Continuous Disclosure. The Board has designated the Company Secretary as the person
responsible for overseeing and coordinating disclosure of information to the ASX as well as communicating
with the ASX.
In accordance with the ASX Listing Rules, the Company immediately notifies the ASX of information:
1. concerning the Company that a reasonable person would expect to have a material effect on the price
or value of the Company's shares; and
2. that wouldI or would be likely to. inﬂuence persons who commonly invest in securities in deciding
whether to acquire or dispose of the Company‘s shares.
Such matters are advised to the ASX immediately they are identiﬁed as being material. Upon confirmation of
receipt from the ASX, the Company posts all information disclosed in accordance with this policy on its
website in an area accessible by the public.
PRINCIPLE 6: RESPECT THE RIGHTS OF SHAREHOLDERS
6.1 Communications policy
The Board respects the rights of its Shareholders and to facilitate the effective exercise of those rights. it has
adopted a policy on communication with Shareholders and implemented a set of processes to ensure timely
and effective communication with Shareholders and the wider investment community. The Company is
committed to:
- communicating effectively with shareholders through releases to the market via ASX, the Company‘s
website, information mailed to shareholders and the general meetings of the Company:
0 giving shareholders ready access to balanced and understandable information about the Company and
corporate proposals;
0 making it easy for shareholders to participate in general meetings of the Company and ask questions
regarding the conduct of audit and about the iunctioning of the Company generally; and
0 making it possible for shareholders to receive communication by electronic means.
The Company also makes available a telephone number and email address for shareholders to make
inquiries ct the Company.
PRINCIPLE 7: REcoeNIsEAND MANAGE Risk
7.1 Policies on risk oversight and management
The Company has developed a framework suitable for its current stage of development for risk management
and internal compliance and control systems that cover organisational, financial, environmental. sustainability,
compliance. strategic, ethical conduct, technological, financial reporting, market related and operational
aspects of the Company's affairs.
The objective of this Risk Management Framework is to:
0 ensure the identification of material business risks across each of the key risk areas:
a establish procedures to analyse risks within agreed parameters across the Company;
a establish procedures to monitor and manage material business risk; and
0 ensure a risk framework is in place which can react should the risk protile of the business change.
Key components of the Risk Management Framework are:
0 identifying and assessing all material business risks;
0 managing. monitoring and wherever possible. mitigating, identified material business risks;
0 reporting periodically; and
- assessing the effectiveness of the risk management framework.
Within its’ operations in Argentina, the Company instituted ISO 31000 standard related to risk management
within this current year, to act comprehensively on all its areas of activity. This compliments ISO 9001. Quality
AssuranceI ISO 14001 Environmental Management and BS OHSAS 16001 Occupational Health and Safety
Management System previously instituted.
44


Orocobre Limited ,

Corporate Governance Statement (continued)

Management meets regularly to discuss material business risks and the management of those risks.

Management reports to the Board on risk management on a regular basis, including advising of any material

changes in the Company's risk profile.

7.2 Report on risk management and internal control system

The Board is responsible for setting the risk philosophy and risk appetite for the Company and approving the

overall risk management and internal control system,

Presently, the full Board carries out the functions of a risk management committee as the Boards View is that

a separate committee to manage the risk management functions is not warranted by the Company at this

time.

The Board reviews the management of material business risks and the adequacy of the risk management and

internal control framework on a regular basis. Management has reported to the Board on the effectiveness of

the management of material business risks. A significant improvement in internal control systems is currently
being achieved with the implementation of SAP systems in both the Sales de Jujuy S.A. and Borax Argentina

S.A businesses. The implementation of SAP at Sales de Jujuy S.A, is complete with Borax Argentina S.A. due

to be completed by the end of the 2013 calendar year.

7.3 Attestation by Chief executive officer (or equivalent) and chief financial officer (or equivalent)

- The Managing Director/CEO, and the Chief Financial Officer, have given written confirmation to the
board that: the declaration provided in accordance with section 295A of the Corporations Act is founded
on a sound system of risk management and internal control ; and

- the Company‘s risk management and internal control system is operating effectively in all material
respects in relation to financial reporting risks.

PRINCIPLE 5: Remunerate fairly and responsibly

8.1 Establishment of a remuneration committee.
The Board has established a Remuneration Committee that assumes responsibilities in relation to
remuneration matters such as remuneration, recruitment. retention and termination policies and procedures,
senior executives remuneration and incentives. superannuation arrangement and the setting of the
remuneration framework for Directors.
The Chairman of the Committee is Mr Courtney Pratt and the other members of the Committee are Mr James
Calaway and Mr Frederico Nicholson. Mr Fernando Oris de Roa was a member of the Remuneration
Committee in addition to his role as a member of the Audit Committee until December 2012. At this time Mr
Fernando Oris de Fioa resigned as a member of the Remuneration Committee and Mr Frederico Nicholson
was appointed to the Remuneration Committee effective 1 January 2013, Details of the members of the
Remuneration Committee and their attendance at Committee Meetings are set out in the Directors' Report,
The Company is committed to remunerating its executive Directors. nonexecutive Directors and future
executives in a manner that is market»competitive, consistent with best practice and supporting the interests
of shareholders.
Details of the Company's remuneration policy are provided in the accompanying Directors' Rapon and
Financial Statements.
8.2 Structure of non-executive and executive Director remuneration
The Company clearly distinguishes the form of remuneration for non—executive Directors and executives. Non-
executive Director fees are not linked to company performance however, components of executive
remuneration are clearly linked to the achievement of company goals.
Board policy is to remunerate non-executive Directors at market rates for comparable companies for time,
commitment and responsibilities, Non-executive Directors' are remunerated by way of fees, in the form of
cash, non-cash benefits, or superannuation contributions The maximum aggregate amount of fees that can
be paid to nonexecutive Directors is subjem to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting and
are not linked to the performance of the Company, At present, this maximum aggregate amount is $600,000.
No other form of retirement benefit is paid,
Details of the members of the Remuneration Committee and their attendance at Committee Meetings are set
out in the Directors’ Report, Details of the Company's remuneration policy are outlined in the Remuneration
Report section of the Directors’ Report, along with the names of the Directors, their qualifications and
experience and the term of ofﬁce held by each Director.

45


‘ | DBRE
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Conwlldnlod Group
More 30 Jun. 30 June
201 3 201 2

S s
Sale 01900415 2 17.654532 >
Cost 01 goods sold 17.108952 >
Gross profit/(loss) 545.530 ~
Olher revenue 2 2.668.396 1.802.946
Galn on CmﬂIIOn OI IOiM venlure 2.14 101.963.5538 ~
Corporate & admlnismnive expenses (9.157.460) (3.659.496)
omer expenses (2.534.761) (756,014)
Share of net prom/(losses) 01 jolm venture 14 (294,535) a
Foreign cuiiency gain/(loss) 3 3.602.282 (182.024)
Prom/(Lion) before income tax 967272.734 (2.994.586)
Income tax expense 4 1243.740 ~
Prom/(Loss) ior tit. your 95.549044 12.994588)
other comprehensive Income (ﬂan)
(mm iitat my in reclassiﬁed subuquontly in
proﬁt and loss) .
Transfers io income statement on creation of joint
venture 5.077.490 ‘
Translation gum/(loss) on foreign conirolled emilies (1,035,993) (1.325.244)
Net gain/(loss) on revaluation 01 ﬁnancial assets 211,402 172,473
Other comprehensive Income/(Ion) ior rite polled,
rill 01 (IX 4.222.899 2.000.71Z
Total comprehensive Income] (loss) for me perlod

99,771,943 4.995.305
ProlII/(Lou) Illrlbuuhle no:
Members oitne parent entity 95.654577 (2.330.025)
Non-controlling inlerest 135.633 164.560

95.549944 (2.994.558
Total comproitomivo liicolM/ (Ion) Illrlbuublo to:
Members 01 the parenl entity 99.907576 (4,330,745)
Non-conirolllng Interest 135.633 164.560

991771.943 (4.995.305)
Baslc sarnlngs per share (cams per share) 5 85.26 (2.74)
Diluted aernlngs per share (cents per share) 5 55.13 (2.74)
The accompanying notes form pan loese iinanclal siatements.

47


CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
as at 30 June 2013
Consolldatod Group
Note 30 June 30 June
291 a 291 2
S 8

CURRENT ASSETS

Cash and cash equivalents 7 18,609,081 16.480515
Trade and other receivables 8 5,766,953 284,655
Inventory 9 8,045,656 -
other 10 768.t81 61,655
Total Current Anus 25,189,791 16,828,825
NON-CURRENT ASSETS

Financial assets 11 12.283 96,634
Property, plant and equipment 12 6,795,631 779,421
Exploration and evaluation asset 13 13,692,541 43,720,233
Investment in joint venture 14 137,973,765 -
Inventory 9 83,922 ~
Deierred tax asset 4 2,078,682 2
Trade and other reoeivables 8 26,602,735 2,928,963
Total Non-Cumnl Aunts 189,240,649 47,525,251
TOTAL ASSETS 214,430,440 64,352,076
CURRENT LIABILITIES

Trade and other payables 15 8,307,738 6.033.893
Loans 3. borrowlngs 16 914.494 -
Provisions 17 1,451,266 87,293
Total current Lllbllltlu 10.873518 6.t21.166
NON-CURRENT LIABILITIES

Trade and other payables 15 3,180,927 9
Loans 3 borrowings 16 2,743,463 A
Defetred tax liability 4 2,857,977 ~
Provisions 17 10.766876 ~
Total Non-Current Llabilitiu 19,548,763 9
TOTAL uAaILITIEs 30,222,281 6,121,166
NET ASSETS 164,208,159 58,230,890
EQUITY

Issued Capital 19 101,712,005 76,029,387
Reserves 20 (2,053,540) (6,799,147)
Retained proﬁts/(accumulated losses) 84,533,907 11,150,770)
Patent Interest 184,192,372 58,079,470
Nan controlling interest 15.787 151 ,420
TOTAL EouITV 184,206,159 58,230,890
The accompanying notes form part otthese ﬁnancial statements.

48


CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Daniella-ted Group
Note 80 Jun. 30 June
2M 5 2012
S 5
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Receipts Imrn customers I8.455,531 -
Payments to suppliers and employees (21 £54,560) (4.123.164)
Interes1 recelved 454.162 1.448.558
Otherlneome 1.565.1I8 143578
Not one!) provided by/(uaad In) operuing actlvitieu 21 (1.176.429) (2.531.030)
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Capllellsed exploration expendlture 13 (7.350.575) (18.200.189)
Payrrrent lor subsidiary net oloasn 18 (4.422.416) -
Pulchase of property. plant and equipment 12 (2.135.352) (648.059)
Prooeeos lrom sale of pinpsﬂy plant and equlpment 41.303 46.033
Ploceeds on creation OI jolnl venture 17.694,480 -
Investment in joint venture (21.645339) -
No! cash provldod by/(used In) Invwlng lemme: (15.119399) (16,800,215)
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Proceeds from issue 01 shares 19 23,539.491 46.875
Funds provided under join! vemure agreement (4.329.213) -
Proceeds horn borrowings 16 3.657977 -
Loan to lolm venture (9.539.949) »
Net lath provided lay/(used in) ﬁnancing aciivilie: 13,578,306 46.875
Mel lncrene/(decreue) In can hold (5.717.522) (21.284370)
Curl and cash eqululents II boglnnlng 171 your 16,430.515 37,678,205
Ellect ol exchange rates on cash holdings in lorelgn
cunencies 153.912 86.680
Cuh It 0nd ol yllr 10.609981 13.480515
Tne eocompanying notes lorm part oltnese ﬁnancial statements.
49


CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Foreign
FIn-nclal Non
snare Ancumulaled Opllon Curr-nay .
"m Carmel Proim/ ﬂeum TrInIl-uon at; “maﬁa? T°"'
(Lona) Reserve
3 s s s s s 5

9.1.1.0. .1 1 July 2011 75.990.037 (9.920.749) 475.520 (5.590.973) (39.929) 315.991 92.911.499
Loss eatribureoie 1o members
onne company . (2.930.027) . - . - (2.930.027)
Loss attributable to non
centralling inlelests . . e - . (154.501) (104.591)
o1ner comprehensive
inoeme/(ioss) Iar me year . . . (1.929.244) (172.473 - (2.000.713
Total comprehensive . (2.990.027) - (1.929.244) (172.473) (104.501) (4.995.305)
Ineome/(ioss)
Shares issued duvan 199 year 59.975 - . A . 9 59.975
Opiions expensed during the
year - - 357.921 . . . 357.921
Options exercised .10an me
year 11.975 , - (11.975) - . - -
Hence it 30 June 2012 70.029.997 (I 1 .1 50.770) 921.472 (7.409.217) (211.402) 151.420 59.230.990
Prom/(less) alliibulable 10
members onhe company ~ 95.094577 - - e - 95.994.677
Lose anribuieble to non
oomroiiing interests - - - A - (195.033) (155.599)
omer comprehensive
inoome/(ioss) Ior the year 9 . - 4.011.497 211.402 - 4.222.999
Tomi oomprehenslve - 95.094.077 - 4.011.497 211.402 (135.033) 99.771.949
inoome/(ieee)
Shams isued during the year

24,711.710 - - . - . 24.71 1 .719
Trenseonon oosis 19 970.902 » . r » . 970.902
Opﬁons sxpensed during me
year - - 522.709 . - . 522.709
salenoo .1 so .1011. 2013 101 .712005 94599907 1.344.190 (3.397.720) - 15.797 194209.159
The accompanying notes 101m part of these ﬁnancial statements.

50


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013

These consolidated ﬁnancial statements and notes represent those at Orooobrs Limited and Controlled Entities (the "Consolidated group' or
'group“).

The separate ﬁnancial statements of the parent entity, Orocobre Limited, have not been presented within this ﬁnancial report as permitted
by the Corporations Act 2001 ,

The ﬁnancial statements were authorised tor Issue on 30 September 2013 by the directors at the company.

The nature oi the operations and principal activities ol the Group are described in the directors report.

NOTE 1: Summary cl Signiﬁcant Accounting PolloieI

Basis of preparation

The ﬁnancial statements are general purpose ﬁnancial statements that have been prepared in accordance with Australian Accounting
Standards. other authoritiva pronouncements at the Australian Accounting Standards Board [M85] and the Australian Corporations Act
2001 . The group is a ior-proiit entity tor ﬁnancial reponing purposes under Australian Accounting Standards.

Australian Accounting Standards set out accounting policies that the AASB has concluded would result in a ﬁnancial statements containing
relevant and reliable iniorrnation about transactions, events and conditions. Material accounting policies adopted in lhe preparation olthese
ﬁnancial statements are presented below and have been consistently applied unless stated otherwise.

Except tor cash ﬂow intormation, the linanoial statements have been prepared on an accruals basis and are based on historical costs.
modified, where applicable. by the measurement at tair value of selected non-current assets, ﬁnancial assets and ﬁnancial liabilities.

The ﬁnancial report is presented in Australian dollars and all values are rounded to the nearest dollar unless otherwise stated.

For the year ended 30 June 2013 and going iorward. the group has voluntarin changed the presentation of the consolidated income
statement tronl nature to function. Since the inclusion oi the Borax business. the group determined the disclosure of the tuncllon oi items
provided more relevant iniormation to the ﬁnancial statement users.

The adjustment is shown in the consolidated income statement and the comparative amounts in the prior period have been adjusted to
show the iunctiun of the expense, The amount oi expenses recorded in each period presented has not changed. Only the presentation has
changed.

- Flevenue has been reclassiﬁed as other revenue (31.602846!

- Employee beneﬁts expenses has been reclassiﬁed as corporate and administrative expenses ($2,139.030)

- Occupancy costs has been reclassiﬁed as corporate and administrative expenses ($169.253i

- capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure written air has been reclassiﬁed as other expenses (3756.014)

Compliance with IFRS

The ﬁnancial report also complies with Inlemational Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as Issued by the International Accounting
standards Board,

Principles 0! Consolidation

The consolidated ﬁnancial statements comprise the ﬁnancial statements of Orooobre Limited and its subsidiaries and special purposes
entities (as outlined in Note 22) as It and tor the period ended 30 June each year (the Group). Interests in joint ventures are equity
accounted and are not part or the consolide Group (see Joint Ventures Note 1 below),

Subsidiaries are all those entities over which the Group has the power to govern the ﬁnancial and operating policies so as to obtain beneﬁk
from their activities, The existence and eltect ol potential voting righﬁ that are currently exercisable or convertible are consideled when
assessing whether a group controls another entity.

Special purpose entiﬁes are those entities over which the Group has no ownership interest but In enact the substance of the relationship is
such that the Group controls the entity so as to obtain the majority of beneﬁts liom its operation.
The ﬁnancial statemenbs oi the subsidlarles are prepared tor the same reporting period as the Parent. using consistent accounting policies.
In preparing the consolidated ﬁnancial statements. all intercompany balances, transactions. unreallsed gains and losses resumng llorrl intro»
group transactions and dividends have been eliminated in full,
Subsidiaries and special purpose entities are fully consolidated from the date on which control is obtained by the Group and cease to be
consolidated lrorn the date on which control is transferred out or the Group.

Investments in subsidiaries held by Orocobre Limited are accounted tor at cost in the ﬁnancial statements or the Parent less any impairment
charges.
51


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 1: Summary at signiﬁcant Accounting Policies (continued)
The acquisition of subsidiaries is accounted to! using the acquisition method oi accounting. The acquisition method 0i accounting involves
recognising at acquisition date, separately rrorn goodwill, the identiﬁable assets acquired. the liabilities assumed and any non-controlling
interest in the aoquiree, The identiﬁable assets acquired and the liabilities aﬁunted are measured at lheir acquisition date iﬂlr Values (see
Business Combinations Note I below).
The diiierenoe between the above Items and the lair value of the consideration (includlng the tail value of any preexisting investment in the
acquires) is goodwill or a discount on acquisition.

. Atter initial recognition, goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses, For the purpose Oi-lmpllrl'neni testing.
goodwill acquired in a business combination is. lrem the acquisition date. allocated to each or the Group‘s cash-generating units that are
expected to beneﬁt tram the combination. irrespective oi whether other asses or liabilities oi the acquire are assigned to those units.
Where goodwill iorms pan or a cash-generating unit and pan oi tire operation within that unit disposal oi, the goodwill associated with the
operation disposed oi is included in the carrying amount oi the operation when determining the gain or loss on disposal oi the operation.
Goodwill disposed Di in this circumstance is measured based on the relative values oi the operation disposed of and the portion of the cash-
generating unit retained.

Non~controlling interests are allocated their share of net proﬁt after tax In the statement oi comprehensive income and are presented within
equity in the consolidated statement ottinanci'ai position, separately from the equity oi the owners of the Parent.

Total comprehensive income within a subsidiary is attributed to the non-controlling interest even it that results In a deﬁcit balance

A change in the ownership Interest of a subsidiary that does not resuit in a loss of control. is accounted for as an equity transaction.

A change in the ownership interest or a subsidiary. without a loss oi control. is accounted tor as an equity transaction. lithe Group loses
oontrol over a subsidiary. it:

. Derecognlses the assets [Including goodrtrlii) and liabilities or the subsidiary

- Derecognises the carryan amount or any non-controlling interest

« Darecognlses the cumulative translation ditterences recorded in equity

- Recognises the fair Value oi the consideration received

- Recognises the fair value at any investment retained

- Recognises any surplus or deﬁcit in proiit or loss

- Reciassities the Parent's share or components previously recognised In other comprehensive income to proﬁt or loss or retained earnings.
as appropriate

Business Combinations

Business combinations are accounted tor using the acquisition method, The cost at an acquisition is measured as the aggregate of the
consideration transierred. measured at acquisition date fair value and the amount oi Any non-controlling interest in the acquires, For each
business combination. the Group elects whether to metBure the non-controlling interest in the acquiree at fair value Or at me proportionate
share oi the aoqulree‘s Identlilable net assets. Acquisition related 005m are expensed as Incurred and Included in administrative expenses.
When the Group acquires a business. it assesses the tinancial assets and liabilities assumed tor appropriate classiﬁcation and designation
in accordance with the contractual terms, economic circumstances and pertinent oondrtions as at the acquisition date. This includes the
separation oi embedded derivatives In host contracts by the aoquiree.

lithe business combination is achieved In stages. the previously held equity Interest is remensured at its acquisition date iair value and any
resulting gain or loss is recognised in proﬁt or loss

Any contingent consideration to be transierred by the acquirer will be recognised at lair value at the acquisition date. Contingent
consideration classliled as an asset or liability that is a ﬁnancial instrument and within the scope oi AASB 139 Financial instruments:
Recognition and Measurement. is measured at iair Value with changes in lair value recognised either in either proﬁt or loss or as a change
to other comprehensive income. It the contingent consideration is rlol within the scope otAASB 139. it is measured in accordance with the
appropriate use, Contingent oonsideraiion that is classiﬁed as equity is not remeasured and subsequent settlement is accounted tor
within equity.

Goodwill is initially measured at cost. being the excess oi the aggregate or the consideran‘on translerred and the amount recognised tor non-
controlling interest over the net identiﬁable assets acquired and liabilities mumed. It the fair value oi the net assets acquired is In excess of
the aggregate consideration transiened. the gain is recognised in profit or loss.
Alter initial recognition. goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated Impairment losses. For the purpose of impairment testing,
goodwill acquired In a business combination is. trom the acquisition date. allocated to each oi the Group‘s cash-generating units that are
expected to beneﬁt from the combination. Irrespective otwhether other assets or liabilities oithe acqulree are assigned to those units.

52


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013

NOTE 1: summary or Slgnlﬂcant Accounting Policies (continued)

Where goodwill has been allocated to a cash-generating unit and part of the operation within that unit is disposed of, the goodwill

associated with the disposed operation is included in the carrying amount or lhe operation when determining the gain or loss on disposal,

Goodwill disposed in these circumstance Is measured based on the relative values of the disposed operation and the portion of the cash-

generating unit retained

Taxes

Current income tax

Current income tax asses and liabilities tor the current period are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the
taxation authorities. The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted or substantiver enacted, at the
reporting date in the countries where the Group operates and generates taxable income.

Current income tax relating to Rams recognised directly in equity is recognised in equity and not in the Income slatement. Management
periodically evaluates positions taken in the tax returns with respect to situations in which applicable tax regulations are sublect to
interpretation and establishes provisions where appropriate.

Dale/red tax

Deferred taxis provided using the liability method on temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and lheir carrying
amouns for ﬁnancial reporting purposes at the reporting dale.

Delerrad income tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary dinerences except:

- When the deferred income tax liability arises from the Inltlal recognition of goodwill or ol an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a
business combination and that. at the time at the transaction. attests neither the accountth prollt nor taxable proﬁt or loss.

» In respect Of taxable temporary differences associated with investments In subsldlarles, associates and interesw in ioint ventures when
the timing ol the reversal of the temporary diilerenoes can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in
the foreseeable future.

Delerred tax assets are recognised for all deductible temporary differences, the carry forward oi unused tax credits and any unused tax
losses. Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that h is probable that taxable protll will be available against which the deductlble
temporary dillerences. and the carry forward or unused tax credits and unused tax losses can be utilised. except:

» When the deferred tax asset relating to the deductible temporary dillererlce arises from the Initial recognition oi an asset or Iiabllity in a
transaction that Is not a buslness comblnatlon and. at the time 0' lhe transaction, affecls neither the accounting proﬁt nor taxable proﬁt or
loss.

- In respect oi deductible temporary dilierences associated with investments In subsidlarles. associates and interests in joint ventures.
delerred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that the temporary dillerencee wlll reverse in the foreseeable future
and taxable profit will be avallable againsl which the temporary diﬂerenoes can be utlllsed.

The carrylng Amount of deferred tax assets ls reviewed at each reporting data and reduced to the extent that it ie no longer probable that
sufﬁcient taxable proﬁt M" be available to allow all or part of the deterred tax asset to be utilised, unrecognised deferred tax assets are
reassessed at each reporting date and are recognised to the extent that it has become probable that iuture taxable profits will allow the
deferred tax asset to be recovered.

Delerred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the year when the asset is realised or the
liability is settled. based on tax rates (and tax laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting data,

Deferred tax relating lo items recognised outside proﬁt or loss is recognised outside proﬁt or loss. Deferred tax items are recognised In
correlation to the underlying transaction either In other comprehensive income or directly in equity.

Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilitia are onset il a legally enforceable right exists to set Olfourrant tax assets against current
income tax liabilities and the deferred taxes relate to the same taxable entity and the same taxation authority.
Tax beneﬁts acquired as part of a business combinalion, but not satislying the criteria lor separate recognition at that date. are recognised
subsequently If new Iniormatlon about facts and circumstances change. The adjustment is either treated as a reduction to goodwill (as long
as it does not exceed goodwill) if it was incurred during the measuremenl period or recognised in proﬁt or loss.

Inventories

Net realisable value tests are performed at each reporting dale and represent the estimated lutura sales price or lhe product the entity
expects to realise when the product is processed and sold. less estimated com to complele production and bring the product to sale
Where the time value of money Is material. lhese luture prices and costs to complete are discounted.

53


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013

NOTE 1: Summary or Signlncant Accounting Pollclaa (continued)

Propeny. Plant and Equipment

Property, plant and equipment is stated at cost. not or accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses. ii any. Such cost
includes the cost of replacing part or the properly. plant and equipment and borrowing costs for long-term construction projects it the
recognition criteria are met. When signiﬁcant pans or property, plant and equipment are required to be replaced at intervals. the Group
recognises such parts as ind'widual assets with speciﬁc useful lives and depreciates them accordingly. Likewise. when a major inspection is
periormed, its cost is recognised In the carrying amount or the plant and equipment as a replacement «the recognition criteria are satisﬁed.
All other repair and maintenance costs are recognised in proﬁt or loss as incurred. The present value at the expected cost tor the
decommissioning oi an asset otter Its use Is included In the cost otthe respective asset if the recognition criteria tor a provision are met.
Refer to critical accounting estimates and judgements (Note 1) and provisions [Note 17) for further inlormation about the recorded
decommixlonlng provision.

Property. plant and equipment translerred from customers is initially measured at the lair value at the date on which control is obtained.
Depreciation is calculated on a straight-lute basis over the estimated useful lives at the assets as iollows:

- Buildings: 20 to so years

- Flam and equipment 5 to lo years

An item or properly. plant and equipment and any signiﬁcant part initially recognised is derecognised upon disposal or when no More
economic benetits are expected lrom is use or disposal. Any gain or loss arising on derecognition dithe asset (calculated as the diirerence
between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount oi the asset) is included in the income statement when the asset is
derecognised.

The residual values. userul lives and methods or depreciation or property. plant and equipment are reviewed at each linancial year end and
adjusted prospectively. it appropriate

Exploration, Evaluation and Development Expenditure

Exploration. evaluation and development expenditures Incurred are capitalised In respect of each identiﬁable area of interest. These costs
are only capitalised to the extent that they are expected to be recovered through the successtul development of the area or where activities
in the area have not yet reached a stage that permits reasonable assessment at the existence at economically recoverable reserves.
Accumulated costs in relation to an abandoned area are written off in lull against proﬁt In the year in which the decision to abandon the area
ls made.

When production commences, the accumulated costs tor the relevant area 0t interest are amorﬂsed over the lite oi the area according to
the rate of depletion oi the economically recoverable reserves.

A regular review is undertaken at each area oi interest to determine the appropriateness oi continuing to capitalise cosls In relation to that
area or interest. ll. aner expenditure e capitalised, lntormalion becomes available suggesting that the recovery or expendtiure is unlikely. the
amount capitalised is written on in proﬁt or loss in the period when the new iniormaiion beoomas available.

Environmental plotoctloll, rehabilitation and closure CW8

Provision is made tor close down, restoration and environmental rehabilitation costs (which include the dismantiing and demolition of
IntrtBtructure, removal of residual materials and remediation 0i disturbed areas) in the ﬁnancial period when the related environmental
disturbance occurs, based on the estimated Iuture costs using lrltormatlon available at the balance sheet date. The provision is discounted
using a current market-based pre-lax discount rate and the unwinding oi the discount is included in interest expense. At the time at
establishing the provision, a corresponding asset is capitalised. where It gives rise to aiuture beneﬁt. and depreciated over future
production irom the operations to which it relates. The provision is reviewed on an annual basis tor changes to obligations. legislation or
discount rates that impam estimated coss or lives oi operations. The cost 01 the related asset Is adjusted for changes in the provision
resulting from changes in the estimated cash ﬂows or discount rate and the adjusted cost at the asset is depreciated prospectively.
Joint Ventures
The Group's Investment In ajolnt venture, an entity in which the Group has joint control. is accounted tDr using the equity method.
Under the equity method, the investment in the ioint venture is initially recognised at cost. The carrying amount ol the investment is adjusted
to recognise changes in the Group's share of net assets at the joint venture since the acquisition date. Goodwill relating to the joint venture
is Included In the carrying amount or the investment and is neither arnortised nor individually tested tor impairment.

54


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013

NOTE 1: Summary or slgrtlllcant Accounting Policies (continued)

The income statement reﬂects the Group's snare oi me results of operations olthe joint venture. When there has been B change recognised
directty In the equity at the joint venture. the Group recognises its share oi any changes, when applicable. In the statement at changes in
equity. Unrealised gains and losses rasulﬂng irom transactions between the Group and the joint venture are eliminated t0 the extent oi the
interest in the joint venture,

The Group‘s share of proﬁt or loss Ol the joint venture is shown on the lace oi the income statement and represents proﬁt or loss alter tax
and non-controlling Interess In the subsidiaries oi the joint venture.

The ﬁnancial statements ol the joint venture are prepared tor the same reporting period as the Group. When necessary. adjustments are
made to bring the accounting policies in line with those of the Group,

Alter applloation of the equity method. the Group delemtines whether it is necessary to recognise an impairment loss on its investment in
the joint venture. At each reporting date. the Group determines whether lhere is objective evidence that the investment In the joint venture is
impaired. Ii there is such evidence. the Group calculates the amount cl impairment as the dilterence between the recoverable amount ol the
joint venture and its carrying value, then recognises the loss as 'Share of losses of jcirrl venture' in the income statement.

Upon loss of signiﬁcant iniluence over the joint venture. the Group measures and recognises any retained investment at Its ialr value. Any
dillerence between the carrying amount of the joint venture upon loss or signiﬁcant inﬂuence and the lair value or the retained investment
and proceeds lrom dlsposal is recognised in proﬁt or loss.

ﬁnancial Instruments

Initial recognition and measurement

Financial assets within the scope oi AASB 139 are classiﬁed as ﬁnancial assets at fair value through proﬁt or loss. loans and receivables.
held-to-maturity investments. aveilable»lor-sale linancial assecs. or as derivatives designated as hedging Instruments in an etlectt‘ve hedge,
as appropriate. The Group determines the classiﬁcation at Its ﬁnancial assets at Inltlal recognition.

All ﬁnancial assets are recognised initially at lair value plus transaction cosls. except in the case ofﬁnanclal assets recorded at lair value
through proﬁt or loss.

Purchases or sales otﬁnancial aseem that require delivery ol assets within a time lrarne established by regulation or conventlon In the

. market place (regular way trades) are recognised on the trade dale. Le..th date that the Group commie to purchase or sell the asset.

Subsequent measurement

The subsequent measurement oi iinancial assets depends on their classlﬁcation as described below:

Financial assets at fair value through proﬁt or lass

Financial assets at lair value through proﬁt or loss include ﬁnancial assets held ior trading and ﬁnancial assets daslgnated upon initial
recognitlon at fair value mrough proﬁt or loss. Financial assem are classiﬁed as held for tradan it they are acquired for the purpose at selling
or repurchasing in the near term. Derivatives. including separated embedded derivatives are also classiﬁed as held ior trading unless they
are designated as ellsctive hedging instruments as deﬁned by M85 139.

Financial assets at lair value through proﬁt or loss are carried in me statement at ﬁnancial position at lair wlue with net changes in tall value
presented as ﬁnance costs (negative net changes in lair value) or ﬁnance income (positive net changes In lair value) in the income
statement.

Financial assets designated upon inilial recognition at lair value through proﬁl or loss are designated at their initial recognition date and only
it the criteria under M53 139 are satisﬁed. The Group has not designated any ﬁnancial assets at (air value through proﬁt or loss.

The Group evaluates its ﬁnancial assets held lor trading. other than derivatives. to determine whether the intentlon to sell them in the near
term is still appropriate. When in rare clrcumstanoes the Group Is unable to trade these ﬁnancial assets due to inawve markets and
management's intention to sell them in the loreseeable ruture signliloantty changes. the Group may elect to reclassily them. The
reclassiﬁcation to loans and receivables. availableior—sale or held to maturity depends on the nature or the asset. This evaluation does not
alieot any ﬁnancial assets designated at lair value through proﬁt or loss using the lair value option at designation. as these instruments
cannot be reclassiﬁed alter initial recognition,

Derivatives embedded in host contracts are accounted for as separate derivatives and recorded at lair value If their economic characterisch
and risks are not closely related to those of the host contracts and the host contracts are not held ior tnading or designated at lair value
though proﬁt or loss. These embedded derivativa are measured at lair value with changes in lair value recognised In proﬁt and loss.
Reassessment only occurs ii there is a change in the terms of the contract that signiﬁcantly modiﬁes the cash ilows that would otherwise be
required.

55


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013

NOTE 1: Summary I). slgniﬁunt Accounting Pollclu (continued)

Loans and receivables

Loans and receivables are non~derivatlve ﬁnancial assets with ﬁxed or determinable payments that are not quoted In an active market. Alter
Initial measurement. such ﬁnancial assets are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the EIR method. less impairment. Amonised
coat is calculated by taking lnto account any discount or premium on acquisition and tees or costs that are an inteng pan of the EIH. The
EIR amortisation is included in finance income in the income statement. The losses arising lrom impairment are recognised in the income
statement in ﬁnance oosls tor loans and In cost aisales or other operating expenses tor receivables.

Held-to-matun‘ty investments

Nan-derivative ﬁnancial assets with ﬁxed or delerminable paymens and ﬁxed maturities are classiﬁed as held to maturity when the Group
has the positive intention and ability to hold them to mamrity. After initial measurement, held to maturity investments are measured at
amonised cost using the EIH. less impairment, Amartised cost Is calculated by taking Into account any discount or premium on acquisition
and lees or costs that are an integral pan or the EIR. The EIR amortisation is included as ﬁnance income in the income statement. The
losses arising irom impairment are recognised in the income statement In ﬁnance costs.

Availabie-Iamale ﬁnancial investments

Available-ror—sale ﬁnancial Investments include equity investments and debt securities. Equity investmenm classiﬁed as available ior sale are
those that are neither classiﬁed are held for trading nor designated at fair value through proﬁt or loss Debt securities in this category are
those that are intended to be held tor an indeﬁnite period at time and that may be sold in response to needs for liquidity or in response to
changes in the market conditions. '

Alter initial measurement. available~iorsale ﬁnancial investments are subsequently measured at fair value with unrealised gains or losses
recognised as other comprehensive income in the availableiorsale reserve until the investment is derecognised. at. which time the
cumulative gain or loss is recognised in other operating Income, or the investment is determined to be impaired. when the cumulative loss
is reclassiﬁed irom the avallable-tor—sale reserve to the income statement in ﬁnance 0055. Interest eemed whilst holding availahle-for-sale
ﬁnancial investments is reported as Interest Income using the Elﬁ method

The Group evaluates whether the ability and intention to sell its available-lor-sale ﬁnancial assets In the near term is still appropriate. When,
in rare circumstances, the Group is unable to trade these ﬁnancial Essex due to inactive Markos and management's intention to do 50
signiﬁcantly changes in the toresaeable future, the Group may elect to reclassify these ﬁnancial assets. Reclassiﬁcation to loans and
receivables ls permitted when the ﬁnancial assets meet the deﬁnition o1 loans and receivables and the Group has the intent and ability to
hold these assets for the ioreseeable More or until maturity. Reclassiﬁcation to the hold to maturity category is permitted only when the
entity has the ability and intention to hold the ﬁnancial asset accordingly.

For a ﬁnancial asset reclassiﬁed horn tha available-ror-sale category, the tan value carrylng amount art the date or reclassiﬁcation becomes
its new amortised cost and any previous gain or loss on the asset that has been recognised in equity is amortised to proﬁt or loss over the
remaining lite oi the investment using the ElFl. Any diﬁerence between the new amortised cost and the maturity amount is also amortised
over the remaining life oi the asset using the EIR. lithe asset is subsequently determined to be impaired. then the amount recorded in
equity is reclassiﬁed to the income statement.

Delecognl'tl'on

A ﬁnancial asset (or. where applicable. a part cl 3 ﬁnancial asset or part at a group at similar ﬁnancial assets) ls derecognlsed when:

- The rights to receive cash ﬂows irom the Asset have expired.

» The Group has transferred its rights to receive cash rlows irom the asset or has assumed an obligation to pay the received cash ﬂows In
run without material delay to a third party under a "pass-through” arrangement; and either (at the Group has transferred substantially all the
risks and rewards oi the asset. or (b) the Group has neithertraneterrad nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards Of the swat. but
has transferred control oi the asset,
Wnen the Group has transferred its rights to receive cash rlows irom an asset or has entered Into a passthrough arrangement, it evaluates ii
and to what extent it has retained the risks and rewards oi ownershipr When it has neither transferred nor retained substantially all oi the
risks and rewards oi the asset. not transferred control of the asset. the asset Is recognised to the extent at the Group's continuing
Involvement in the assets in that case, the Group also recogn'ses an associated liability. The translerred asset and the associated liability are
measured on a basis that reﬂects the rights and obligations that the Group has retained,
Continuing involvement that takes the term at a guarantee over the transrerred asset is measured at the lower at the original carrying
amount of the asset and the maximum amount of consideration that the Group could be required to repay,

56


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
tor the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 1: summary 0! Signiﬁcant Accounting Policies (continuldt
Impairment ol ﬁnancial atom
The Group assesses. at each reporting date, whether there is objective evidence that aiinanclal asset or a group cl ﬁnancial assets Is
impaired. A ﬁnancial asset or a group or ﬁnancial assets is deemed to be impaired it there is objective evidence at impalrment as a result at
one or more events that has occurred since the initial recognition of the asset (an incurred 'lcss event‘) and that loss event has an impact on
the estimated tuture cash licws ol the ﬁnancial asset or the group cl ﬁnancial assets that can be reliably estimated. Evidence of impairment
may Inciude Indications that the debtors or a group or debtors is experiencing signiﬁcant iinanciai dirticuiiy, deiauii or delinquency In Interest
or principal payments. the probability that they will enter bankruptcy or other ﬁnancial reorganisation and observable data indicating that
there Is a measurable decrease in the estimated luture cash llows. such as changes in arrears or economlc conditions that correlate with
delaults.
Financial assets carried at amo/‘rised cost
For ﬁnancial assets carried at amon cost. the Group lirst assesses whether objective evidence 0t impairment exists Individually for
ﬁnancial assets that are Individually signiﬁcant. or collectively for ﬁnancial assets that are not individually signiﬁcant. ll the Group determines
that no objective evidence ol impairment exists lo! an individually assessed ﬁnancial asset. whether signiﬁcant or not, it Includes the asset in
a group of llnancial assets with similar credit risk characteristitx and collectively assesses them lor Impairment. Meets that are individually
assessed tor impairment and ror which an impairment loss is. or continues to be. recognised are not included in a collectlve assessment ct
impairment.
If there is Objective evidence that an impairment loss has been incurred. the amount of the IN is measured as the dillerehce between the
asset's carrying amount and the present value or estimated ruture cash ﬂows (excluding ruture expected credit losses that have not yet
been incurred). The present value at the estimated tuture cash ﬂows is discounted at the ﬁnancial assets original etfective interest rate. If a
loan has a variable interest rate, the discount rate tor measuring any impairment loss is the current EIR.
The carrying amount or the asset is reduced through the use oi an allowance account and the loss is recognised in proﬁt or lax. Interest
income continues to be accrued on the reduced carrying amount and Is accmed using the rate of Interest used to discount the ruture cash
ﬂows for the purpose or measuring the Impairment loss. The interest income is reoorded as ﬁnance income in the income statement. Loans
together with the associated allowance are written cll when there is no realistic prospect of luture recovery and all collateral has been
realised or has been transferred to the Group. Ii. in a subsequent year. the amount or the estimated impairment loss increases or decreases
because or an event occurring alter the impairment was recognised. the previously recognised impairment loss is increased or reduced by
adiusting the allowance account. ll a writeolr is later recovered. the recovery Is credited in ﬁnance costs In the Income statement.
Available for sale Ilnanclal Investments
For available-ior-sale ﬁnancial investments. the Group assesses at each reporting date whether [here is obiectrve evidence that an
investment or a group or investments is impaired.
In the case Dl equity investments classiﬁed as available-lor-sale. objective evidence would Include a signiﬁcant or prolonged decline In the
lair value olthe Investment below its cost. "Signiﬁcant" is evaluated against the original cost ol the investment and "prolonged" against the
period in which the fair value has been below its original cost, When there '8 evidence of impairment. the cumulative loss - measured as the
dlrierence between the acquisition cost and the current lair value. less any impairment loss on that Investment previously recognised in the
income statement 7 is removed from other comprehensive income and recognised in the inoome statement, Impairment losses on equity
Investments are not reversed through the income statement: increases in their lair value alter impmrment are recognised directly in other
comprehensive income.
In the case at debt instruments classiﬁed as available tor sale. impairment '6 assessed based on the same criteria as ﬁnancial assets carried
at amortised cost. However. the amount recorded tor impairment is the cumulative loss measured as the diiterence between the amonised
oost end the current tair value. less any impairment ices on that investment previously recognised in the Income statement.
Future interest income continues to be accrued based on the reduced carrying amount of the asset. using the rate at interest used to
discount the luture cash ﬂows for the purpose of measuring the Impairment loss, The Interest Income is recorded as part at ﬁnance income.
ll. in a subsequenl year, the lair value of a debt instrument increases and the increase can be objectively related to an event occurring alter
the lmpalrrnent loss was recognised in the income statement. the impairment loss is reversed through me income statement.
Flmnclal Ilahllltlea
Initial recognition and measurement
Financial liabilities within the scope ol AASB 139 are classiﬁed as ﬁnancial liabilities at tair value through proﬁt or loss. loans and
borrowings. or as derivatives designated as hedging Instruments in an eftective hedge, as appropriate. The Group determines the
classiﬁcation 01 its ﬁnancial liabilities at initial recognition,
All ﬁnancial liabilities are recognised initially at lair value and. In the case Ol loans and borrowings, net of dlrectty attributable transaction
costs.
57


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013

NOTE 1: Summary 0t Slgnltlclnt Accoumlng Pollclu (contllluod)

The Group’s ﬁnancial liabilities include trade and other payables. bank overdraﬁs. loans and borrowings, ﬁnancial guarantee contracts. and
derivative ﬁnancial instruments.

Subsequent measurement

The measurement at ﬁnancial liabilities depends on their classiﬁcation. described as lollows:

Financial liabilities at fair value through proﬁt or loss

Financial liabilities at lair value through proﬁt or loss include ﬁnancial liabilities held for trading and ﬁnancial liabilities designated upon initial
recognition as at fair value through profit or loss.

Financial llabllltles are classiﬁed as held for tradlng If they are acquired tor the purpose of selling in the near term. This category includes
derivative ﬁnancial inslruments entered into by the Group that are not designated as hedging instrumene in hedge relationships as deﬁned
by “SE 139. Separated embedded derivatives are also classiﬁed as held tor trading unless they are designated as ellective hedging
instruments.

Gains or losses on liabilities held for trading are recognised in the Income statement.

Financlal liabilities designated upon initial recognition at fair value through proﬁt or loss are designated at the Initial date at recognition. and
only it the criteria in M53 139 are satisﬁed. The Group has not designated any ﬁnancial liability as at lair value through proﬁt or loss.

Loans and borrowings

Alter initial recognition. interest bearing loans and borrowings are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the EIR method. Gains
and losses are recognised In proﬁt or loss when the liablllﬁes are delecognised as well as through the EIR amortisation process.

Amortised cost is calculated by taking Into account any discount or plemlum on acquisltlon and lees or costs that are an integral part ol the
EIH. The EIR amortisation is included in ﬁnance costs in the income statement.

Financial guarantee contracts

Financlal guarantee contracts issued by the Group are those contracts that require a paymentto be made to reimburse the holder tor a loss
It [hours because the speciﬁed debtor lails to make a payment when due in accordance with the terms at a debt instrument, Financial
guarantee contracts are recognised initially as a liability at lair value. adjusted lol transaction costs that are directly attributable to the
issuance ottns guarantee Subsequently. the liability is measured at the higher at the best estimate ottne expenditure required to settte the
present obligation at the reponing date and the amount recognised less cumulative amortisation.

Derecognl'tl'on

A ﬁnancial liability is dereoognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged or cancelled. or expires. When an exisﬁng ﬁnanclai
Ilablllty is replaced by another tram the same lender on substantially dillerent terms, or the terms 0! an existing liability are substantially
modiﬁed. such an exchange or modiﬁcation is trealed as the dereoognition of the original liability and the recognition at I new Ilablllty. The
dmerence in the respective carrying amounts is recognised in the inoome statement.

Wattlan of ﬁnancial Instruments

ﬁnancial assets and ﬁnancial liabilities are onset and the net amount is reported in the consolidated statement at ﬁnancial position if there Is
a currently enforceable legal right to ottset the recognised amounts and there Is an intention to some on a net basis, to realise the assets
and settle the liabilities simultaneously.

Fllr value at ﬁnanclal Inltrumellta
The (air value oi ﬁnancial instruments that are traded in active markets at each reporting date is determined by reference to quoted market
prices or dealer price quotations lbld price lor long positions and ask prlce tor short positions), without any deduction tor transaction costs.
For ﬁnancial Instmmems not traded in an active market. the lair value is determined using appropriate valuation techniques. Such
techniques may include:
- Using recent arm's length market transactions
- Reference to the current lair value ol another Instrument that Is substantially the same
- A discounted cash llow analysis or other valuation models
An analysis otteir values or ﬁnancial instruments and further details as to how they are measured are provided In Note 11.

58


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 1: summary of Signiﬁcant Accounting Policies (continued)
Impairment or Assets
The Group assesses. at each reporting date. whether there is an indication that an asset may be impaired. Ir any Indication exists. or when
annual Impairment testing Ior an asset is required. the Group estimates the asset‘s recoverable amount, An asset's recoverable amount is
the higher at an asset's or cash-generating unit’s (CGU) fair value le§ costs to sai and its value in use, Recoverable amount is determined
tor an individual asset, unless the asset does not generate cash inrlows that are largely independent or those lrorn other assets or groups of
assets. When the carrying amount oi an asset or CGU exoeeds in recoverable amount. the asset '5 considered impaired and is written
down to its recoverable amount.
In assessing value in use. the estimated tuiure cash ﬂows are discounted to their present value using a ore-tax discount rate that reﬂects
current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks speciﬁc to the asset. In determining lair value less costs to sell. recent
market transactions are taken into account. II no such transactions can be Identiﬁed, an appropriate valuation model is used, These
calculations are corroborated by valuation multiples, quoted share prices for publicly traded companies or other available fair value
Indicators.
The Group bases its Impairment calculation on detailed budgets and iorecasi calculations, which are prepared separately for each oi the
Group's CGUS to which the individual assets are allocated, These budgets and torecast calculations generally cover a period of ﬁve years.
For longer periods. a long-term growth rate is calculated and applied to project More cash ﬂows alter the trim year.
impairment losses oi oorrtinuing operations. including impairment on inventories, are recognised in the income statement in expense
categories consistent with the function at the impaired asset. except for a property previously revalued where the revaluation was taken to
other comprehensive income, In this case. the impairment is also recognised in other comprehensive income up to die amount at any
previous revaluation,
For assets excluding goodwill. an assessment is made at each reporting date to determine whether there is an indication that previously
recognised Impairment losses no longer exist or have decreased, If such indication exists. the Group estimates the asset‘s or CGU's
recoverable amount. A previoust recognised impairment Ides is reversed only it there has been a change in the mumptions used to
determine the assets recoverable amount since the I$t impairment loss was recognised The reversal is limited so that the carrying amount
at the asset does not exceed its recoverable amount, nor exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined. net at
depreciation. had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset In prior years. Such reversal is recognised in the income statement
unless the asset is carried at a revalued amount. in which case. the reversal is treated as a revaluation increase,
The Iollowing assets have speciﬁc characteristics ror impairment testing:
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested tor Impairment annually 5 at 30 June and when circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired.
Impairment is determined lor goodwill by assessing the recoverable amount of each ccu (or group or CGUs] to which the goodwill relates.
When the recoverable amount of the CGU is less than its carrying amount. an impairment loss Is recognised. Impairment losses relating to
goodwill cannot be reversed in Mute periods,
Intangible assets
Intangible assets with indeﬁnite useful lives are tested Ior impairment annually as at 80 June either Individually or at the CGU level. as
appropriate. and when circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be Impaired.
Dun and Cash Equlvalenu
Cash and short-term deposits In the statement of ﬁnancial position comprise cash at banks and on hand and snorHerm deposits with a
maturity or three months or less.
For the purpose of the consolidated statement oi cash flows. cash and cash equivalents consist or cash and short-term deposim as deﬁned
above, net of outstanding bank overdratrs.
Inued Capital
Ordinary shares are classiﬁed as equity. Transaction costs arising on the issue or ordinary shares are recognised in equity as a reduction of
the share proceeds received,

59


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 1: summary or Signlncant Accounting Policies (continued)
Equity-uttled transaction:
The cost ol equitysattied transactions is recognised, together with a corresponding increase In other capital reserves in equity. over the
period in which the pertormance and/or service conditions are iuitiiied. The cumulative expense recognised tor equity-settled transactions at
each reporting date until the vesting date retlects the extent to which the vestan period has expired and the Group's best estimate ot the
number oi equity instruments that will ultimately vest, The income statement expense or credit tor a period represents the movement In
cumulative expense recognised as at the beginning and end at that period and is recognsed In employee beneﬁts expense (Note at.
No expense Is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest. except tor equity-settled transactions for which vesting is conditional upon
a market or non-vesting condition, These are treated as vesting Irrespective of whether or not the market or non-vesﬁrtg condition is
satisﬁed. provided that all other parlormance and/or service conditions are satisﬁed.
when an equity-settled award is cancelled, it is treated as it It vested on the date aicenoellatton, and any expense not yet recognised tor the
award Is recognised Immedlnlely. This inductee any award where nonvesling conditions within the control at either the entity Or the
employee are not met. However, it a new award is substituted tor the cancelled avtmrd. and designated as a replacement award on the date
that It is granted, the cancelled and new awards are treated as it they were a modiﬁcation ot the original award. as described in the previous
paragraph.
The dilutive ellect of outstanding options is reﬂected as additional share dilution In the computation OI diluted earnings per share (lurther
details are given in Note 5).
Revenue Ind Other Income
Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that the economic beneﬁts will now to the Group and the revenue can be reliably
measured. regardless at when the payment is being made. Revenue Is measured at the lair value or the consideration received or
receivable. taking into account contractually deﬁned terms ol payment and excluding goods and services tax (GST) The specliic
recognition criteria described below must also be met before revenue ls recognised.
Sale orgoads
Sales revenue is recognised at the point where responsibility shirts lrorn seller to buyer as dictated by the Incoterms speciﬁed in the sales
contract.
Interest Income
For all ﬁnancial instruments measured at amortlsed cost and Interest bearing ﬁnancial assets classiﬁed as available Ior sale, interest income
or expense is recorded using the eltective interest rate (HR). ElFt is the rate that exactly discounts the estimated luture cash payments or
receipts over the expected lite oi the ﬁnancial Instrument or a shoner period. where appropriate, to the not carrying amount or the ﬁnanclal
asset or liability. Interest income is included in other income in the income statement.
Goods and Services Tax (GIST)
Revenues. ewenaes and assets are recognised net or the amount or GST (or overseas. VAT), except where the amount or esr incurred is
not recoverable from the relevant taxation authority.
Receivables and payables are stated Inclusive of the amount ol GST receivable or payable The net amount pl 631 recoverable train. or
payable to, the relevant taxation authority is included with other receivables or payables in the statement 0' tlnanclal position.
Cash tlowe are presented on a gross buis. The GST components of cash llows arising from Investing or ﬁnancing activities which are
recoverable irom, or payable to. the relevant taxation authority are presented as operating cash llows included in receipts irom customers
or payments to suppliers
Provlolon:
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation (legal or constructive) as a result of a past event, it is probable that an
outﬂow of resources embodying economic beneﬁts will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the
amount ol the obligation, When the Group expects some or all of a provision to be reimbursed. for example. under an insurance contract.
the reimbursement is recognised as a separate asset. but only when the reimbursement is virtually certain. The expense relating to a
provision is presented in the income statement net or any reimbursement,
Wages, salaries, annual leave and sick leave
Liabilities for wages and salaries. including nonsmonetary beneﬁts. annual leave and accumulating sick leave expected to be settled within
i2 months ot the reporting date are recognised In respect or employees services up to the reporting date. They are measured at the
amounts expected to be paid when the liabilities are settled Expenses for non—accumulating sick leave are recognised when the leave is
taken and are measured at the rates paid or payable
60


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013

NOTE 1: Summary oi Signiﬁcant Accounting Pollclu (continued)

Lang sarw'ce leave

The liability tor long service leave is recognised and measured as the present value or expected luture payments to be made in respect or

services provided by employees up to the reporting date using the projected unit credit method. Consideration is given to expected iuture

wage and salary levels, experience oi employee departures. and periods at service. Expected luture payments are discounted using market

yields at the reporting date on national govemment bonds with terms to maturity and currencies that match, as closely as possible. the

estimated future cash outﬂows.

Leases

The determination of whether an arrangement is, or contains. a lease is based on the substance 0! the arrangement It the Inception date.
The arrangement is assessed for whether lullllment ofthe arrangement is dependant on the use of a specillc amt or assets or the
arrangement conveys a light to use the asset or assem. even it that right is not explicitly speciﬁed in an arrangement,

Group as a lessee

Finance leases that transfer substantially all the risks and benefits incidental to ownership of the leased Item to the Group. are capilalSed at
the commencement of the lease at the lair value or the leased propeny or, it lower. at the present value at the minimum lease payments.
Lease payments are apportioned between tinance charges and reduction ot the lease liability so as to achieve a constant rate ot interest on
the remaining balance at the liability. Finance charges are recognised in ﬁnance costs in the income statement,

A leased asset ls depreciated over the useful lite ot the asset. However. il there is no reasonable certainty that the Group will obtain
ownership by the end of the lease term, the asset is depreciated over the shorter ot the estimated useful lite of the asset and the lease term,
Operating lease payments are recognised as an operating expense In the income statement on a straightiine basis over the lease term
Group as a lesser

Leases in which the Group does not transfer substantially All the risks and beneﬁts of ownership of an asset are classiﬁed as operating
leases. Inltlal direct costs incurred in negotiating an operating lease are added to the carrying amount at the leased asset and recognised
over the lease term on the same basis as rental Income. Contingent rents are recognised as revenue In the period in which they are earned.
Elmlngl per Share (EPS)

Basic earnings per share amounts are calculated by dividing the net proﬁt tor the year attributable to ordinary equity holders oi the Parent
by the weighted average number or ordinary shares outstanding during the year.

Diluted earnings per share amounts are calculated by dividing the net proﬁt attributable to ordinary equity holders of the Parent tater
adjusting for interest on the convertible preterenoe shares) by the weighted average number ct ordinary shares outstanding during the year
plus the weighted average number of ordinary shares that would be Issued on conversion of all the dilutive potential ordinary shares into
ordinary shares,

Foreign Currency Translation

The Group‘s consolidated ﬁnancial statements are presented in Australian dollars, which is also the Parent's functional currency. For each
entity the Group determines the functional currency and items included in the ﬁnancial smtements of each entity are measured using that
functional currency, The Group uses the direct method or consolidation and has elected to recycle the gain or loss that areas from using
this method.

Transactions and balances

Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded by the Group’s srtthies at their respective functional currency Spot rates at the date
the transaction ﬁrst qualiﬁes for recognition.

Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in toreign currencies are translated at the iunctionai currency spot rates or exchange at the
reporting date.

Ditterencas arising on seniement or translation or monetary items are recognised in grain or loss with the exception or monetary items that
are designated as part 01 the hedge or the Group's net investment of a foreign operation. These are recognised in other comprehensive
income until the net Investment Is disposed of, at which time, the cumulative amount is reclassiﬁed to profit or loss. Tax charges and credits
attributable to exchange differences on those monetary items are also recorded In other comprehensive inooma.

Non-monetary items that are measured in terms or historical cost in aiprelgn currency are translated using the exchange rates at the dates
at the Initial transacn‘ons. Non-monetary items measured at tair value in a loreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the
data when the fair value is determined. The gain or loss arising on translation of non-monetary items measured at fair value is tremed in line
with the reocgnlﬁon oi gain or loss on change in fair value or the item tie, lranslah‘on differences on items whose fair value gain or loss is
recognised in other comprehensive income or profit or loss are also recognised in other comprehensive Income or proﬁt or loss,
respectively),
61


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013

nor: 1: summary or signiﬁcant mounting Pollclea ioomlnued)

Any goodwill arising on the acquisition ot a toreign operation and any teir value adjustments to the carrying amounts ot assets and liabilities
arising on the acquisition are treated as assets and liabilities or the lorelgn operation and translated at the spot rate ol exchange at the
reporting date.

Group companies

On consolidation. the assets and liabilities 01 foreign operations are translated into dollars at the rate of exchange prevailing at the reporting
date and their income statemens are translated at exchange rates prevailing at the dates 01 the transactions The exchange difierences
arising on translation tor consolidation are recognised in other comprehensive Incomes 0n disposal or a toreign operation. the component
at other comprehensive income relating to that particular loreign operation is recognised in profit or loss.

orltloal Accounting Estimates and Judgements

The preparation of the Group's consolidated ﬁnancial statemenE requires management to make judgements, estimates and assumptions
that affect the reported amounts oi revenues, expenses. assets and liabilities. and the accompanying disclosures, and the disclosure at
contingent liabilities. Uncertainty about these assumptions and estimates could result in outcomes that require a material adjustment to the
carrying amount of assets or liabilities alteoted in ruture periods,

The group makes estimates and judgements in applying the accounting policies. Critical judgements In respect of accounting policies relate
to exploration and evaluation assets. whereby exploration and evaluation expenditure is capitalised in certain circumstances, primarily
where activities in the area oi interest have not yet reached a stage which permits reasonable assessment or economically recoverable
reserves. Otherwise expenditure is expensed.

Snare-based payments

The Group measures the cost or equity-sealed transactions with employees by reierenoe to the lair value or the equity instruments at the
date at which they are granted. Esu'mating tair value tor share based payment transactions requires determination ol the most appropriate
valuation model. which is dependent on the terms and conditions 01 the grant. This estimate also requires determination 01 the most
appropriate inputs to the valuation model including the expected life at the share option. Volatility and dividend yield and making
assumptions about them

Provision for rehabilitation

As part at the identiﬁcation and measurement of mats and liabilities for the acquisition ct Borax Argentina 5A. In 2012, the Group has
recognised a provision tor rehabilitation obligations associated with a lactory owned by Borax Argentina 5A.. In determining the fair value ol
the provision. assumptions and estimates are made in relation to discount rates. the expected cost to dismantle and remove the plant llom
the site and the expected timing 0' those costs. The carrying amount of the provision as at. 30 June 2018 was $10,051,530 (2012: $Nil),
Comparative Figures and Financial Period

When required by Accouan Standards, comparative ﬁgures have been adjusted to coniorm to changes in presentation tor the current
ﬁnancial year.

New accounting standards and interpretation:

The accounting policies adopted are consistent with those ot the previous ﬁnancial year except as lollows:

-AASB 2011-9 Amendments to Australian Accounting Standards -Presentatian of Other Comprehensive Income [AASB 1, 5, 7, 101, 112,

120, 121, 132, 135‘, 134, 1039 & 1049] (Application dale olsmndard 1 July 2012; Application date of group 1 July 2012)

This standard requires entities to group items presented in other comprehensive income on the basis of whether they might be reclassiﬁed
subsequentiy to protit or loss and those that will not.

The Group has not early adopted any other standard, interpretation or amendment that has been issued but is not yet eltective.

Accounting Standards and Interpretations lulled but not yet cllootlva

Australian Accounting Standards and Interpretations that have recently been issued or amended but are not yet attractive and have not been
adopted by the Group tor the annual reporting period ending 30 June 2013. outlined below:

- M33 10 Consolidated Financial Statements (Applican‘on data or standard 1 January 2013: Application date or group 1 July 2013}

M55 10 establishes a new control model that applies to all entities. lt replaces parts or AASE 127 Consolidated and Separate Financial
Statements dealing with the accounting for consolidated ﬁnancial statements and UlG-112 Consolidation - Special Purpose Entlties,
The new control model broadens the situations when an entity is considered to be controlled by another entity and includes new guidance
for applying the model to speciﬁc situations, including when acting as a manager may give control. the Impact ol potential voting rights and
when holding less than a majority voting rights may give control.
consequential amendmens were also made to this and other standards via AASB 201 F7 and M35 2012-10.

52


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013

NOTE 1: Summary or Signlrlcam Accounting Policies (contlnucd)

The Directors have considered this standard and note the changes will not have a material impact on the Group‘s ﬁnancial statements.

-AASB 11 Joint Arrangements (Application data or standard 1 January 2013; Application date or group 1 July 2013)

M53 11 replaces AASB 151 Interests In Joint Ventures and UIG»113 Jointly< controlled Entities - Non<monetary Contributions by Ventures.

M35 11 uses the principle ol conkol in AASB to to deﬁne lolm control. and therefore the determination of whether joint control exists may

change. In addition It removes the option to account tor jointly controlled entities (JCEs) using proportionate consolidation. Instead.

accounting tor a joint arrangement is dependent on the nature ol the rights and obligations arising trorn the arrangement. Joint operations
that give the venturers a right to the underlying assets and obligations themselves Is accounted tor by recognising the share 01 those assets
and obligations. Joint ventures that give the venturers a right to the net assets is accounted for using the equity method,

consequential amendments were also made to this and other standards via AASB 2011-7. M53 2010—10 and amendments to M33 128,
The Directors have considered this standard and note the changes will not have a material impact on the Group‘s ﬁnancial statements,

- M53 12 Disclosure of Interest: in Other Entities (Application date of standard 1 January 2013; Application date of group 1 Jilly 2013)
M55 12 includes all disclosures relating to an emit/s interests in subsidiaries, joint arrangements. associates and structured entities. New
disclosures have been introduced about the judgments made by management to determine whether control exists. and to require
summarised inlormation about loim arrangements. associates, structured entities and subsidiaries with non-controlling interests.

The Directors have considered this standard and note the changes will not have a material impact on the Group's ﬁnancial statements.

- M83 13 Fair value measurement (Application dare oi standard 1 January 201:1,- Appircation date oi group 1 July 201:1)

M85 13 establishes a single source of guidance Ior determining the lair value 01 Assam and liabilities, AASB 13 does not change when an
entity is required to use lair value. but rather. provides guidance on how to determine lair value when lair value is required or permitted.
Application at this deﬁnlﬁon may result in dillerem lair values being determined tor the relevant assets,

AASB 13 also expands the disclosure requirements tor all assets or liabilities carried at fair value. This includes information about the
assumptions made and the qualitative impact at those assumptions on the lair value determined.

Consequemlal amendments were also made to other standards vla MSB 2011~5.

The Directors have considered this standard and note the changes will not have a material impact on the Group's ﬁnancial statements.

- M58 119 Employee Beneﬁts (Application date oi standard 1 January 2013; Application date or group 1 July 2013)

The main change Introduced by this standard is to revise the accounting Ior dellned beneﬁt plans. The amendment removes the options lor
accounting tor the liability. and requires that the liabilities arising lrom such plans is recognised in lull with actuarial gains and losses being
recognised in other comprehensive income. It also revised the method olcalculating the return on plan Wis.

The revised standard changes the delinition of short-term employee beneﬁts. The distinction between short-term and other long-term
employee beneﬁts is now based on whether the beneﬁts are expected to be settled wholly within 12 months other the reporting date.
Consequential amendments were also made to other standards via MSB 2011-10.

The Directors have considered this standard and note the changes will not have a material impact on the Group‘s ﬁnanclal stalemate,

- Interpretation 20 Stripping Costs in the Producn‘orl Phase Ola Surface Mine (Application date 0/ standard 1 January 2073; Application dale
a! group 1 July 2013)

This lnterprotatlon applies to stripping costs incurred during the production phase of a surlaac mine. Production stripping costs are to be
capitalised as part of an asset, it an entity can demonstrate that It is probable luture economic beneﬁts wille realised. the costs can be
reliably measured and the entity can identity the component at an ore body lor which access has been improved. This asset is to be called
the "stripping activity asset‘.

The stripping activity asset shall be depreciated or amortised on a systematic basis. over the expected usetul lite ofthe identiﬁed
component ol the ore body that becomes more accessible as a result 01 the stripping activity. The units 01 production method shall be
applied unless another method is more appropriate.

consequential amendments were also made to other standards vla AASB 201142,
The Directors have considered this standard and note the changes will not have a material impact on the Group's ﬁnancial statements,
- AASB 201 1-4 Amendments to Australian Accounting smnuards to Remove individual Key Management Personnel Disclosure Requirements
[M55 124] (Applican‘on data or standard 1 July 2013; Application date or group 1 July 2013)
This amendment deletes lrom AASB 124 Individual key management personnel disclosure requirements tor disclosing entities that are not
companies. It also removes the individual KMP disclosure requirements for all disclosing entitles in relation to equity holdings, loans and
other related party transactions.
The Directors have considered this standard and note the changes will not have a material impact on the Group's ﬁnancial statements.

63


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Consolidated Group
2013 2012
S 3
NOTE 2: Result for the Period
The ioilowing revenue and expense items are relevant in explaining the ﬁnancial performance lor the period:
Sale or goods 17,054,532 -
interest - related panies 331.010 ~
Interest - other persons 415.357 1.449.720
Other revenue 1.435.911 143.570
Unwind o1 discount on loans receivable 304.504 -
Gain on sale oi plant 3 equipment 41.303 9.640
Total other revenue 2.600.393 l.302.94e
Gain on creation oi joint venture (see Note 14) 101.903.3313 »
NOTE 3: Prom/(Loss) lor the Vnr
Included In expenses are the toilowing items:
Capitalised exploration 3. evaluation expenditure written-oil 499.747 758.014
Depreciation a. amortisation 720.071 125.279
Rental expense on operating lease 140.454 112.700
Foreign currency translation losses/(gains) (3.602.232) 102.024
Employee beneﬁts expense comprises:
Short term banelits 4.674.097 4.434.142
Contributions to deﬁned contribution plans 07.430 04.237
Share based payments 522.700 357.021
Less capitalised as exploration expenditure 1.619.124) (2 007 170
M
NOTE 4: Income Tux Expense
The major components o1 income tax expense lor the years ended 30 June 2013 and 2012 are:
income Tax Expense/(Beneﬁt)
Current income tax:
current income tax charge - -
Adjustments in respect of current income tax or previous year a -
Deierred tax:
Relating to origination and reversal of temporary ditlerenoes 107.951 4
Relating to prior year 1.000.331 -
Foreign exchange on DTL acquired 55.450
income tax expense reported in the income statement 1.243 740 .
A reconciliation between tax expense and the product of accounting proﬁt multiplied by Austraiies domestic tax rate tor the years ended
30 June 2013 and 2012 is as iollows:
Gain/(Loss) irom continuing operations before income tax expense 93.792134 .
Tax expenses / (Beneﬁt) at Australian tax rate o1 30% (2012: 30%) 29,037,035 -
Tax eiiect oi amounts which are not deductible/(taxable) in calculating taxable income:
- Share - based payments 71.753 2
~ Entenalnment expense 235 -
- Disposal ctJv (30.032060) ~
- Other 03.773 -
Unrecognised Tax losses current year 2.350.132 -
Diirerenoes in tax rates (loreign subsidiaries) (002,909) r
Foreign exchange on DTL acquired 55.450
Relating to prior year 1.000.331 .
income tax expense 1.243.740 ~
64


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Consolidnud Group
2013 2012
s 3
NOTE 4: income in Expanu (conllnuad)
neierred cox
Deiened iax relaics io lhe lollowlng:
neierred tax men
Payable and accruals 556203 »
Employee beneiire 35.632 -
Investments 33.741
Deierred exploraiion expenditules i49.924 »
lnveniory 35,918 -
ciher deoiors 386.578 ~
Share ssue coals (PE-L) 28.069 »
Share issue oasis (Equity) 746.604 .
2.079.652 »
Deferred tax liabililies
PPE (i 314.747) -
Receivables (333.599) .
Prepaymenis (zoo) -
Unrealised iorelgn exaianges (709 373) -
(2.557.977) -
Movomonu:
Opening Balance - -
Under/(over) provision in prior years (PeiL) (i 350.332) .
Under/(over) provision in prior years (Equity) 1.772.855 -
orediied/(charged) to ma Equiiy (Current year) 343,742 -
Credited/(charged) io lire income siaiernenr (Ar aeouisilion a. PPAJ (1 .706.612) .
Credited/(charged) io ihe income siaierneni (107,951) .
Closing Balance — [7—7s,295) -
The Gloup has iax lossee oi $19,246,464 (2012: $15,000,000) lire: are available indeiiniiely ior oiiseiiing against iurure iaxaole proiile oi
ihe ocrnpanies in which the losses arose.
"or: s: Ell-ulna: Pei share
Baslc eamlngs per share arnounis are oaloulaied by dividing ihe nei proiii ior ihe year anrihuiaole io ordinary equiiy holders oi ihe Parenr
oyihe weighied average number oi ordinary shares ouisianding during ihe year
Diluted earnings per share amounle ere calculaled by dividing ihe nei proiii amouiaple cc ordinary equin holders oiihe Parent (aner
adjusiing ior Inlelesl on ma convertible preierence shares) by iiie waighled average number oi ordinary shares outstandan during ihe
year plus he welghied average number oi ordinaly shares ihai would be issued on conversion of all ihe diluiive poienlial ordinary shares
inw ordinarv shares.
The ioliovving rellecis ihe inoorne and share daia used in the oeeic and diiuied earnings per share computalions:
Proiii/(Loes) ior lhe iinancial year 495549.044 (2,994,535)
Exclude non-coniroiling iniereai 135.533 164.560
Nei Prom/(Loss) used in ma caicuiaiion oi oeeic end diluiive EPS L W
No. No.
Welghted average number of ordinary shares ouieianding during 1 12.221395 103154.354
Weighted average number oi opiiona omstanding Home -
Weighied average number oi ordinary shares ouisranding during
the period used in the calculation OI dilmive EPS l 12.331313 103,184.35!
There are 701.092 share opiione excluded lrorn ihe caloularion oi diluied earnings per share ihai could potentially dilute basic eamings
per share in the iuiure oeoauae lhey are ami-dilmive ior ihe current period preeenied.
65


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Oonmlldllod Group
2013 2012
s s
NOTE 6: Auditors Remuneration
Remuneration of the auditor oi the consolidated group lor:
- auditing or reviewing the ﬁnancial report 162.352 169.106
- other assurance services 18.300 17.392
150.652 186.495
NOTE 7: Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash at bank and on hand 5.429.940 2.063596
Short term deposits 5.179.141 14.416.919
10,609,051 l6.480.515
Cash at the end at the ﬁnancial year as shown in the statement of cash ﬂows is the same amount as shown in the statement of ﬁnancial
,position.
Included in cash at bank are balances drawn dcwn lrorn the HSBC Loan (see Note 16). These cash funds are designated tor the speciiic
purpose or the relocation oi the Tlncaleyu prelect.
The eiiectlve interest rate on short term deposits was 4.01% (2012: 5.3%). Deposits have an average maturity ot69 days.
NOTE 8: Trade and other Receivables
current:
Trade receivables 4.129.401 -
Related party receivables 29.532 17,526
Other receivables 516.910 257.127
VAT tax credits 891.060 r
5.766.953 234.655
Non Current:
Trade receilmbles 1,578,422 ~
Related party receivables 340.977 ~
Receivable 170m Joint venture 17.861344 ~
Receivable from Joint venture partners 6,054,175 -
VAT tax credits 767.514 2.928.965
28.602.735 2.923.963
Trade and other receivablea
As at 30 June 2013, no trade receivables were impaired. ii. is expected all balances will be received when due. There are no balances
with terns that have been renegotiated but which would otherwise be past due or Impaired. The amounts are non~interest hearing and
generally on 90 days terms. No collateral is held over receivables.
Credit Risk — Trade and Other Receivable!
Inctuded In other receivables is 51.658374 (2012: $2,928,963) being VAT recoveries due irom the Argentine revenue authority. This
amount represents a signiﬁcant concentration at credit risk to the Group. on a geographical basis the Group has total receivables cl
ASB,752.240 (2012: “3.103.006) denominated ln Argentine pesos, which represents a signiﬁcant concentration of credit risk to the
Group.
Receivables from Iolnt venture and joint venture partners
Receivables from joint venture and joint venture partners relates to amounts recelvable in respect of the Oleroz project (see Note 14). All
amounts are denominated in USD and 317.551.34415 interest bearing. The receivables will be recovered once the Olaroz project is
operational (see Note 22).
66


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Consolidated Group
2013 2012
S 8
NOTE 9: lnvultory
Current:
Inventory 3.045.656 -
8.045.656 -
Noll Current:
Inventory 53,922 -
33.922 »
Current inventories relate to borates and related produas, Non current inventory relates to consumables and spare parts.
NOTE 10: Othlr AM!
Current:
Prepayments 768.101 61.655
NOTE 1|: FInIlIcIII Allen
Avalllble tor are ﬁnancial I833” (It flir Vllue)
Non—current - shares in listed entity 12.233 96.634
Impairment on available-ior—sale ﬁnancial investments
For available-forsale ﬁnancial investments, the Group assesses at each reporting date whether there is objeaive evldenoe that an
investment or a group 01 investments is impaired. In the case 01 equity irwestments daSSlllecl as available-lor-sale. objective evidence
would include a signiﬁcant or prolonged decline in the lair value at the investment Delaw i6 cost. The determination of what is
“signiﬁcant” or 'piolonged" requires judgement. In making this judgement, the Group evaluates. among other tactors. the duration or
extent to which the fair value oi an Investment is less than its cost.
Based on these criteria. the Company identiﬁed an impairment at 5295.304 on avallable-lor-sale investment - quoted equity secun’ties,
The impairment on available-lor-sale ﬁnancial investments is recognised within other expenses In the Income statement.
NOTE 12: Propeny. Plant and Equipment
Land 8t Work In Plant 8t
buildings Progress equipment Total
Plant and equipment
At oost ' - 1.000.693 1.000.696
Accumulated depreciation - - (221.277) (221.277)
Total at 30 June 2012 - - 779.A21 779,421
At Cost 3.361.552 603.262 5.751.279 9.716.193
Aocumuiaied depreciation (41.756) - (€73,595) (920,3s2l
Total at so June 2013 8.819.888 603.262 4.972.583 3.795.531
Plant and oqulpmm 20l3 2012
Reconciliation oi the carrying amounts ior property. plant and equipment is set out below:
Balance at the beginning of year 779.421 340.053
Additions - buslneS oomblnatlons 6.665.052 ~
Additions 2.136.852 646.059
Dlsposals - creation 01 jolnt venture (415.991) (34.904)
Depreciation expense (720.570 (125.279)
Foreign currency translation movement 351.153 (46.543)
Carrying amount at the end oi year 8.795.831 779.421
67


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Consolidated Group
2013 2012
s 3
NOTE 1:: Exploration, Evaluation and Development Aunt
Exploration. evaluation and development expenditure carried lorward in respect ol areas ol interest are:
Explorauon and evaluation phase - at cost 13,692,541 43.720333
Movement In explomlun and mlulllon asset:
Opening balance - at cost 43.720233 27.249392
Capitalised exploration expenditure 7.650.575 15.966205
Decrease on creation at joint venture (36.543116) -
Capitalised exploration expenditure written-elf (499.747) (755.014)
Foreign currency translation movement (635.404) (1.739.850)
Carrying amount at the end of year —t'5,§92.541 43.720233
Reooverabtlity ot the carrying amount at exploration assets is dependent on the succequ exploration and development ol projects or
alternatively through the sale at the areas at interest,
Capttalised exploration expenditure written cit relates to the write oft or accumulated costs with regards to projects which have been
abandoned in the current tinancial year.
During the 2012 tinanclal year. capitalised exploration expenditure included $10,000 settled by way cl share issue (Note 26).
NOYE 14: InveIlmelll in Joint Vontun
During the period the Group executed an agreement with Toyota Tsusho Corporation l'TiC“) tor a joint venture to develop the Olaroz
lithium project located in the Province otJujuy. northern Argentina,
Prior to the transaction the Group owned a 100% interest In the olaroz lithium project. Net assets held at the date ol the transaction were
$57,510,000 with the majority being exploration and evaluation assets, Subsequent to the transaction the olaroz lthium project is owned
66.5% by the Group. 25.17% by TTC and 8.5% by Jujuy Energia y Mineria Sociedad del Estado ('JEMSE') (the mining investment
company owned by the provincial Government olJuiuy, Argentina) At the completion cfthe transaction the net assets previously
recorded were written pit and replaced by an investment in the joim venture ot 915249.532 and loans receivable lrom the joint venture
ol$17.561.a44.
The Group has recorded the investment oi 31.37.973.705 in the joint venture at lair value and has recorded a non cash and non taxable
preﬁtoi:101.963,338 as a result oi the transaction (including the recycling of amounts previously recorded in the loreign currency
translation reserve ol s5.077.4so and discounting of other loans of $1 £54,301). The investment in the Jolni venture will be accounted tor
using the equity method ol accounting.
Construction of the project will be majority Iurided by a debt Iacility provided by Mizuho Corporate Bank Limited (with a maximum lacility
limit oi US$192 million), During the construction period Tic will provide a guarantee tor its portion oi the debt and also a joint guarantee
With the Group tor the Group's portion (together 100% oi the debt). Alter completion or conetmction and aher satisfying operating
pertorrnarice tests. the Japanese Government's Japanese Oil. Gas and Metal National Corporation ('JOGMEC") will provide a guarantee
tor a maximum ol 82% of the project debt (to a maximum of US$155 million). The remaining 13% ot the debt will be guaranteed by 'I'rc
who will provide a guarantee tor its portion of the debt and also a joint guarantee with the Group tor the Group's portion (13%). To lurther
secure the debt iacility Sales de Jujuy Pte. Ltd has provided security in favour cl Mlzuho Corporate Bank over the shares it owns In Sales
de Juiuv SA
Each oi Tic and Orocobre have granted cross charges on standard terms in tavour oi the other over their respective shareholding in
Sales de Jujuy Pte, Ltd to better secure their respective pericrmances ottheirobligatiens under the Sales de Juluy Pte, Ltd joint venture
agreement.
Interest In jointly controlled entities
The Group's share ol the assets and liabilities as at 30 June 2013 and income and expenses of the jointly controlled entity tor the year
ended 30 June 2013. which is accounted tor using the equity method in the consolidated tinanclal statements, is as lollows:
Share of the joint ventures statement ct tinanclal position:
Current Assets 12,740,847 -
Non-Current Assets 224.7662 -
Current Liabilities (15,1 13.487) -
Non-Current Liabilities (55,020.126) -
.lolnt venture's noncontrolling interest (15.755353 -
Equity 151 are no .
63


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Comolidmed Group
2013 201 2
$ 5
NOTE 14: Investment In Joint Venture (continued)
shore o11he jolnt venture‘e revenue and proﬁt:
Other Revenue 230.777 -
Corporate 8. administrative expenses (1,172,366) '
Foreign currency gain/(loss) 568 634 -
Proﬁt belore tax (321.955) -
Income tax expense ~ -
Prom/(loss) lor the year from continuing operations (321 955 -
Income attributable to joint venture‘s nonmnlmlling interest (27.861 -
share at proﬁt/(laﬁ) tor the year trom continuing operations (294 588] -
The Group‘s share oi project development oommitmenw which are lunded through project linencing:
Operating commitments 53.352364 -
NOTE 15: Trade and other Payable:
Current:
Unsecured liabilities:
Trade peyoblee and accrued expenses 7.213.090 1.624.613
Joint venture contributions received - 4.897.280
Subsidiary instalments payable 1.094.645 ~
Payable to related entitles - 12.000
3.307 738 6.033 893
Non-Current:
Unsecured liabilities:
Trade peyobles and accrued expenses 1.405.477 -
Subsidiary instalments payable 1.775.450 ~
3.180.927 ~
NOTE 16: Loan: and Borrowings
Current:
ARS 16,000,000 HSBC Loan (15,2539 simple Interest) 914.4114 ~
Non-Current:
ABS 10,000,000 HSBC Loan 11 525% Simple Interest) 2.743.483 ~
3 657 977 ~
This loan has been dim/m down under a lcur year bank lecility (HSBC). The loan is repeyable within 45 months and is secured by
guarantee (see note 24),
NOTE I7: Provident
Current:
shon term employee benetite 1.451.286 87.293
1.451256 97.293
Non-Current:
Provision lor rehabilitation 10,051,530 ~
Other provisions 714.1345 ~
10.766376 ~
Short term employee benefit:
shon term employee beneﬁts comprise at annual and long service leave entitlements lor Orocobre Ltd employees (3115.773). and
leave entitlements and pension beneﬁt obligations lor Borax SA employees (31.332298).
69


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Contolldahd Group
2018 2012
s s
NOTE 17: provisions (comlnuod)
Rohlbllhnllon provision
The Group has recognised a provision lcr rehabilitation obligations associated with the rectory owned by Borax sac
Heconclllallon oi the carrying amount for provision lcr rehabilitation is set out below:
Balance at the beginning oi year . .
Additions . business combinations 7.093.223 -
Arising during the year 2.953.307 -
Carrying amount at the end 01 the year 10 051 530 -
Other provisions #—
The Group has recognised a provision icr a legal claim raised by a contractor regarding a workplace injury. in which Borax salt, is
one oi the delendan'si
Reconciliation ol the carrying amount lor other provisions is set out below:
Balance at the beginning or year . a
Additions . business combinations . .
Arisan during the year 714.846 a
Carrying amount at the end oi the year 714.846 »
NOTE is: Buslneu Combinations
On 21 Augusl 2012 the Group purchased 100% oi the Argentine boron minerals and reiined chemicals producer. Borax Argentina an.
(Borax), trorn Rlo Trnto PLO entities The Group purchased Borax as it provides a well established regional operating presence. 5.
experience and management skills which will compliment existing operations in Argentina. The consideration paid tor the sale was
US$5.5m and usst ,om payable tor 2 years on each anniversary ol the acquisition. and a iihai payment otsezak on the third anniversary
oi the acquisition
Fair value
recognised on
The lair values oi the identlﬁable asset and liabilities acquired were as loilcws: acouicilion
Anon: s
Property. plant 3. equipment 6.665.052
Cash and cash equivalents 1323.423
Trade and other receivables 7.657.139
inventories 7.802.570
Prepaymems and other assets 1.512 523
24,480,707
Llabllllles: —
Trade and other payabies (6.091.432)
Delerred tax liability 1544.329)
Provision icr employee entitlements and other (3.006.261)
Provision ror rehabilitation 7.099.223)
(16.740.5452
Total identiﬁable net assets a1 lair value 1720.162
Purchase consideration translerred —
Cash 5.245.839
instalments payable 2.474.323
7,720.1 62
The net assets recognised in the at December 2012 llnanciai statements were based on a provisional assessment otiarr value while the
Group sought an independent valuation for the land and buildings owned by Borax. The valuation had not been completed by the date
the 2012 interim ﬁnancial statements were approved for issue by management.
In June 2013 the laiuatioh was completed and the acquisition data lair value ol the propeny. plant and eouprnant was $6,365,052. an
increase ct 31260272 over the provisional vaiuei The increased depreciation charge on the buildings trcm the acquisition date to 30
June 2013 was not malelialt
70


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Consoliﬂltad Group
2013 2012
S 5
NOTE Io: Business Combinlﬂom (continued)
Overall. total assets have increased by $262,141, as a result o1 minor amendments on valuation. Total liabilities have decreased by
3636.376 as a result of minor amendments on valuation. As a result. there was an increase in the deterred tax liability o1$544.529.
The change to the consIderetIon payable since the provisional acquisition note in the 2012 Interim ilnanciai statements is due to a
working capital adjustment as agreed between the parties at acquisition date o1 5374.235 that was made subsequent to the date ol
acquisition,
From the date at acquisition, Bcrax has contributed 617.654.532 o1 revenue and a reduction cl 33.417.044 lo the net proﬁt batore tax ol
the Group.
If the combination had taken place at the beginning or the linancial year revenue from continuing operations lor the Group would have
been szo.979,724 and the protrt trorn the continuing operations tor the Group would have been 394336.949.
NOTE 19: Issued Clpllll s 5
Fully paid ordinary shares 101.712 005 75029557
Ordinary shares No. No.
Balance at the beginning oi the reporting year 103.195.0213 103063.594
Sheree issued during the year:
Previous ﬁnancial year - 131.135
13 November 2012 - Australian placement at $1 .70 12.352.941 -
30 November 2012 - Australian placement at $1 .70 2.197.170 -
Balance at the end ol the reporting year 117 745 140 103195.029
Options No. No.
Unlisted sitar. Options 1.885.000 1.465.000
Balance at the beginning oi the reporting year 1.465.000 960.000
Options Issued during the year (see note 26) 1.041.884 550.000
Options exercised during the year (see note 26) - 1125.000)
Options lapsed during the year (see note 26) (465.000) a
Balance at the end at the reporting year 2 041 534 1 465 000
share option whenm
The Group has one share option scheme under which options to subscribe tor the Group's shares have been granted to certain
executives and senior employees (Note 26).
Transaction com
Costs incurred in current year (1,145,693) -
Less tax eltect - current year 943.742 -
- previously not reoogntsed 1.772.355 r
970.902 -
NOTE 20: ﬁourvu
Foreign currency translallon "ENG: 3397.720)
The toreign currency translation reserve records exchange dilterenoes arising on translation of a toreign controlled subsidiary.
Opllons mum: 1.344.180
The options reserve records items recognised as expenses on valuation ol employee share options.
Total reserves (2.053.540)
71


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
camolidaled Group
2m 2012
s 3
NOTE 21: Cash Flow lrwonnailon
nooorrolllailorr of can. Flow 1min Operations will. Lou a11or lrroorrro Tax:
Prom/(loss) lrorri ordinary deriviliea belore inoome lax 96.792704 (2.994.500)
Nonrcash llewa in loos irorn ordinary aoilviiies:
Options expense 522.708 357.321
Depreciation 01 propeny. plant and equipmenl 720.671 l25,279
Gain on sale ol eaeeoa (101,909,300) (9.645)
snare ol prom In on assodate 294.500 2
eapnallsad exploration expendlrure wrmen-oﬁ (043.714) .
l=alr value adl'ustment or loans and ﬁnancial aseele 211.402 .
Unwind ol disoouni on loans receivable (1.373.073) -
Unreallsed lorelgn exchange gain (3.002.202) 152,024
Changes In opereiing assets and llsbililiesz
(IncreaseyDecrease in ieoelvables (213.2132) (913.702)
(Beoreeseulnereaee in payebles ‘0276.067 667.79!
(lncrease)/Decrease in inveniory (552.270) »
(lnu’easeﬂDecrease in prepayments (1.341.684) 53.993
Cash ﬂows lrorrr opereliona (1 I76 429) (2.531 030
Non-cm. Flrunelrro Ind lnvutlng mlvhlu
Share 1mm:
During me previous year 6,135 shares were issued. represenling $10,000 under A mineral renemenl aoquisilion agreement.
NOTE 22: Roland F-ﬂy Tmnmcllonc
The consolidated ﬁnancial statements or llie Group include:
Marne earring of Incomnllon 95 oguig lmoreal
Sales de Jujuy 3.4, Argentlna . 10000
Sales de Jujuy Pre Lid Singapore 7208 -
souzn American salar Minerals Ply Lid Australia 05.00 05.00
Somh American Selar s.A. (wholly owned subsidiary ol Souln Argentina 100.00 10000
American Seler Minerals Ply Lid)
Borax Argeniina Holdlng No l Pty Lid Australia 100.00 -
chx Argenlina Holding No 2 Ply Ltd Ausﬂalia 100.00 .
Boiax Avgemina SA Argentina 100.00 .
The lollowing lame provides me ioial amouni ol iraneaollons mat have been enrered Into with related panles for (he relevani ﬁnancial
year. For inlormalion regardan outstanding balance: at 30 June 201 a and 2012. reler to Notes a and 22:
John von1ure ln whlch 0.. Fault la . vanlunr:
sales de Ju'uy PTE LTD
Exploraiion oasis reimoureed . ioini veniure 17,001,904 -
Amounts owed by Joint Venture 18,043,845 -
Tnnacllon; wlln Jolm warrior.
Al 30 June 2013. 317001.044 is reoorded as a reoeivaola lrorn me lolnl venlure enlily. and $0,054.17o ls reoorded as recoverable lrorn a
iolni veniure panner. The loan to me jolm venture entity is interest bearing al LIEOR +101 per annurn and will oe repaid during lne period
the joint veniure is operational and alrer sausraaion or the minimum reouirernems ol lne project linanoe iaoiliry. The loan lo a lolmveniure
parrner is noninlereei oearing and will be repaid when lne joinl veniure pays dividends at 30.3% of dividends distilbuﬂon io lne jolm
venture manner,
Kay Mnnngomont Personnel of the group:
gamon'dge Boa‘neee eoporaie servlces
Purchases horn KMP 116.100 “4.075
Arnounls owed to KMP - 0.000
72


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
Consolidated Group
2013 2012
s s
NOTE 2:: Hehled Pany Transactions (conllnued)
L thlum investors LLc
Purchases 1mm KMP 44.473 121.079
Amounts owed to KMP s 5.200
Transactions with Kly Management Personnel
Key Management Personnel compensation and equity interests are detailed in Note 25.
During the year. the parent entity engaged Cambridge Business at Corporate Services. an entity controlled by Mr Crawford. company
secretary oi the parent entity. to provide accounting. company secretarial. and other services to the parent entity.
During the year. the parent entity engaged Lithium investors LLC. an entity aesooiated with Mr Calaway. a director at the parent entity. to
provide technical services to the parent entity.
Hal-ted plnlu of the group:
Elementce Limited .
Sales to related parties: 450 43.934
Amounts owed oy related panies: - -
OGL Resources Limited
Sdes (0 related parties: 13.512 11.457
Purchases trom related parties: (4454i -
Amounts owed by related ponies: 11.253 4.573
DlgmnEx Limited
Sales to related parties: 349 496
Amounts owed by related parties: 394 4913
Coronation Resources Limited
Sales to related parties: 27.638 25.970
Amounts awed by related parties: 29.920 2.232
Elementos Limited, listed on the ASX. is a related party oi the Group as Mr Calaway is a director oi that company. and Mr Ciawlord is a
company secretary.
During the year. the company was party to a cost reimbursement agreement tor services provided to OGL Resources Limited. Elementos
Limited. DiamonEx Limited and Coronation Resources Limited. Mr Crawiord is a director at Coronation Resources and DlamonEx
Limited.
The parent entitys shareholding in the controlled entities is detailed In Note at. The company also provides linanoe to its controlled
entities.
nor: 23: commitment.
Not later than 1 year
- exploration commitments (t) 1.025.222 826.953
. operating leases (2t 97.035 123.335
» contracts (3) 209.993 323.739
1.5%.555 1.274.027
Liter than 1 your but not Imor nun 5 your:
- exploration commitments (1) 15.273 1.451.134
- operating leases (2) 265,618 257.331
- contracts (3) 6.520 314.232
237.718 2,023,297
(1) The economic entity must meet minimum expenditure commitments in relation to option agreements over exploration tenements
and to maintain those tenemean in good standing,
The commitments exist at balance sheet date but have not been brought to account. lithe relevant mineral tenement ls relinquished
the expenditure commitment also ceases.
(2) The lease commitment relates to a non-cancellatole lease with a 2 year term remaining at 50 June 2013. Rent is payable monthly in
advance,
(a) The group has ocntractual commitments to the Provincial Government oi Jujuy and its mining company (JEMSEJ.
73


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 24: Conllngonl Item:
The group has provided the following guarantee at 30 June 2018:
- Guarantee 01 100% 0' the loan made under Loan Communication A5380 of the Central Bank 01 Argentina from HSBC Bank Argentlna
SA. up to me loan amount MARSIBm (30 June: Aﬁﬁsm). This loan was granted to Borax Argentina SA. on 25 June 2013.
NOTE 25: KUy Mnnngomonl Parsonnol Componnﬂon a. Equity
(u) Th. mm“ or key mun-gamem penonnol or me onllly at my time during an nn-ncI-I ynr were:
Rlchard P. Sevllls Dlrecmr - Exacmlve
James D. Calaway Dlremor - Non-Executive Chairman
Nell F. Small Director - Non-Executive (retired 30 November 2012)
John W. Glbson Dlreclor - Non-Executive
Courtney Plan Dllsc10r - Non-Executive
Fernando Orbs :19 Flea Dlreclol - Non-Examine
Federico Nicolson Director - Nonixeculive
Roben Hubbard Director - N0n»b<ewtlve (elfecﬁve from 30 November 2012)
Paul A Crawford Company Secretary
Nell Kaplan Chief Financial Ofﬁcer (effective horn 7 January 2015)
Davld Hall Business Development Manager (eﬂecﬁve from 7 January 20m)
(b) Key Manugemem Personnel campensalion 201a 2012
8 3
Shun-term employee beneﬁls 1.509.512 957.395
Post-employmem benefns 48,567 29,925
other long-term beneﬁts - -
Share-based paymenls 199.448 109.143
Detailed disclosures on compensation for key management personnel are sel cm In ma Remuneration nepon included in me Direclors'
Report,
Number cull-m iiold by key
(c) mlnagemeni personnel (I) "c‘ N°' No‘ No‘ No‘
Openan Opﬁions Purchned / Balnnce 30 Jun.
2°” a-l-nco convened °°mP°"”“°" (Sold) 2013
Dlroclors:
James D. Calaway 8.574.000 ~ - - 8.574.000
Neil F. Sluan (as at
retirement 30 November 5.542.995 - ~ 42.647 5.685.643
Richard F'. Sevllle 4.521.500 - ~ l05.000 4.925.500
John W. Gibson 25.000 ~ r - 25.000
Counney Pram - ~ . - -
Fernando Oris de Flea - ~ » - -
Federico Nicholson - - v - ‘
Floben Hubbard - - ~ - -
Omar:
Paul A. Crawford 2.570.999 - ‘ (352.700) 2.218.299
Neil Kaplan - - ~ 20.000 20.000
David Hall - - - ~ -
Total 21.634.495 ~ » (105.053) 21.449.442
74


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE :5: Key Management Poncnnol compensation 8. Equity (continued)
0 nln o tions Purehasod/ Bllancn 30 June
2"” BIT-no: 095nm °°"“’°""“°" gsotdi 2012
Dlmnon:
James D, Calaway 0,200,000 - - 574,000 0.574000
Neil F, Stuart 5,022,990 - - 20,000 5.642.990
Richard P. Seville 4,821,500 - r 4 4,321,500
John w, Gibson 25,000 - - ~ 25,000
Courtney Flatt ~ s r - ~
Fernando Otis de Hoa ~ - - s -
Federico Nicholson v - ~ A ~
other:
Paul A. CraMord 2,703,337 - - 132,688 2,570,999
T013] 21,373,183 s s 261.312 21,654,495
11) Represents shares held directly or indirectly. The company does not issue shares u a iorm oi remuneration.
(01 Number otoptlons held by Key Management Personnel (l)
Options held by key management personei duilng the current ﬁnancial year were:
201 :1 50:3: Convonod componullon was?“ I “mg: 4””
Dlrectors:

James D, Calaway 1 150,000 - - ~ 150.000

Neil F. Stuart (retired) 2 100.000 - - - 100.000

Richard P. Seville a A ~ 441.004 7 4-11 .084

John w, Gibson 4 100,000 - - - 100.000

Courtney Pratt 5 100,000 - - ~ 100.000

Federico Nicholson 0 100,000 - ~ 100.000

Fernando Oris de Roa 7 100.000 - - ~ 100.000

Robert Hubbard ~ - ~ ~ -
Other:

Paul A. Crawford - - - - s

Neil Kaplan - - - - ~

David Hall - - - - »
Total ——050.000 - 441,004 - 1E1 .sﬁ
1.2.45.0.7 - 50% vested and exercisable, 50% not yet vested
a - 100% Vest 31/0/2015

2012 Eng: Converted Compensation “$23” ’ am"; 12° "‘"‘°
Dlrlclors:

James D. Calaway - - 150,000 ~ 150.000

Neil F. Stuart - - 100,000 - 100.000

Richald P. Seville - - » » r

John w. Gibson . - 100.000 - 100.000

Courtney Pratt . s 100.000 » 100.000

Fedeiltzo Nlcholson . 100,000 100,000

Fernando 01B do Roe » - 100,000 - 100.000
Dthor:

Paul A. Crawford . ~ ~ - -
Total - s 050.000 - 650.000
(i) Represents options held directly or indirectly.

Details 01 options provided as compensation tor key management personnel are set out in the Remuneration Report Included in the Dlvectors'
Report.
Terms and conditions ot grants made during the period are disclosed in Note 26.

75


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 25: Share Blood Payments 2013 2012
$ $
Emense arising tront equlty-settled share based payment transactions 522,705 985000
This relates to equity-settled share based payments in the form or grants of options under the Employee 0 Ofﬁcer snore Option Plan and
grants at options and performance rights under the Pertolmanoe Rights & Option Plan. See Note 26 a) and Note 25 b) for more details.
(I) optlons
Employee & Ofﬁcer Share Option Plan (EOSOP)
Under the Employee & Ofﬁcer Share Option Plan (EOSOP). awards are made to executives and other key talent who have an impact on the
Group‘s pertonnanoa EOSOP awards are delivered in the term oi options over shares which vest over varying periods subject to me
employee remaining in service
The parent entity had t,485,000 share options on issue at the start of the year, 435.000 with an exerclse price $2.03 explrlng 30 June 2013,
400.000 with an exercise price $2.03 expiring 30 June 2015. and 550.000 with an exercise price $1.50 expiring 30 November 2016‘
During the year, 435,000 at these options were forfeited,
During the year 600.000 share options were granted pursuant to the company‘s Employee 5. Ofﬁcer Share Option Plan tor nil consideration.
Options are exercisable at $1.50 each with 400,000 expiring on a July 2017. and 200.000 expiring on 31 May 2010, 50.000 options with expiry
date M5 July 2017 were forfeited during 2013.
Performance Flights 8. Option Plan (PROP)
Under the Performance Rights 8- Option Plan (PROP), awards are made to executives who have an impact on the Group's performance, and
are delivered in the iorm or options and righﬁ,
PROP options over shares vest over a period or 2.5 years and are subject to the ioilowing TSR Outperlormenoe Conditions. and continuous
service until the vestlng date.
TSR Panormance Condltlon Pro - - rrlon at O - Ion! whlnh vast
It ORE TSR tells below lhe 50th percentile None of the Performance Rights vest
It CHE TSR is at the 50th percentlle 50% of the Parlormanoe nghts vest
It CHE TSH lies between the 50th and 75th percentiles The proportion of Pertormance nghts that vast increases linearly from
50% and 100%
It ORE TSR lies at or above the 75th eicemile 100% the Pertormance Ri Ms vest
During the year301,092 share options were granted pursuant to the company's Pertormance Rights and Option Plan tor nil oonsideration.
Options are exercisable at $2.20 each with 301.092 expiring on 30 September 2015.
PROP perturrnanoe rights vest over a period or 2.5 years and are subject to the ioliowing Milestone Conditions, and conﬂnuous servioe until
the vesting date,
Mllestone Condlllons Number or Pertomtance Rights
whlch in: vast
Complete construction 0' the Olaroz Project withln1|7% 01 the Development Budget as set out in the
Shareholders Agreement
Achieve satistaction of the completed tests tor the Olaroz Project, as speciﬁed In Bankan Agreements
wiﬂ'l Mizuho Banking Corporation 105.594
Achieve audited Net Protlt alter Tax at ASSM or more in the 2015 ﬁnancial ear 35.198
140.792
During the year 140.792 performance rights (PM) were granted pursuam to the company‘s Periormance Rights and Option Plan for nil
consideration Performance rights are exercisable at $0.00 each with 140.792 expiring on 30 September 2015‘
All options granted are over ordinary shares. which center a right at one ordinary share per option. The options hold no voting or dividend
rights. At the end of the ﬁnancial year there are 1091.864 optlons on Esue to key management personnel (2012: 650.000],
76


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 26: share Based Payment: (continued)
Movements in the year are:
201 :i 2012
Number or w°'°"'°‘ Number of we'gm“
options a. P a ‘0 “’“9‘ Options "'"9'
' ' Exercise Price Exercixo Price
No s No 3
Outstanding at the beginning or
the year 1.405.000 1.790 900.000 1.015
Granted 1.041.854 1.500 650.000 1.500
Forieited (405.000) 1.975 ~ -
Exercised t - (125.000 0375
Outstanding at year-end 2.041.004 1.604 1.485.000 1.796
Exercisable at year~end 757.500 1.702 635.000 2.030
At the date oi exercise. the weighted average share price was $1.613. The options outstanding at 30 June 2013 had a weighted average
exercise price oi $1.702 and a weighted average remaining contractual lite oi 3.15 years.
The weighted average iair value oi options granted during the year was $0.734 (2012: $0.759).
The iair value of performance righcs and options granted is deemed to represent the value oi the employee services received over the vesting
period. The iair value oi equity settled options is estimated at the date oi grant using a binomial option valuation model with the following .
Inputs:
Financial year at Inue 201 :i 2012 2012 2011
Number Issued 400.000 325.000 325.000 400.000
Fair value at grant date 3 0.85 $ 0.73 s 0.79 s 0.05
share price 0 1,65 3 1,46 s 1.40 s 2.17
Exercise price 5 1.50 s 150 s 1.50 s 2.03
Expected volatility 70.00% 75.00% 75.00% 75.00%
Option lite 5.0 years 4.0 years 0.0 years 4.0 years
Expected dividends nil nil nil nil
Risk-tree interest rate 2.00% 3.20% 3.20% 4.70%
Financial year oi lune 2013 201a 2013
Number Issued 200.000 140.792 301.002
Fair value at grant date $ 0.69 s 1.56 s 034
Share price 5 1.40 s 1.36 $ 1.00
Exercise price 3 1.50 $ - s 2.20
Expected volatility 05.00% 60.00% 00.00%
Option lite 5.0 years 2.5 years 2.5 years
Expected dividends nii nII nil
Risk-tree interest rate 2.70% 3.05% 3.00%
Hismrlcttl volatility has been the basis for determining expected share price volatility as it is assumed that this is indicative‘ oiiuiure
movements.
(0) Shares
During the previous year 0.135 shares were issued to third parties as equity-settled share based payments in the term at share grants for the
acquisition oi exploration assets. The weighted average value oitheee shares. determined by reierence to market price was $1.63. An amount
of $10,000 was included in capitalised exploration expenditure tor the previous year. in relation to this share based payment. .
NOTE 27: Financial ﬁiek Management
(a) Financial Risk Management
The group‘s ﬁnancial instruments comprise deposits with banks. ﬁnancial assets. amounts receivable and payable.
The main purpose ottnese ﬁnancial instruments is to provide finance for group operations.
77


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 27: Financial Risk Monagemom (oontinuedi
Risk Management Policies
A ﬁnance committee consisting or key management oi the group meet on a regular basis to analyse exposure and to evaluate treasury
management strategies in the context oi the most recent economic conditions and torecasts.
The Boaid oi Directors has overall responsibility tor the establishment and oversight oi the group's risk management iramework. Management
is responsible tor developing and monitoring the rek management policies and reports to the board.
Financial Risks
The main risks the economic entity is exposed to through its ﬁnancial instruments are interest rate risk. ioreign currency risk. credit risk and
liquidity risk, There is a minor exposure to price risk through the ﬁnancial assets. These risks are managed through monitoring etiorecast
cashiiows, interest rates. economic conditions and ensuring adequate iunds are available.
Equity price risk
The Group‘s listed equity securlﬁes are susceptible to market price risk arising ircrn uncertainties about iuture values at the investment
securities.
At the reporting data. the exposure to listed equity securities at lair value was $12,232, Ari increase or decrease oi 10% on the 45x market
index could have an impact oi approximately s! .229 on the proﬁt attributable to the Group, depending on whether the variance is signiﬁcant
or prolonged.
interest Rate Risk
The group's exposure to interest rate risk, which is the risk that a ﬁnancial instruments value will ﬁuctuate as a result oi reasonable possible
changes in market interest rates arises in relation to the group‘s bank balances.
This risk is managed through the use oi variable rate term deposits.
interest note Sensitivity
With all other variables held constant. the Gioup's proﬁt aner tax is attected through the impact on iieating rate borrowings as toilovvs:
2013 2012
Cash 9 cash equivalents 10,609,061 18,460.515
Receivables 23,915,522 264,655
34,524,603 16.765.176
Etiect on equity as a result ot a:
1% +/- reasonably possible change in interest 645,246 167,652
The assumed movement in basis points tor the interest rate sensiiivity analysis is based on the currently observable market environment.
Liquiditr Risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the group will not be able meet its ﬁnancial obligations as they tall due. This risk is managed by ensuring. to the
extent possible. that there is suiiicient liquidity to meet liabilities when due, without incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the
groups reputation.
The groups activities are iunded irorn equin sources and revenue.
Financial instrument composition and maturity analysis:
Veer ended 30 June 2013 Within 12 months 1 to s Venn ever a years Total
. cash 6. cash equivalents 10.609.051 . . 10,609,081
- receivables 5.766.956 16,604,619 17.711545 40.053117
» shares in listed entity - ~ 12.233 12.263
. payabies (9,534,959) (6,882,590) . (16,397,546)
6,541 ,076 9.742.030 17.725.775 34.308383
Veer ended :16 June 2o12 imtitin 12 months 1 to s Voars Over 5 years Total
a cash a cash equivalents 16.460515 - ~ 16,466,515
. receivables 284.655 2,926,963 » 3,213,616
a shares in listed entity . » 96.634 96.664
. payebies 16,033.898) » - (6033.593)
10,761,277 2,926,963 96.664 19.756674
73


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 27: Financial Rlek Management icomlnued)
Forelgn Currency Risk ’
The group is exposed to ﬂuctuations in the Argentinean Peso and United States Dollar arising from the purchase of goods and services in
currencies other than the group‘s measurement currency. The Group does not currently undertake any hedging of foreign currech items.
Foreign Currency Sensitivity
The following tables demonstrate the sensitivity to a reasonably possible change in the Argentinean Peso, US Dollar and Canadian Dollar
exchange rates. with all other variables held constant, The impact on the Group‘s profit alter tax and equity is due to changes In the lair value
of monetary assets and liabilities.
2013 2012
Argentine Peso cash ti. cash equivalents ~ 2,575,270
United States Dollar cash 8t cash equivalents 865 4.253.320
Canadian Dollar cash 8t cash equivalents ~ 3,700
865 7.162290
Eltect on prolit as a result or a:
10% +/- Reasonably possible change In Argentine Peso - 287.527
10% +/- Reasonably possible change in United States Dollar 87 428.332
10% +/- Reasonably possible change in Canadian Dollar - 370
Etiect on equity as a result eta:
10% +/- Reasonany possible change in Argentine Peso - 287.527
10% +/» Reasonably possible change In United States Dollar 87 428.392
10% +/- Reasonany possible change in Canadian Dollar - 370
Credit Risk
Credit risk is the risk that a counterpeny will not meet ix obligations under a ﬁnancial instrument or customer contract, leading to a ﬁnancial
loss. The Group Is exposed to credit risk from its operating actlvltles (primarily trade receivables) and from its ﬁnancing activities, Including
deposits with banks and ﬁnancial institutions, foreign emhange transactions and other ﬁnancial Instruments.
Credit risk is managed and reviewed regularly by the finance committee. It arises from exposures to certain llnancial instruments and
deposits with iinanciol institutions, The hnance committee monitors credit risk by actively assessing the rating quality and liquidity or counter
parties. Only banks and ﬁnancial institutions wﬂh an ‘A' rating are utilised.
The maximum exposure to credit risk, excluding the value of any collateral or other security. at balanoa date to recognised ﬁnancial assets, is
the carrying amount, net or any provisions tor impairment or those assets. its disclosed in the statement at iinancial position and notes to the
ﬁnancial statements.
The group does not have any material credit risk exposure to any single receivable or group or receivables under ﬁnancial instruments
entered into by the group, other than bank balances (Note 7) and the non current receivable (Note at.
Commodity Price Risk
The Company's prospects and share price will be inﬂuenced by the price obtained from tlme to time for the commodities targeted in its
exploration programs, namely lithium chemicals and potash and. to a lesser extent, other minerals. The prices of such commodities have
tluctuerteo widely In recent years and are attracted by rectors beyond the control or the Company including. but not limited to. the relationship
between global supply and demand tor such minerals which may be attected by, among other things, developmem and commercial
acceptance or lithium based applications and technologies and/or the introduction of new technologies that may not be based on lithium.
forward selling by producers, the cost of production. new mine developments and mine closures, advances in various production
technologies for such minerals and general global economic conditions, The prices at such commodnies are also affected by the outlook for
Inflation. interest rates. currency exchange rates and supply and demand Issues, Including those resulting from the current global ﬁnancial
crises. Also. maiur lithium producers may attempt to sell lithium products at artificially low prices in order to drive new entrants out of the
market. These rectors may have an adverse attect on the Company's exploration and any subsequent development and production activities.
as well as its ability to tund its future activities.
The Group is affected by the market forces and market price cycles of boron Chemical and mineral products. In relation to boron chemical
and mineral products the market price is determined largely by the market supply and demand balance. more are two signilicartt
manufacturers of boron chemicals and minerals in the global market so the supply side is relatively consolidated. Boron chemical and
mineral products are used in applications such as ceramic and glaﬁ manufacture, Insulan‘on and fenlliser menutacturs. Although there is a
cyclic profile in these markets they are considered steady growth markets linked strongly to urbanisation and lood production so volatility Is
not considered high. in terms or inputs, the major input is ore mined irom the companies own assets so input cost risk Is managed through
control of cost inputs such as diesel fuel. labour and gas via forward contracts. All sales contracts are agreed in USD or USD equivalent
prices and forward contracts are agreed tor periods or $12 months.
79


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 21: Financial Rllk Management (continued)
Trading Commodity Price Sensitivity
The iollowing mble shows the 916901 at price changes in boron chemciais.
Eitect on [aromas a result 01 a: 2013 2012
10% +/- Reasonably possible change in Boron chemlcrrls 1.765.453 -
Capital management
Capital includes equity alirlbulable to the equity holders oi the Parem.
The primary objective oi the Group's capital management ls to ensure that it maintains a strong credit rating and healthy capital ratios to
support its business and maximise the shareholder's Value.
The Group manages its capital stmcture and makes adiuatmenia to it in light of changes in economic conditions. To maintain or adjust the
capital structure. tile Group may return capital to shareholders or issue new shares
No changes were made in lire objectives. policia or processes for managing capital during the years ended 30 June 2013 and 2012.
Trade and other payables (Note 15) 1 1.488.655 6.093.893
Less: cash and shomerm deposits (Note 7) 10.609.081 16.480515
Net debt 879.584 (10.446.622)
Fully paid ordinary shares (Note 19) 101 .712.005 76.029.387
Equity 184.192.372 58.079.470
Total capital 285904377 134.108.857
capital and net debt 286.783.981 123562.235
(a) Not ralr Value.
No ﬁnancial assets or liabilities are readily traded on organised markets in a standardised iorm. other than available to! sale ﬁnancial assets .
The aggregate net lair values and carrying amounts at ﬁnancial assets and Ilabililies are disclosed in the statement at ﬁnancial position and
notes to the ﬁnancial statements. Fair values are materially in line with carrying values. The available ior sale assets comprise listed
Investments ior which a level 1 fair value hierarchy has been applied (quoted price in an aciive market),
(1:) Flnancill Atutl
The Group's ﬁnancial instruments consist mainly oi deposits with banks, local money market instruments, short-term investments, accounts
receivable and payable. loans to and irorn subsidiaries, bills. leases, preference shares and derivatives.
The totals for each category at ﬁnancial instruments, measured In accordance with M35 139 as detailed in the accounting policies to these
ﬁnancial statements, are S iollows:
Note Consonant-d Group
Financial mots
Cash and cash equivalents 7 10,609,051 16.480515
Flnanclal assets at amorﬁssd cost:
- current trade and other receivables 8 5.766.953 234.655
- non-current tnade and olher receivables 8 25,602,735 2.923.963
Available-tor-sals ﬁnancial assets:
- at fair value:
- listed investments 11 12.233 96,634
Total ﬁnancial nut: 42,991,002 19.790.767
Financial Ilablllllu
Financial liabilities at amonised cost:
— current trade and other payables 15 5.307.738 3.121.183
— non~current trade and other payablss 15 a.leo.927 -
Tot-l ilmnclnl Illbllltlea 11.483.665 6.121.136
80


for the year ended 30 June 2013
MovEuﬁ-ummlopovunu
1m 5mm“ “My imam... m man MAW mew» pymm u an Wm.“ mmammm cum“. mm. .m ... mm mm mew Ilwolnlumas 1m
opmlingamax mint
m. «amazemth m. mm. “mm. mg OWN: m. m. 01m: m. sm. mm s..." ...n aw
.n «......ang Dummy "mm, an army m m mm .. rm \nlommmn-nd Wmcmnmm «my. my ....» mmailabealc mm mm 1mm mm am». am
(csoy 5mm...“ mm MAMA... decbiou my And n .mp0...“ by m-BoudolDIImm Io .uem remum ...a u.u.m»mmm.m «my mm .515": .m mm
m. Mm mg .... mm. 109mm: Mow Segment Datum-mi: mm ......1 an lhopu'oml-nea mm puma. Quad m em. mm mum. .... mum mm ..V- «.....Vi.‘
“mm WWW. mvﬂv, mm, ploduwonvolumzomd can my.
sum-mm...”
mnnm 0mm.“ SmlhAka-IIS-l-n Dom Ellmlmllon- mm,

mmnmm. “mam”... Vuuvmodao‘lum “-..—“mu... mummy“... V-u-nmaolunc

2m: 2012 m 2012 201: 2012 m m 201: m m 2012
REVENUE I I S t S 5 S S 3 l l I
WWW.“ “my 1.535.321 . . 39.097 ms valuzzl . . . mews ..mm
lm-uogmmvmm «15,301 «9.056 . V - A A A “35.3911 (mm) - -
1...”.mm.mw 1.905423 1315.5“ . A 30997 67.1w .s.m.2.. . mm mm 20.322925 1,902.9“
nzsuus
Immuncomn 1.053.022 1399.556 . A A . . . “mm mm mm. mama
m.“me (2, um; 191,125) (mass; 9.522., mm. (mm A use?! «mesa «mes. (mm
9.9mm;
nmmnﬂm (29.092) {mey (many) (3.439] (37.715) [NMKI (502,601) v - - (120,67!) (125.2791
5"... m M a ...
“cme V . (5:45.558) A . . . . . . (294.535) A
“madam” mme V . A A A V . . V mama .
prbnsexoenu $22,709] (357321) A A - A A A - - (sans) («$321)
www.mps
ummum 1mm ‘ u

(295.60.) ~ - A ~ - - - - - 1295,5414! A
umm wan sumac wst 257,090 mum (29.555) (20,12!) we“ . A . 1502232 mm
Sum-m plum/{knit “1557,76! hosting 511299 ENE guns 1,007,054 1752.312 - ~ ~ 85,5409“ (2334,5091
Assn:
summm 5w7uu 12.152599 mmmos 2:29.025 29.531,m 2am.” meme . “9.25mi mum mum «552,075
“mums
swammme. “mm mm: . 22mm 252N916 25mm 39.9mm V 391nm mm «0.222.251 muss
ma. nmunu
\nm‘m-mmm Isn‘zagm muses»
Wm, _ ‘ . _ . . . . mam .
c-piulEkpendnum 0.536253) (7.773.660 (“197.qu (7.70.2261 1667.185) (5.159.300) V . V V 0.60.575} "5.300.153

a1


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE 25: Segment Reporting (continued)
Segment accounting policies
During the period the reponable segments or the Group changed primarily as a result or the acquisition or Borax (previously there was
one reportable eagmant being mineral exploration). Heter Note 15. Segment accounting policies are conststent with those adopted in the
annual ﬁnancial statements at the Group.
ﬁeoollcllllllon ol prom 2013 2012
Segment prom 95.549.044 (2.994.535)
Group protlt 95.549.044 2.994.588)
Reconciliation or some
Segment operating assets 261595.821 121 £96,765
Deferred tax asses 2.079.682 -
Inter-Segment loans (ellmlnatlons) (39,127,948) (47.555.749)
Inter-segment Investments (eliminations) (10,117,117) (9.387.960)
Group operating assets 214,430,440 64.352.076
Heeoncllletlon or llobllitiee
Segment operating liabilities 66.492250 53.677935
Deferred tax liabilities 2.857.977 -
Inter-Segment loans (eliminations) (39.127346) 147.556.7413)
Group operating llablliﬂes 30.222251 6.!21.186
Geogrlphlc inionnetion
Segment Revenue
Australia 1.208.834 1.535.827
Argentina 19,114,291 67.119
Total revenue 20,322,925 1.602.946
Segemenraneta
Australia 171 593.793 16.374.727
Argentlna 42,838,847 47.977349
Total assets 214.430.1340 64.352076
Segement thlllties
Australia 4.019.990 5.454.833
Argentina 26.202291 $6.353
Total liabilities 30,222.28! 6.121.186
NOTE :9: Subwquent Events
Subsequent to years end, no and Orocobre have been working together with Mizuho corporate Bank and JOGMEC to make mlnor
amendments to the iinanoe documents tor the Olaroz Project so they comply with cenaln detailed aspects oi Argentine foreign currency
regulations regarding accounts management so as to allow the project debt repayments to be made directly trom export proceeds in the
iuture. The revised documentation has been ﬁnalised and approved ln principal by all parties. it is nntlclpated that the amended inanoe
documents wlll be executed shortly with Initial loan drawdown to occur in November 2013.
In the interim. and to ensure that the Olaroz project constructan remained on schedule 'I'I'C arranged for Sumltomo Mitsui Bank to
provide standby letters or credit, in order for SDJ SA to secure local Argentinian runding or US$50m equivalent. This iunding has allowed
the prefect construction to oonﬁnue on schedule and wlll be repaid out of the proceeds oi the initial drawdown iron! the Mizuho
Corporate Bank Facility.
NOTE 30: Pan!!! Emlty Information
The iollowlng lniotmation relates to the parent entity. Orooobre Limited at 30 June 2013. This iniomiation has been prepared in
acoordanoe with Accounting Standards using consistent acocunting policies as presented in Note 1, The inrormetion is extracted iront
the books and records ottrte parent.
82


NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
for the year ended 30 June 2013
NOTE :0: Parent Emily Information (continued)
2013 2|" 2
S 3
Current assets 6.537.014 16,217,586
Non-current assets 187.441 .447 55,914,683
Total amt: 193,973,461 72.132569
Current liabilities 360.637 5.454.833
Non-current liabilities » -
Total liabilities 360.637 5.454.833
Contributed equity 101 ,735.478 78.029367
Reserves 1 344.180 610.070
Accumulated losses 90.517.181 9.96t ,721
Total equity 196396.839 65.577.786
From/(loss) tor the year 100,778,901 (1.093.122)
Other comprehensive income 211.402 172.473
Total comprehensive proﬁt/(loss) lor the year 100.990.1508 1.265.595
Orooobre Limited has entered into a guarantee. in the current ﬁnancial year. in relation to a loan for its subsidiary. Borax SrA, (see Note
24). The company had no contingent liabilities at year end. As set out in Note 23 the Company has an operating lease Commitment for
3392.653 (20l2: 3351.216).
NOTE 31: controlled Entities
Sales de Jujuy SA. incorporated in Argentina. The parent entity holds 665% at the ordinary shares ct the entity. The company was
incorporated in November 2006 and undertakes exploration activity in Argentina. The company changed its name lrom Orocobre SA in
20m. During the period the Group executed an agreement wim Toyota Tsusho Corporation ("i‘l’C'l for a joint venture to develop the
Olaroz lithium project located in the Province oi Jujuy. northern Argentina Subsequent to the transaction the Olaroz lithium project IS
owned 66.5% by the Group. 250% by TTC and 85% by Jujuy Energia y Mineria Socledad del Estado ('JEMSE') (the mining investment
company owned by the provincial Government of Jujuy. Argentina).
Under the terms of a Joint Venture Agreement between WC and the company, the Olarox lithium project will be operamd as an
incorporated joint venture through a Singaporean holding company. Sales de Jujuy Pte Ltd. Both 'l'rc and the company will contribute
project equity or US$823 million, equating to approximatst 30% or maximum project tunding ii the project ﬁnancing iacllity is iuliy
drown. Sales do Jujuy Pte Ltd is owned 72.68% by the company and 27.32% by Toyota Lithium PTE Ltd a Singaporean registered
company 100% owned py no. The board or the holding company will be responsible tor the Project's delivery.
Existing management in the Argentine operating company. Sales de Jujuy 3A.. will operate the Dioroz Project according to set
authorization limits and will report to the Chairman 0' the joint venture company The company has entered into a service arrangement
with Sales de Jujuy SrAr Since lst November 2012 being the creation of the joint venture company between the Company and 170. the
Company has recognised its interest in the joint venture as an equity aoocuniod Investment.
South American Solar Minerals Pty Ltd. incorporated in Australia. The parent entity holds 85% ot the ordinary shares of the entity, The
company was incorporated and acquired In November 2005 and undertakes exploration activity in Argentina.
South American Saiar SA. incorporated in Argentina. South American Solar Minerals Pty Ltd holds 100% at the ordinary Shams Ottt'te
entity. The company was incorporated and acquired in December 2008 and undertakes exploration activity in Argentina.
During the financial year two wholly owned subsidiary companies (Borax Argentina Holding No 1 Pty Ltd at Eicrax Argentina Holding No 2
Ply Ltd)mre inoorporated in Australia. These companies were established as vehicles to hold investments at OIOCDbie in Borax
Argentina SA. On 21 August 2012the Group purchased 100% or the Argentine boron minerals and reﬁned chemicals producer. Borax
Argentina SVA. (Borax). from Rio Tinto PLC entities. The Group purchased Borax as it provides a well established regional operating
preeenoe. 8. experience and management skills which will compliment existing operations In Argenﬂna. The consideration paid tor the
sale was US$5.5m and usm .om payable for 2 years on each anniversary or the acquisition, and a inai payment ct $629k on the third
anniversary oi the acquisition.
NOTE 32: Company Details
The registered olﬂce and principal place at business is: Level 1. 349 Coronation Drive Milton. Queensland. 4034. Australia.
33


Crocobre Limited .
Directors Declaration

Directors' Declaration

In accordance with a resolution of the directors of Orocobre Limited, | state that:

1. In the opinion of the directors:

(a) the financial statements and notes 0' Orocobre Limited for the financial
year ended 30 June 2013 are in accordance with the Ca/poraflbnsActzom, including:
(i) giving a true and fair view of the consolidated entity's financial position as at 30 June
2013 and of its performance for the year ended on that date: and
(ii) complying with Accounting Standards and the Corporations Regulations 2001;

(b) the financial statements and notes also comply with International Financial Reponing
Standards as disclosed in Note 1: and

(c) there are reasonable grounds to believe that the Company will be able to pay its debts as
and when they become due and payable.

2. This declaration has been made after receiving the declarations required to be made to the directors by the
chief executive officer and chief financial officer in accordance with section 295A of the Corporations/lot
2001 for the ﬁnancial year ended 30 June 2013.

a o «9.,  /

%‘ r /7

v

James D Calaway Richard P Seville

Chairman Managing Director

Dated this: 80th day of September 201 a

84


EY mm: ,m-z r..- on r m; w:
III gag», Sheet rat at r um mu
iimi1 mo launmstnn --,.-,»~«.m

“Idlmnkm, -;w:- is. warm» om um

wrung world

Independent auditor's report to the members of Orocobre Limited

Report on the financial report

We have audited the arsomp anying tinantial report oi Orotobre leled, whith comprises the
(ontolidated statement oi iinantial position as at 30 June2013, the consolidated statement oi
comprehensive Into me, the consolidated statement or (hanges in equity and the (onsolidaled statement
oi sash ilows torthe yearthen ended, notes tom prising a summary oi slgnltisant arrountlng polities and
other explanatory iniorrn atlon, and the dirertors' detlaration oi the consolidated entity comprising the
(ompany and the entities it (onlrolled at the year's end orirom timeto time during the tin anrial year.
Directors ’responsibiiity for the ﬁnancial report

The directors oithe torn pany are responsible ior the preparation oi the iinaneial report that gives a true
and iairview h attordantewith Australian hero untlng Standards and the Corporationsnd 2001 and ior
surh internal rontrols as the directors determine are neeessarv to enable the preparation oi the linantial
report that is iree irom materiairnlsstatem ent, whether due to iraud or errors In Note 1, the direttors
also state, Ill arcorda nre with Arson nting Standard on $3 101 Presentation orFInanciatStatemenrsg that
the tin ant iai statements somply with international Financial Reporting Standards.

Auditor ‘s responsibility

our responsibility is to express an opinion on the iinanrial report based on our audit We ton dusted our
audit in aeeordancewith Australian Auditing Standards. Those standards require that we com plywith
relevant ethital requirements relating to audit engagements and plan and periorm the audit to obtain
reasonable assurante about whether the iinantial report is tree trom material misstatement

an audit involves periorming protedures to obtain auoit evidente about the amounts and disrlosures in
the linanzial report. The proted ures seierted depend on the auditor's judgement, insluding the
assessment oi the risks ol material misstatement oi the ilnantial report, whether due to iraud or errors In
making those risk assessments, the auditor (onsiders internal (ontrols relevant to the entity's
preparation and lair presentation oi the iinantial report In orderto design audit procedures that are
appropriate in the (irtumslanr es, but not torthe purpose oi expressing an opinion on the etiettiveness oi
the entity‘s internal controls An audit also inrludes evaluatingthe appropriateness oi acrounting policies
used andthe reasonableness oi attounting estimates made by the direttors, as well as evaluating the
overall presentation oi the iinaneial reports
We believe that the audit evidente we have obtained is sutiicient and appropriate to provide a basis tor
our audit opinion,
Independence
In sonducting our audit we have toniplied win the indepe ndente requirements oi the Corporations Act
2001. We have given to the dirertors otthe tornpany a written Auditor’s Indepe ndense Deriaratlon, a
topy oiwhitn is inrluded in the direttors’report.
t M H.113: L"Li'.‘.".’7‘.:'23,....,.u. mm w.“

85


mt
Sigmund"
Opinion
In our opinion:
at the iinantial report oi Orocnbre Limited Is In attorda nte with the torporation: Ad 2001,
littlll ding:
i givinq a true and fair view oi the (nnsolidated entity's financial position as at 30 June 2013
and of Its perinnnante iorthe year ended on that date; and
ii ( om ptyin 9 w it h australlan Arcounting Sta ndards a nd the Corporation: Regulation! 2001;
and
b. the finanrlai report also (omplies wth internationai Financial Reporting Standard: as disclosed in
Note 1
Report an the remuneration report
We have audited the Remuneration Report intlu ded in the dirertors' report forthe year end ed 30 June
2013. The direttorx otthe (ompany are responsible torthe preparation and presentation oi the
Remuneration Report in accordance with settle" 300A oi the CorporationsAct 2001‘ Our responsibility is
tn express an oplnion on the Remuneration Report, based on ouraudtt tondurted in arrordante with
Australian Auditing Standards
Opinion
In our opinion, the Remuneration Report oi Oroco bre Limited iorthe year end ed 30June 2013, tomplies
win settlon 300a oi th e Corporations Ad2001.
(qua/t '4 79.5?
Ernst & Voung
Mark Hayward
Partner
Brisbane
30 Septem her2013
.m...,...a..n...c.-t...a
t... mm nanny—uni a.-.“ 2--.“-..
86


q i u I; p c a B R E
ASX ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
87


Orooobre Limited
ASX Additional Information
Following is additional information required by the Australian Securities Exchange Limited and not disclosed
elsewhere in this report,
1. Shareholding:
The following information is provided as at 17 September, 2013.
Distribution of Shareholders
Category Number Number of
(Size of Holding) Holders
1 — 1.000 964
1,001 - 5,000 1486
5,001 - 10,000 596
10,001 » 100,000 621
100.001 - and over 97
The number of shareholdings held in less than marketable parcels is 151,
Twenty Largest Holders - Ordinary Shares
96 of Total
Shareholder Name No. 01 Shares Held Ca - ital
1 HSBC Custody Nominees 11,018,270 9.4%
2 National Nominees Limited 9,582,707 8.1%
3 Lithium Investors LLC 8,574,000 7.3%
4 Canadian Register 5,262,177 7.0%
5 J P Morgan Nominees Australia 6,494,795 5.5%
6 Richard Seville & Associates 4,926,500 4.2%
7 Fairground Pty Ltd / Mr Neil Stuart 4,720,811 40%
Mr Dennis Grenville Hinton & Mrs Roslyn Susanna
8 Hinton 3,856,462 3.3%
9 JP Morgan Nominees Australia (Cash Inc A/c) 3,737,443 3.2%
10 Citieorp Nominees Pty Limited 2,356,439 2.0%
Mr Paul Anthony Crawford & Mrs Robyn Lynelle
11 Crawlord 2,016,199 1.7%
12 Mr Robert Bruce Woodland & Mrs Erika Woodland 1,667,611 1.4%
13 Mr John Gordon Park 8. Mrs Shirley Patricia Park 1,515,000 1.3%
14 HSBC Custody Nominees GSCO ECA 1,464,134 1.2%
15 Merrill Lynch (Australia) 1,442,500 1.2%
HSBC Custody Nominees <Nt~Comanth Super
16 Corp A/C> 1 ,136,247 1.0%
17 BNP Paribas Noms Pty Ltd 1,081,321 0.9%
Citicorp Nominees Pty Limited <Colonial First
18 State lnv A/C> 1,012,199 0.9%
19 UBS Nominees Pty Ltd 760,516 0.6%
RBC Investor Services Australia Nominees Pty
20 Limited 716,664 0.6%
Total To 20 76,323.995
88


V Orocobre Limited
ASX Additional Information
Following are substantial shareholders listed in the company‘s register on 17 September, 2013,
% of Total
Shareholder Name No. of shares Held Ca ital
1 HSBC Custody Nominees 11,018,270 9.4%
2 National Nominees Limited 9,582,707 8.1%
3 Lithium Investors LLC 8,574,000 7.3%
4 Canadian Register 8,262,177 70%
5 J P Mo an Nominees Australia 6,494,795 5.5%
The following securities were on issue as at 17 September, 2013.
IMPE—
Ordinar (ORE)
400,000 ASX Code OREAK — Options exercisable at $2.03 on or before 30
June 2015
650,000 ASX Code OREAI — Options exercisable at $1 .50 on or before 30
November 2016
350,000 ASX Code OREAO — Options exercisable at $1.50 on or belore 3
Jul 2017
301,092 ASX Code to be allocated — Options exercisable at $2.20. 30 days
after the later of 31 August 2015 or the date of release of the
Coman 's financial results for the 2014/2015tinancial ear
140,792 ASX Code to be allocated — Periorrnance Rights exercisable at
$000. 30 days after the later of 31 August 2015 or the date of
release of the Company’s financial results for the 2014/2015
iinancial ear
200.000 Otions exercisable at $1.50 on or betore 31 Ma 2018
The following unlisted options have lapsed in accordance with the terms of their grant.
. Exercise No. of
Expr Date
CREAM 30 June, 2015 $2.03 435.000
OREAO 31 Jul .2017 $1.50 50.000
Voting Rights:
Each ordinary share is entitled to one vote when a poll is called, otherwise each member present at a
meeting has one vote on a show of hands.
There are no voting rights attached to the Options, but voting rights as detailed above will attach to the
ordinary shares issued when the Options are exercised.
2. Registers of securities are held at the iollowing addresses:
Boardroom Pty Limited Equity Financial Trust Company
Level 7 200 University Avenue
207 Kent Street Suite 400
Sydney NSW 2000 Toronto ON M5H4H1
Australia Canada
89


Orocobre Limited
ASX Additional Information
3. Stock Exchange Usting
Quotation has been granted lor all the ordinary shares of the company on all Member Exchanges of the
Australian Stock Exchange Limited. other than those classified as restricted securities and detailed below.
4. Restricted Securities
The company currently has no restricted securities:
5. Use of Cash and Convertible Assets
During the period from admisslon to the official list of the Australian Stock Exchange to 30 June 2013, the
company has used cash and assets readily convertible to cash In a manner oonslstent with Its business
activitles. The company is involved In mineral exploration and development in Argentina.
90


Orocobre Limited
ASX Additional Information
Schedule ofTanements
m
—
—-m
—
—-u
—.u
—m
—-m
—-m
—-u
_
—
—
—
—mm,-
—m
_
—mw
—.m
—
—
_m
—m
—
—mm-
—mw
—
—
—
_
—
—
—
—
_
_————
m
—
_
—
—
—-ﬁl
91


Orooobre Limited
ASX Additional Information

968 R 2008 703.44 85% Aremina
—m
—
_
—
—
—
—
_
—
_
—
—
—
—
—
_————
—-n—

Ju'u 1432-1996 Arentina
—
—-M!
—
_-m
—
—
—
—
—
—
—m
—
—m
_-El
_-m
——_—_
—-—

Sana 21063 2998. 34 A! entina
—m
—
_
—m
_-m
_m
—
—m

_ -
92


Orocobre Limited
ASX Additional Information
21479 266289 55% Arenlina
—
_m
—
—
_
—-!!I
—
_
—-_-ﬂ
—
—
—
—
_
—
—-m
—-za
—m--m
_-m
—-_-m
—
—
—
—
—-m
—-E!
—-m
—l-
—
_
—
—
_
—.ﬂ
—
_
_
—
—
_-5
—-E!
—
—
—
93


Orocobre Limited
ASX Additional Information
19746 2647797 35% Aremina
— 2400.09
— 19707 2002.09
_ 19700 2007,00
_ 1120.39
—-_
_
_-m-m
_-El
—-_—m
—m--m
_-El
—“
—
—
—-_
—
—
—-&l
——
01001111000000 ———_
— 1190 m
_—=a 1007°
_ 10010 mi: 100%
— 1107 100%
— 1109 100%
—-E!
711.0010 .sm —__—
— 1271 m 100%
100 % (Galaxy
Lithium has an
usufruci on the
1215 500 brinss Arentina
100 % (Galaxy
Lithium has an
usuiruct on the
1495 200 brines Arentina
— 7772 100%
100 % (Galaxy
Lithium has an
usuiruct on the
800 brines Arentina
— 100%
—.m
_
100 % (Galaxy
Liihium has an
usuiruct on the
13843 Diana 100 brines Arentina
— wees 1110110 100% eauax
94


Orocobre Limited
ASX Additional Information
Lithium has an
usufruct on the
brines)
0100111100 . Sana —_——
100% (Potasio y
Litio de Argentina
SA has an
usufruct on the
11691 2700 brines Arentina
s1 es-Salta —-——
— 0507 100%
_ 1 1000
—m
_ 0009
— 14001 _ 100%
_ 14121 100%
—m 100%
1:01.1010500110 __——
Lithee Inc (Borax
has usuiruct over
the boretes Arentina
Lithea Inc (Borax
has usufruct over
the borates Ar entina
Lithea Inc (Borax
has usuiruct over
200 the borates Ar entina
Lithea Inc (Borax
has usuiruct over
13171 200 the borates Arentina
Lithee Inc (Borax
has usuiruct over
13172 the borates Ar entina
Ratones . Sam! ————
Potasio y Litio
Argentina SA, (
Borax has usuiruot
62066 500 over the boretes Ar entina
Potasio y Litio
Argentina S.A. (
Borax has usufruct
3843 over the borates Ar entina
Porvenir (Cauchari)
— Salts
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
394 300 brines Arentine
100% (Exer has the
usulrum over the
336 brines Ar entina
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
347 100 brines Ar entina
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
354 brines Ar entina
100% (Exar has the
340 100 usuiruct over the Ar entina
95


Orooobre Limited
ASX Additional Information
brines)
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
444 100 brines Ar entina
100% (Exar hes the
usufruct over the
353 brines Arentina
100% (Exar has the
usutruct over the
350 100 brines Arentina
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
brines Arentina
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
345 100 brines Ar entina
100% (Exar has the
usutruct over the
344 brines Ar entina
100% (Exar hes the
usufruct over the
343 brines Arentt'na
100% (Exer has the
usutruct over the
852 brines Arentina
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
351 100 brines Ar entina
100% (Exer has the
usutruct over the
365 100 brines Ar 5 entina
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
122 100 brines Arentine
100% (Exar has the
usuiruct over the
221 brine: Arentina
100% (Exar has the
usulruct over the
190 100 brines Ar entina
100% (Exar has the
ueufruct over the
1 16 100 brines Ar entina
100% (Exer has the
usulruct over the
117 300 brines Ar entina
100% (Exar has the
usutruet over the
389 brines Arentina
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
306 24 brlnes Ar entina
100% (Exar has the
ueutruct over the
402 brines Ar - entine
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
195 brines Arentina
100% (Exer has the
ueufruct over the
220 brines Ar entine
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
259 100 brines Ar entina
96


Orocobre Limited
ASX Additional Information
100% (Exar has the
usutruct over the
43 100 brines Arentine
100% (Exar has the
usufmct over the
341 brines Ar entina
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
42 100 brinee Ar - entina
100% (Exar has the
usulruct over the
438 100 brines Ar entina
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
160 brines Alentina
100% (Exar has the
usufruct over the
378 brlnes Ar entlna
100% (Exer has the
usufruct over the
3390 brines Ar 5 entina
100% (Exar has the
ueufruct over the
377-0 100 brines Ar entina
100% (Exer has the
usufruct over the
191 »R 100 brines Arentina
97


Orocobre Limited
Technical Information, Competent Persons’ and Qualified Persons’ Statements
Technical Information, Competent Persons' and Qualifies Persons’ Statements
The resource estimation of the Salar de Olaroz stated in this report was undertaken by John Houston who is
a Chartered Geologist and a Fellow of the Geological Society of London. John Houston has sufficient relevant
experience to qualify as a competent person as defined in the 2004 edition of the Australasian Code for
Reporting of Exploration Results. Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves. He is also a "Qualified Person" as
defined by Canadian Securities Administrators’ National Instrument 43-101(”N| 43-101").
The Feasibility Study on the Olaroz project was prepared by Mr, Houston (Consulting Processing Engineer)
and Peter Ehren (Consulting Processing Engineer), together with Sinclair Knight Merz and the Orocobre
technical group. Mr. Houston and Mr. Gunn prepared the technical report entitled “Technical Report 7 Salar
de Olaroz Lithium-Potash Project, Argentina" dated May 30, 2011 (the "Olarcz Report") under NI 43-101 in
respect of the Feasibility Study. and each of Messrs, Houston and Gunn was a Qualified Person under NI 43-
101, and independent of the company. at the date such report was prepared. . Mr Peter Ehren is a Member of
the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy and Chartered Professional and is a consulting mineral
processing engineer with significant experience in lithium brine deposits Mr Gunn is a Member of the
Australian Insititute of Mining and Metallurgy and is consulting mineral processing engineer with
approximately forty years experience.
The technical information relating to Salinas Grandes and Cauchari has been prepared by Murray Brooker in
conjunction with Mr Peter Ehren regarding Salinas Grandes, Murray Brooker is a geologist and
hydrogeologist and is a Member of the Australian Institute of Geoscientists. Murray has sufficient relevant
experience to qualify as a competent person as defined in the 2004 edition of the Australasian Code for
Reporting of Exploration Results. Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves. He is also a “Qualified Person" as
defined in NI 43-101. Mr Peter Ehren is a Member of the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy and
Chartered Professional and is a consulting mineral processing engineer with significant experience in lithium
brine deposits. He has acted as a consultant on the company’s Olarcz and Cauchari lithium projects as well
as consulting extensively for other clients. Mr Ehren is responsible for the mineral processing and
metallurgical testing statements in section 15 of the Technical Report on the Salinas Grandes Lithium Project
effective April 16‘“ 2012. This report was reviewed and updated to include a statement of Peter Ehren’s
responsibilities on August 12'" 2013 as a result of a review by the Ontario Securities Commission and refiled
on wwwsedarrcom with an accompanying media release over the Canadian disclosure network on August
23" 2013. Mr Ehren is also a “Qualified Person” as defined in NI43-101.
The Company confirms that it is not aware of any new information or data that materially affects the
information included in the references above and that all material assumptions and technical parameters
underpinning the resource estimates continue to apply and have not materially changed. The Company also
confirms that the form and context in which the Competent Person’s findings are presented have not been
materially modified.
Additional information relating to the Company’s projects is available on the Company’s website.
Caution Regarding Forward — Looking Information
This report contains "forward-looking information" within the meaning of applicable securities legislation.
Forward-looking information may include, but is not limited to. the results of the Olaroz feasibility study, the
estimation and realization of mineral resources at the Company's projects, the viability. recoverability and
processing of such resources, costs and timing of development of the Olaroz project, the forecasts relating to
the lithium and potash markets provided by Roskill in the Olaroz feasibility study. timing and receipt of
approvals for the Company‘s projects. consents and permits under applicable legislation, adequacy of
financial resources. production and other milestones for the Olaroz project. the Olaroz project’s future
financial and operating performance including production, rates of return. operating costs, capital costs and
cash flows, , potential operating synergies between the Salinas Grandes project and the Olaroz project, and
other matters related to the development of the Olaroz project and the Salinas Grandes project.
Forward-looking information is subjea to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may
cause actual results to be materially different from those expressed or implied by such forward»looking
information, including but not limited to the risk that further funding may be required. but unavailable. for the
ongoing development of the Company’s projects; changes in government regulations, policies or legislation;
fluctuations or decreases in commodity prices; the possibility that required permits or approvals may not be
obtained; uncertainty in the estimation, economic viability. recoverability and processing of mineral resources;
general risks associated with the feasibility of the Company's projects; risks associated with construction and
development of the Olaroz project; unexpected capital or operating cost increases; and the uncertainty of
meeting anticipated program milestones at the Company’s projects,
98


Orocobre Limited
Technical Information, Competent Persons‘ and Qualified Persons’ Statements
(continued)
The Company believes that the assumptions and expectations reflected in such forward-looking information
are reasonable. Assumptions have been made regarding, among other things: the Company's ability to carry
on its exploration and development activities, the timely receipt oi required approvals, the prices of lithium and
potash, the ability oi the Company to operate in a sale. efficient and eflsctlve manner and the ability ot the
Company to obtain financing as and when required and on reasonable terms. Readers are cautioned that the
foregoing list Is not exhaustive of all factors and assumptions which may have been used.
There can be no assurance that forward-looking information will prove to be accurate, as actual results and
future events could differ materially from those anticipated in such information Accordingly, readers should
not place undue reliance on toward-looking information. The Company does not undertake to update any
forward-looking information, except in accordance with applicable securities laws.

99

