
S-3 1 a2211169zs-3.htm S-3
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on September 28, 2012
Registration No. 333-
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM S-3
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Uranium Resources, Inc.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction
of incorporation or
organization)
75-2212772
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification Number)
Uranium Resources, Inc.
405 State Highway Bypass 121,
Building A, Suite 110
Lewisville, Texas 75067
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant's principal executive offices)
Thomas H. Ehrlich
Chief Financial Officer
Uranium Resources, Inc.
405 State Highway Bypass 121,
Building A, Suite 110
Lewisville, Texas 75067
(972) 219-3330
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies to:
Alfred C. Chidester
Brent M. Westrop
Baker & Hostetler LLP
303 East 17th Avenue Suite 1100
Denver, Colorado 80203
(303) 764-4091
From time to time after the effective date of this Registration Statement, as determined by the stockholders.
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public:
If the only securities being registered on this Form are being offered pursuant to dividend or interest reinvestment plans, please check the
following box.    o
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415 under the
Securities Act of 1933, other than securities offered only in connection with dividend or interest reinvestment plans, check the following box.    ý
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, please check the following
box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.    o
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the
Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.    o
If this Form is a registration statement pursuant to General Instruction I.D. or a post-effective amendment thereto that shall become effective
upon filing with the Commission pursuant to Rule 462(e) under the Securities Act, check the following box.    o
If this Form is a post-effective amendment to a registration statement filed pursuant to General Instruction I.D. filed to register additional
securities or additional classes of securities pursuant to Rule 413(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box.    o
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting
company. See the definitions of "large accelerated filer," "accelerated filer" and "smaller reporting company" in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
(Check one):
Large accelerated filer o
Accelerated filer ý
Non-accelerated filer o
(Do not check if a
smaller reporting company)
Smaller reporting company o
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each Class of Securities
to be Registered
Common Stock, par value $0.001 per share
(1)
Amount to be
Registered
Share(1)
53,114,307
$0.51
Proposed Maximum
Offering Price Per
Proposed Maximum
Aggregate Offering
Amount of
Price(1)
Registration Fee
$27,088,297
$3,104.32
Estimated in accordance with Rule 457(c) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, solely for the purpose of computing the amount of
the registration fee, based on the average of the high and low sales prices of the Registrant's Common Stock on the NASDAQ Capital
Market on September 26, 2012.
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its effective date
until the Registrant shall file a further amendment that specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective
in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act, as amended, or until this Registration Statement shall become effective on such date
as the Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. The stockholders identified in this
prospectus may not sell these securities until the registration statement filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission is effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is not
soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any state where the offer or sale is not permitted.
Subject to completion, dated September 28, 2012
PROSPECTUS
53,114,307 Shares of Common Stock
Uranium Resources, Inc.
This prospectus relates to shares of our common stock that will be sold from time to time by the selling
stockholders named in this prospectus. The selling stockholders acquired these shares from us in private placements
completed on March 9, 2012, August 31, 2012 and September 5, 2012.
All of the proceeds from the sale of the shares covered by this prospectus will be received by the selling
stockholders. We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of those shares.
Our common stock is currently traded on the NASDAQ Capital Market under the symbol "URRE." On
September 26, 2012, the last reported sales price for our common stock on the NASDAQ Capital Market was $0.50
per share.
See "Risk Factors" beginning on page 2 of this prospectus for factors you should
consider before buying shares of our common stock.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved or
disapproved of these securities, or passed upon the adequacy or accuracy of this prospectus. Any
representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is                , 2012.
DISCLOSURE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus and the documents we have incorporated by reference contain forward-looking statements
within the meaning of the federal securities laws. Forward-looking statements convey our current expectations or
forecasts of future events. We intend such forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for
forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
Forward-looking statements are generally identifiable by use of the words "may," "could," "should," "would,"
"estimate," "project," "believe," "intend," "plan," "anticipate," "expect," "targets" and similar expressions. These
forward-looking statements include management's expectations regarding our liquidity and burn rate, reserves and
mineralized uranium material, capital requirements, timing of receipt of mining permits and access rights, production
capacity of mining operations for properties in South Texas and New Mexico and planned dates for commencement of
production at such properties, and plans for consolidation of the uranium mineral interests in the Grants, New Mexico
uranium district. Our ability to predict results or the actual effect of future plans or strategies is inherently uncertain.
Actual results could differ materially from those in forward-looking statements because of, among other reasons, the
factors described below and in the periodic reports that we file with the SEC from time to time, including Forms 10-K,
10-Q and 8-K and any amendments thereto. The forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance.
They are based on numerous assumptions that we believe are reasonable, but they are open to a wide range of
uncertainties and business risks.
Key factors that could cause actual results to be different than expected or anticipated include, but are not
limited to:
the price of uranium;
weather conditions;
•
•
•
operating conditions at our mining projects;
government regulation of the mining industry and the nuclear power industry;
the world-wide supply and demand of uranium;
availability of capital;
currently pending or new litigation;
legislation by the Navajo Nation;
timely receipt of mining and other permits from regulatory agencies; and
the risks set forth herein under the caption "Risk Factors."
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-
looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this prospectus or as of the date of any document
incorporated by reference in this prospectus, as applicable. When considering forward-looking statements, you should
keep in mind the cautionary statements in this prospectus and the documents incorporated by reference. We are not
under any obligation, and we expressly disclaim any obligation, to update or alter any forward-looking statements,
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. In light of these risks,
uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events discussed in or incorporated by reference in this
prospectus might not occur.
i
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement that we have filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission, which we refer to as the "SEC," utilizing a "shelf" registration process. This prospectus relates to the
offer and sale by the selling stockholders of our common stock. Under this shelf registration process, the securities
described in this prospectus may be offered and sold in one or more offerings. This prospectus only provides you with
a general description of the securities being offered. You should also read and carefully consider the information in the
documents we have referred you to under the heading "Where You Can Find More Information" and "Documents
Incorporated by Reference."
You should rely only on the information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus and any
prospectus supplement. Neither we nor the selling stockholders are making offers to sell the securities in any
jurisdiction in which an offer or solicitation is not authorized or in which the person making such offer or solicitation is
not qualified to do so or to anyone to whom it is unlawful to make an offer or solicitation. No dealer, salesperson or
other person has been authorized to give any information or to make any representations other than those contained
in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus in connection with the offer contained in this prospectus and, if
given or made, such information or representations must not be relied upon as having been authorized by us. Neither
the delivery of this prospectus nor any sale made hereunder shall under any circumstances create an implication that
there has been no change in our affairs since the date hereof. The information contained in, and incorporated by
reference into, this prospectus speaks only as of the date of this prospectus unless the information specifically
indicates that another date applies.
ii
SUMMARY
The SEC allows us to "incorporate by reference" certain information that we file with it, which means that we can
disclose important information to you by referring you to those documents. The information incorporated by reference
is considered to be part of this prospectus, and information that we file later with the SEC will update automatically,
supplement and/or supersede this information. Any statement contained in a document incorporated or deemed to be
incorporated by reference in this prospectus shall be deemed to be modified or superseded for purposes of this
prospectus to the extent that a statement contained in this prospectus or in any other document which also is or is
deemed to be incorporated by reference in this prospectus modifies or supersedes such statement. Any such
statement so modified or superseded shall not be deemed, except as so modified or superseded, to constitute a part
of this prospectus. You should read the detailed information regarding our company, our common stock and our
financial statements and notes to those statements appearing elsewhere in this prospectus or incorporated herein by
reference. References in this prospectus to "our company," "we," "our," and "us" refer to Uranium Resources, Inc.
Uranium Resources, Inc. is a uranium exploration, development and production company. We were organized in
1977 to acquire and develop uranium mines in South Texas using the in-situ recovery mining process ("ISR"). Since
its founding, the Company has produced over 8 million pounds U3O8 from five Texas projects, two of which have
been fully restored and returned to the land owners. The Company currently has two fully licensed ISR processing
facilities in Texas: Kingsville Dome and Rosita. In addition, through a joint venture with Cameco Resources, the
Company is continuing an exploration program on the 53,524 acre Los Finados property in Kenedy County, Texas.
Since 1986, the Company has built a significant asset base in New Mexico that includes 152.9 million pounds U3O8
of in-place mineralized uranium material on over 206,000 acres of uranium mineral holdings. We have a U.S. Nuclear
Regulatory Commission ("NRC") license to build a 3 million pound U3O8 per year ISR processing facility at
Crownpoint, New Mexico. As of September 25, 2012, we had 64 employees. As a result of low uranium prices, we
ceased production in 2009.
Our principal executive offices are located at 405 State Highway Bypass 121, Building A, Suite 110 Lewisville,
Texas, and our telephone number is (972) 219-3330.
OFFERING
Uranium Resources, Inc.
Issuer
Common stock
offered by the
selling
stockholders
Use of Proceeds   The proceeds from the sale of the securities covered by this prospectus will be received by the
53,114,307 shares
selling stockholders. The Company will not receive any of the proceeds from any sale by any
selling stockholder of the securities covered by this prospectus. See "Use of Proceeds."
The Company's common stock is listed on the NASDAQ Capital Market under the symbol
"URRE." See "Risk Factors—General Risks and Uncertainties—Our common stock is subject to
delisting, and we may not be able to maintain our listing on the NASDAQ Capital Market."
Listing of
common stock
1
RISK FACTORS
You should carefully consider the general discussion of risk factors set forth in the material set forth under the
caption "Business—Risk Factors" in our Form 10-K and any amendments or updates thereto (including in our
Form 10-Qs), before making your investment decision, as well as those contained in any filing with the Commission
subsequent to the date of this prospectus. Those risks are not the only risks we face. Additional risks that we do not
yet know of or that we currently judge to be immaterial may also impair our business operations. If any of the events
or circumstances described in the aforementioned risks or other material actually occurs, our business, financial
condition, or results of operations could be materially adversely affected. In such case, the trading price of our
common stock could decline, and you may lose all or part of your investment.
The factors identified below are important factors, but not necessarily all of the important factors, that could
cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statement made by, or on behalf
of, the Company. Where any such forward-looking statement includes a statement of the assumptions or bases
underlying such forward-looking statement, we caution that, while we believe such assumptions or bases to be
reasonable and make them in good faith, assumed facts or bases almost always vary from actual results, and the
differences between assumed facts or bases and actual results can be material, depending upon the circumstances.
Where, in any forward-looking statement, the Company, or its management, expresses an expectation or belief as to
the future results, such expectation or belief is expressed in good faith and is believed to have a reasonable basis,
but there can be no assurance that the statement of expectation or belief will result, or be achieved or accomplished.
Taking into account the foregoing, the following are identified as important risk factors that could cause actual results
to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statement made by, or on behalf of, the Company.
General Risks and Uncertainties
Operations History—Planned Production Startup
In New Mexico, the Company is engaged in preparing a technical report on its Churchrock Section 8 project
which was subjected to a peer review by an independent engineering firm in order to validate the economic
determinations and engineering plans. The feasibility study prepared by the engineering firm is currently under review
by the Company, with a revised draft expected to be re-submitted to the engineering firm. The Company's ability to
begin plant construction and wellfield development in New Mexico in 2013 is subject to receipt of necessary approvals
for access to the property, availability of financing and activation of the Company's permits and licenses.
In South Texas, our Vasquez project was mined out in 2008 and is now being restored. In October 2008, Rosita
production was shut-in due to depressed pricing and technical challenges in the first new wellfield that made mining
uneconomical. The decline in uranium prices throughout 2008 also led to a decision in October 2008 to defer new
wellfield development at Rosita and Kingsville Dome. Production continued in two existing wellfields at Kingsville
Dome and was completed in July 2009. While the Company has approximately 664,000 pounds of in-place proven
uranium reserves at its South Texas properties, the Company is not planning to commence production at any of these
properties until the Company is able to acquire additional reserves and uranium prices recover to levels that will
ensure that production, once resumed, is sustainable in the 300,000 to 500,000 pound range per year.
2
We are not producing uranium at this time. As a result, we currently have no sources of operating cash.
If we cannot monetize certain existing company assets, partner with another company that has cash
resources, find other means of generating revenue other than uranium production and/or have the ability to
access additional sources of private or public capital, we may not be able to remain in business.
The Company is not planning to commence production at any of its South Texas properties until the Company is
able to acquire additional reserves and uranium prices recover to levels that will ensure that production, once
resumed, is sustainable in the 300,000 to 500,000 pound range per year. The Company's ability to begin plant
construction and wellfield development in New Mexico in 2013 is subject to the receipt of necessary approvals for
access to the property, availability of financing and activation of our permits and licenses. Our ability to initiate
construction and development is dependent on resolution of access issues relating to Churchrock Section 8 (See "—
The Navajo Nation's ban on uranium mining in what it considers to be Navajo Indian Country and its opposition to the
transportation of radioactive substances over and across what it views as Navajo Nation lands may have a material
adverse effect on our future operations"). Until we begin uranium production we have no way to generate cash inflows
unless we monetize certain Company assets or through financing activities. In addition, our Vasquez project has been
depleted of its economically recoverable reserves and our Rosita and Kingsville Dome projects have limited identified
economically recoverable reserves. Our future uranium production, cash flow and income are dependent upon the
results of exploration as well as our ability to bring on new, as yet unidentified wellfields and to acquire and develop
additional reserves. We can provide no assurance that our properties will be placed into production or that we will be
able to continue to find, develop, acquire and finance additional reserves.
We will require additional financing in order to complete our plan of operations, including the integration of
Neutron Energy, Inc. ("Neutron") following our recent acquisition of Neutron. We may not be able to obtain all of the
financing we require. Our ability to obtain additional financing is subject to a number of factors, including the market
price of uranium, market conditions, investor acceptance of our business plan, and investor sentiment. These factors
may make the timing, amount, terms and conditions of additional financing unattractive or unavailable to us. The
detrimental effects of the weak economy and cessation of production could result in material adverse effects on our
business, revenues, operating results and prospects.
The Navajo Nation's ban on uranium mining in what it considers to be Navajo Indian Country and its
opposition to the transportation of radioactive substances over and across what it views as Navajo Nation
lands may have a material adverse effect on our future operations.
In April 2005, the Navajo Nation ("Nation") Council passed the Diné Natural Resources Protection Act of 2005,
18 Navajo Nation code §1303, which prohibits uranium mining and processing on any sites within "Navajo Indian
Country" as defined by 7 Navajo Nation Code § 254(A). The ban may impede or prevent us from developing and
operating our properties located in federally defined Indian Country for two reasons. First, the Navajo Nation takes a
more expansive view of its own jurisdiction over "Navajo Indian Country" than does current federal law. Specifically,
7 N.N.C. § 254(A) provides that the term "Navajo Indian Country" applies to all land within the exterior boundaries of
the Navajo Indian Reservation or of the Eastern Navajo Agency, Navajo Indian allotments, dependent Indian
communities, and all land held in trust for, owned in fee by, or leased by the United States to the Navajo Nation. This
may conflict with federal law as codified by Congress and interpreted by the federal courts. The term "Indian Country"
is derived from jurisdictional determinations in criminal law enforcement proceedings under the federal Indian Country
statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1151, and understood to encompass territory situated within Indian reservations, land owned by
Indian allottees, and land within a dependent Indian community. Second, while the United States Court of Appeals for
the Tenth Circuit has specifically held, en banc, that the Company's Section 8 property in Churchrock, New Mexico is
not Indian Country, approximately 32.5% of our in-place mineralized uranium material is located elsewhere in federally
3
defined Indian Country. Consequently, with respect to the Navajo Nation, our ability to mine will be adversely affected
unless Navajo law is modified or a waiver or other exemption is provided.
In February 2012, the Navajo Nation Council passed The Radioactive and Related Substances, Equipment,
Vehicles, Persons and Materials Transportation Act of 2012 which would prohibit the transport across Nation lands of
any equipment, vehicles, persons or materials for the purposes of exploring for or mining, producing, processing or
milling any uranium ore, yellowcake, radioactive waste or other radioactive products on or under the surface of or
adjacent to Nation lands unless the transporter has first (i) obtained Nation consent and a federal grant of easement,
(ii) consented to full subject matter and personal jurisdiction of the Nation, and (iii) agreed to terms and conditions
regarding clean-up and remediation. The Act would also require the Navajo Nation Environmental Protection Agency
("NNEPA") to promulgate regulations implementing notice requirements, license fees, bonding requirements, route
restrictions and curfews for the transportation of radioactive substances over and across Nation lands or otherwise
within Navajo Indian Country. The Act, which may conflict with federal laws and regulations governing the transport of
radioactive materials, could have a material adverse effect on our future operations, including our ability to transport
equipment and personnel to and from our properties and to transport resin from New Mexico to our processing
facilities in Texas.
In April 2012, the Nation's Division of Natural Resources issued a Notice of Violation and Order to Comply with
the Navajo Nation Civil Trespass Act (the "NOV") against the Company's subsidiary Hydro Resources, Inc. ("HRI").
The NOV assessed a $50 civil assessment for alleged trespass on Section 9, Township 16 North, Range 16 West,
N.M.P.M. ("Section 9"), which is land held in trust by the United States for the benefit of the Nation ("Trust Lands").
The Order stated that HRI's Section 8 Churchrock property cannot be reached from New Mexico State Highway 566
without crossing either Section 9 or Section 17, both of which are Trust Lands, and that the Highway 566 right-of-way
does not abut or extend into the Section 8 Churchrock property. The Order demanded that HRI cease entering upon
and crossing Section 9 and Section 17 for the purpose of transporting vehicles, equipment and/or personnel to the
Section 8 Churchrock property until HRI either (i) provided documentation of a validly existing right-of-way or
easement; or (ii) obtained an appropriate right-of-way from the Nation. In July 2012, HRI and the Nation resolved the
NOV by entering into a Temporary Access Agreement (the "Agreement"). Under the terms of the Agreement, HRI and
its contractors may now access Section 8 through either Section 9 or 17 to support site visits by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission and to satisfy other administrative permitting and licensing requirements related to the
Churchrock Project. The Agreement does not extend to construction-related or earth-disturbing activities. HRI has
further agreed to remediate any radioactive contamination now existing on Sections 8 and 17 surface lands created by
prior operators prior to commencing mining operations on Section 8. Under the terms and for the duration of this
Agreement, HRI has agreed to the jurisdiction of the Navajo Nation. HRI and the Nation are now actively engaged in
confidential settlement negotiations in order to determine effective compliance with the remediation requirement
included in the Agreement, including applicable clean-up standards, enforcement, and waste disposal, and to address
longer-term surface access to the entire licensed Project site consistent with applicable law. If further agreement with
the Nation is not reached, the Company's development plan could be materially adversely affected.
Because we are not currently producing uranium, we have limited liquidity.
We had $2.9 million in cash at December 31, 2011 and $4.8 million at September 15, 2012. Under the terms of
our Investment Agreement with Resource Capital Fund V L.P. ("RCF"), on March 9, 2012, we completed a $10 million
sale of our common stock to RCF at a price of $0.9747 per share and on September 5, 2012, we completed a
$5 million sale of our common stock to RCF at a price of $0.5159 per share. The Company currently has one available
commitment to raise capital in the equity markets. It has an At-The Market financing arrangement with BTIG LLC for
an additional $10.0 million. While the
4
Company believes that its cash on hand and this financing source will be sufficient to meet its liquidity requirements
for the next 12 months, certain amounts of these financings will be dependent upon the Company's share price,
market conditions and continued listing on the NASDAQ Capital Market, and there can be no assurance that such
activities will result in the ability to raise the entire amount. In addition, the Company may require additional funding in
order to integrate Neutron and cover Neutron's cash requirements. We do project that with the cash on hand and the
Company's financing sources that we will be able to maintain our liquidity for the next twelve months. At such time,
additional sources of cash will be required to further maintain our liquidity. The Company also expects that it will need
to secure up to approximately $50 million in additional capital for the development of its Churchrock uranium project in
New Mexico in advance of beginning development activities on the project. There can be no assurance that we will be
able to raise sufficient funds under the ATM program or the funds necessary to allow the Company to move forward
with its future development plans in New Mexico.
Our ability to function as an operating mining company will be dependent on our ability to mine our
properties at a profit sufficient to finance further mining activities and for the acquisition and development of
additional properties. The volatility of uranium prices makes long-range planning uncertain and raising
capital difficult.
In addition to ceasing all production, we have deferred activities for exploration, delineation and development of
new wellfields at all of our South Texas projects except for the Los Finados project. This decision limits our ability to
be immediately ready to begin production should uranium prices improve suddenly. Our ability to operate on a positive
cash flow basis will be dependent on mining sufficient quantities of uranium at a profit sufficient to finance our
operations and for the acquisition and development of additional mining properties. Any profit will necessarily be
dependent upon, and affected by, the long and short term market prices of uranium, which are subject to significant
fluctuation. Uranium prices have been and will continue to be affected by numerous factors beyond our control. These
factors include the demand for nuclear power, political and economic conditions in uranium producing and consuming
countries, uranium supply from secondary sources and uranium production levels and costs of production. A
significant, sustained drop in uranium prices may make it impossible to operate our business at a level that will permit
us to cover our fixed costs or to remain in operation.
Our common stock is subject to delisting, and we may not be able to maintain our listing on the
NASDAQ Capital Market.
The Company's common stock is currently traded on the NASDAQ Capital Market. On January 17, 2012, we
received notice from NASDAQ that we had failed to maintain compliance with the $1.00 per share minimum bid price
for 30 consecutive business days. The Company was provided a "compliance period" of 180 calendar days to regain
compliance with the applicable NASDAQ requirements. On July 17, 2012, the Company received notice from
NASDAQ that it was granted an additional compliance period of 180 calendar days to regain compliance with
NASDAQ's $1.00 bid price per share rule. We will regain compliance with the minimum bid requirement if at any time
before January 14, 2013, the bid price for our common stock closes at $1.00 per share or above for a minimum of 10
consecutive business days. In the event that the Company does not regain compliance with the minimum bid price
rule by January 14, 2013, NASDAQ will provide the Company with written notification that our common stock is
subject to delisting from the NASDAQ Capital Market. The Company may appeal NASDAQ's determination to delist
its common stock at that time. If our common stock is delisted from NASDAQ, a reliable trading market for the
Company's securities could cease to exist, the market price of our common stock could be negatively impacted, and
we could face difficulty raising additional capital. In addition, there may be negative tax consequences if our common
stock is delisted from NASDAQ and a reliable trading market is not found.
5
Exploration and development of uranium properties are risky and subject to great uncertainties.
The exploration for and development of uranium deposits involve significant risks. It is impossible to ensure that
the current and future exploration programs on our existing properties will establish reserves. Whether a uranium ore
body will be commercially viable depends on a number of factors, including, but not limited to: the particular attributes
of the deposit, such as size, grade and proximity to infrastructure; uranium prices, which cannot be predicted and
which have been highly volatile in the past; mining, processing and transportation costs; perceived levels of political
risk and the willingness of lenders and investors to provide project financing; availability of labor, labor costs and
possible labor strikes; availability of drilling rigs, and governmental regulations, including, without limitation,
regulations relating to prices, taxes, royalties, land tenure, land use, importing and exporting materials, foreign
exchange, environmental protection, employment, worker safety, transportation, and reclamation and closure
obligations. Most exploration projects do not result in the discovery of commercially mineable deposits of uranium and
there can be no assurance that any of our exploration stage properties will be commercially mineable or can be
brought into production.
The developments at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in Japan continue to have a negative
impact on the uranium markets and public acceptance of nuclear energy is uncertain.
The developments at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant following the earthquake and tsunami that
struck parts of Japan in March 2011 created heightened concerns regarding the safety of nuclear power plants and the
ability to safeguard the material used to fuel nuclear power plants. The impact on the perception of the safety of
nuclear power resulting from this event may cause increased volatility of uranium prices in the near to mid-term as
well as uncertainty involving the continued use and expansion of nuclear power in certain countries. A reduction in the
current or the future generation of electricity from nuclear power could result in a reduced requirement for uranium to
fuel nuclear power plants which may negatively impact the Company in the future.
Maintaining the demand for uranium at current levels and future growth in demand will depend upon acceptance
of nuclear technology as a means of generating electricity. The developments at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear
Power Plant may affect public acceptance of nuclear technology. Lack of public acceptance of nuclear technology
would adversely affect the demand for nuclear power and potentially increase the regulation of the nuclear power
industry.
The only significant market for uranium is nuclear power plants world-wide, and there are a limited
number of customers.
We are dependent on a limited number of electric utilities that buy uranium for nuclear power plants. Because of
the limited market for uranium, a reduction in purchases of newly produced uranium by electric utilities for any reason
(such as plant closings) would adversely affect the viability of our business.
The price of alternative energy sources affects the demand for and price of uranium.
The attractiveness of uranium as an alternative fuel to generate electricity may be dependent on the relative
prices of oil, gas, coal, and hydro-electricity and the possibility of developing other low-cost sources of energy. If the
prices of alternative energy sources decrease or new low-cost alternative energy sources are developed, the demand
for uranium could decrease, which may result in a decrease in the price of uranium.
6
We may not be able to mine a substantial portion of our uranium in New Mexico until a mill is built in
New Mexico.
A substantial portion of our uranium in New Mexico lends itself most readily to conventional mining methods and
may not be able to be mined unless a mill is built in New Mexico. We have has no immediate plans to build, nor are
we aware of any third party's plan to build, a mill in New Mexico and there can be no guarantee that a mill will be built.
In the event that a mill is not built, a substantial portion of our uranium may not be able to be mined. Our inability to
mine this portion of our uranium in New Mexico would have a material adverse effect on future operations.
We do not have a committed source of financing for the development of our New Mexico Properties,
including the Churchrock Property, which is the property we expect to develop first in New Mexico.
The Company is evaluating a number of alternatives for the development of its Churchrock uranium project in
New Mexico, including staged development. The Company expects that it will need to secure up to approximately
$50 million in additional capital for the full development of the project. We do not have a committed source of
financing for the development of our Churchrock property. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain
financing for this project or our other New Mexico projects. Our inability to develop the New Mexico properties would
have a material adverse effect on our future operations.
Our operations are subject to environmental risks.
We are required to comply with environmental protection laws and regulations and permitting requirements, and
we anticipate that we will be required to continue to do so in the future. We have expended significant resources, both
financial and managerial, to comply with environmental protection laws, regulations and permitting requirements and
we anticipate that we will be required to continue to do so in the future. The material laws and regulations within the
U.S. include the Atomic Energy Act, Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation Control Act of 1978, or UMTRCA, Clean Air Act,
Clean Water Act, Safe Drinking Water Act, Federal Land Policy Management Act, National Park System Mining
Regulations Act, the State Mined Land Reclamation Acts or State Department of Environmental Quality regulations,
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and the rules and regulations of the NNEPA, as
applicable.
We are required to comply with the Atomic Energy Act, as amended by UMTRCA, by applying for and
maintaining an operating license from the NRC and the state of Texas. Uranium operations must conform to the terms
of such licenses, which include provisions for protection of human health and the environment from endangerment due
to radioactive materials. The licenses encompass protective measures consistent with the Clean Air Act and the
Clean Water Act. Mining operations may be subject to other laws administered by the USEPA and other agencies.
The uranium industry is subject not only to the worker health and safety and environmental risks associated with
all mining businesses, but also to additional risks uniquely associated with uranium mining and milling. The possibility
of more stringent regulations exists in the areas of worker health and safety, storage of hazardous materials,
standards for heavy equipment used in mining or milling, the disposition of wastes, the decommissioning and
reclamation of exploration, mining and ISR sites, climate change and other environmental matters, each of which
could have a material adverse effect on the cost or the viability of a particular project.
We cannot predict what environmental legislation, regulation or policy will be enacted or adopted in the future or
how future laws and regulations will be administered or interpreted. The recent trend in environmental legislation and
regulation, generally, is toward stricter standards, and this trend is likely to continue in the future. This recent trend
includes, without limitation, laws and regulations relating to air and water quality, mine reclamation, waste handling
and disposal, the protection of
7
certain species and the preservation of certain lands. These regulations may require the acquisition of permits or other
authorizations for certain activities. These laws and regulations may also limit or prohibit activities on certain lands.
Compliance with more stringent laws and regulations, as well as potentially more vigorous enforcement policies or
stricter interpretation of existing laws, may necessitate significant capital outlays, may materially affect our results of
operations and business or may cause material changes or delays in our intended activities.
Our operations may require additional analysis in the future including environmental, cultural and social impact
and other related studies. Certain activities require the submission and approval of environmental impact
assessments. Environmental assessments of proposed projects carry a heightened degree of responsibility for
companies and directors, officers, and employees. We cannot provide assurance that we will be able to obtain or
maintain all necessary permits that may be required to continue our operation or our exploration of our properties or, if
feasible, to commence development, construction or operation of mining facilities at such properties on terms which
enable operations to be conducted at economically justifiable costs. If we are unable to obtain or maintain permits or
water rights for development of our properties or otherwise fail to manage adequately future environmental issues, our
operations could be materially and adversely affected.
Because mineral exploration and development activities are inherently risky, we may be exposed to
environmental liabilities and other dangers. If we are unable to maintain adequate insurance, or liabilities
exceed the limits of our insurance policies, we may be unable to continue operations.
The business of mineral exploration and extraction involves a high degree of risk. Few properties that are
explored are ultimately developed into production. Unusual or unexpected formations, formation pressures, fires,
power outages, labor disruptions, flooding, explosions, cave-ins, landslides and the inability to obtain suitable or
adequate machinery, equipment or labor are other risks involved in extraction operations and the conduct of
exploration programs. Previous mining operations may have caused environmental damage at certain of our
properties. It may be difficult or impossible to assess the extent to which such damage was caused by us or by the
activities of previous operators, in which case, any indemnities and exemptions from liability may be ineffective. If
any of our properties are found to have commercial quantities of uranium, we would be subject to additional risks
respecting any development and production activities.
Although we carry liability insurance with respect to our mineral exploration operations, we may become subject
to liability for damage to life and property, environmental damage, cave-ins or hazards against which we cannot insure
or against which we may elect not to insure because of cost or other business reasons. In addition, the insurance
industry is undergoing change and premiums are being increased. If we are unable to procure adequate insurance
because of cost, unavailability or otherwise, we might be forced to cease operations.
Our inability to obtain financial surety would threaten our ability to continue in business.
Future financial surety requirements to comply with federal and state environmental and remediation
requirements and to secure necessary licenses and approvals will increase significantly as future development and
production occurs at certain of our sites in Texas and New Mexico. The amount of the financial surety for each
producing property is subject to annual review and revision by regulators. We expect that the issuer of the financial
surety instruments will require us to provide cash collateral equal to the face amount of the bond to secure the
obligation. In the event we are not able to raise, secure or generate sufficient funds necessary to satisfy these
requirements, we will be unable to develop our sites and bring them into production, which inability will have a material
adverse impact on our business and may negatively affect our ability to continue to operate.
8
Competition from better-capitalized companies affects prices and our ability to acquire properties and
personnel.
There is global competition for uranium properties, capital, customers and the employment and retention of
qualified personnel. In the production and marketing of uranium, there are a number of producing entities, some of
which are government controlled and all of which are significantly larger and better capitalized than we are. Many of
these organizations also have substantially greater financial, technical, manufacturing and distribution resources than
we have.
Our uranium production also competes with uranium recovered from the de-enrichment of highly enriched
uranium obtained from the dismantlement of United States and Russian nuclear weapons and imports to the United
States of uranium from the former Soviet Union and from the sale of uranium inventory held by the United States
Department of Energy. In addition, there are numerous entities in the market that compete with us for properties and
are attempting to become licensed to operate ISR and/or underground mining facilities. If we are unable to
successfully compete for properties, capital, customers or employees or alternative uranium sources, it could have a
materially adverse effect on our results of operations.
Because we have limited capital, inherent mining risks pose a significant threat to us compared with
their larger competitors.
Because we have limited capital, we are unable to withstand significant losses that can result from inherent
risks associated with mining, including environmental hazards, industrial accidents, flooding, earthquake, interruptions
due to weather conditions and other acts of nature which larger competitors could withstand. Such risks could result in
damage to or destruction of our infrastructure and production facilities, as well as to adjacent properties, personal
injury, environmental damage and processing and production delays, causing monetary losses and possible legal
liability.
Our business could be harmed if we lose the services of our key personnel.
Our business and mineral exploration programs depend upon our ability to employ the services of geologists,
engineers and other experts. In operating our business and in order to continue our programs, we compete for the
services of professionals with other mineral exploration companies and businesses. In addition, several entities have
expressed an interest in hiring certain of our employees. Our ability to maintain and expand our business and continue
our exploration programs may be impaired if we are unable to continue to employ or engage those parties currently
providing services and expertise to us or identify and engage other qualified personnel to do so in their place. To
retain key employees, we may face increased compensation costs, including potential new stock incentive grants and
there can be no assurance that the incentive measures we implement will be successful in helping us retain our key
personnel.
Approximately 34.2% of our common stock is controlled by two significant stockholders and
management.
As of September 25, 2012, approximately 33.4% of our common stock is controlled by two significant
stockholders, including approximately 28.1% controlled by RCF and 5.3% is controlled by RMB Australia Holdings
Limited ("RMB"). In addition, as of September 25, 2012, our directors and officers are the beneficial owners of
approximately 0.8% of our common stock. This includes, with respect to both groups, shares that may be purchased
upon the exercise of outstanding options. In connection with the execution of the Investment Agreement, the
Company entered into a Stockholders' Agreement with RCF. Under the Stockholders' Agreement, RCF was entitled to
have one designee placed in nomination for a seat on the Company's Board of Directors at the 2012 annual meeting,
and RCF was granted the right to participate in future equity offerings by the Company in proportion to its percentage
ownership of the outstanding shares of the Company's common stock. Such ownership by
9
the Company's principal stockholders, executive officers and directors, and the terms of the Stockholders' Agreement,
may have the effect of delaying, deferring, preventing or facilitating a sale of the Company or a business combination
with a third party.
The availability for sale of a large amount of shares may depress the market price of our common stock.
As of September 25, 2012, 158,746,746 shares of our common stock were outstanding, all of which, except for
the shares owned by RCF, RMB and Roth are freely transferable. In connection with the execution of the Investment
Agreement, the Company and RCF entered into a registration rights agreement whereby RCF is granted certain
registration rights with respect to the shares of the Company's common stock issued under the Investment
Agreement. The registration rights agreement obligates the Company to file a registration statement immediately
following the consummation of the merger with Neutron to enable RCF to sell its common stock in a continuous
offering under Rule 415 of the Securities Act. As of September 25, 2012, approximately 3.98 million shares of our
common stock were reserved for issuance upon the exercise of outstanding options and warrants. The availability for
sale of a large amount of shares by any one or several stockholders may depress the market price of our common
stock and impair our ability to raise additional capital through the public sale of common stock. We have no
arrangement with any of the holders of the foregoing shares to address the possible effect on the price of our common
stock of the sale by them of their shares.
Terms of subsequent financings may adversely impact our stockholders.
In order to finance our future production plans and working capital needs, we may have to raise funds through
the issuance of equity or debt securities. We currently have no authorized preferred stock. Depending on the type and
the terms of any financing we pursue, stockholders' rights and the value of their investment in our common stock
could be reduced. For example, if we have to issue secured debt securities, the holders of the debt would have a
claim to our assets that would be prior to the rights of stockholders until the debt is paid. Interest on these debt
securities would increase costs and negatively impact operating results. If the issuance of new securities results in
diminished rights to holders of our common stock, the market price of our common stock could be negatively
impacted.
Our stockholders could be diluted if we were to use common stock to raise capital.
As previously noted, we may need to seek additional capital in the future to satisfy our working capital
requirements. This financing could involve one or more types of securities including common stock, convertible debt,
preferred stock or warrants to acquire common or preferred stock. These securities could be issued at or below the
then prevailing market price for our common stock. Any issuance of additional shares of our common stock could be
dilutive to existing stockholders and could adversely affect the market price of our common stock.
The benefits of integrating the Company and Neutron may not be realized.
The Company acquired Neutron on August 31, 2012, through the merger of URI Merger Corporation, a wholly-
owned subsidiary of the Company, with and into Neutron, with Neutron surviving the merger as an indirect wholly-
owned subsidiary of the Company. To be successful after the merger, the Company will need to combine and
integrate the operations of the Company and Neutron into one company. Integration will require substantial
management attention and could detract attention from the day-to-day business of the combined company. We could
encounter difficulties in the integration process, such as the need to revisit assumptions about reserves, future
production, revenues, capital expenditures and operating costs, including synergies, the loss of key employees or
commercial relationships or the need to address unanticipated liabilities. If we cannot integrate our and Neutron's
businesses successfully, we may fail to realize the expected benefits of the merger.
10
If the Company fails to implement an effective system of internal controls with respect to Neutron after
the merger, it may not be able to accurately report its financial results or prevent fraud and, as a result, its
business could be harmed and current and potential stockholders could lose confidence in the Company,
which could cause the Company's value to fall.
If the Company is not able to establish and maintain effective internal controls with respect to Neutron in a
timely manner following the merger or with adequate compliance, it may not be able to accurately report the financial
results of the combined company or prevent fraud and might be subject to sanctions or investigation by, among
others, the NASDAQ Capital Market. Any such action could harm its business or investors' confidence in the
Company, and could cause its stock price to fall.
USE OF PROCEEDS
The proceeds from the sale of the common stock covered by this prospectus will be received by the selling
stockholders. We will not receive any proceeds from the sale by any selling stockholder of the shares of common
stock offered by this prospectus.
11
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
We are registering for resale the shares covered by this prospectus on behalf of the selling stockholders
identified below. The selling stockholders acquired the resale shares from us in private placements completed on
March 9, 2012, August 31, 2012 and September 5, 2012.
On March 1, 2012, the Company executed an Agreement and Plan of Merger by and among the Company,
Neutron and URI Merger Corporation (the "Merger Agreement"). Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the
effective time of the merger on August 31, 2012, URI Merger Corporation merged with and into Neutron (the "Merger"),
with Neutron continuing as the surviving corporation and becoming an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the
Company.
In connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, on March 1, 2012, the Company entered into an
Investment Agreement with Neutron and RCF. Pursuant to the Investment Agreement, concurrent with the closing of
the Merger on August 31, 2012, RCF purchased 24,638,673 shares of our common stock for $20,000,000, with the
proceeds used by us to partially repay a loan due to RMB by Neutron as described below. In addition, pursuant to the
Investment Agreement, RCF agreed to purchase additional shares of our common stock for $15,000,000, divided in
two tranches, for the purpose of funding the working capital of the Company and Neutron. The first tranche of this
private placement, the purchase by RCF of 10,259,567 shares of our common stock for $10,000,000 in cash
consideration, closed on March 9, 2012. The second tranche of this private placement, the purchase by RCF of
9,691,801 shares of our common stock for $5,000,000 in cash consideration, closed on September 5, 2012. In
connection with the execution of the Investment Agreement, on March 1, 2012, we entered into a Registration Rights
Agreement with RCF, pursuant to which RCF is granted certain registration rights with respect to the shares of our
common stock issued under the Investment Agreement. The Registration Rights Agreement obligated us to file the
registration statement (of which this prospectus is a part) within thirty days following the consummation of the merger
to enable RCF to sell its shares of our common stock in a continuous offering under Rule 415 of the Securities Act.
In connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, on March 1, 2012, URI, Neutron and Cibola
Resources LLC entered into a Forbearance and Debt Conversion Agreement with RMB and RMB Resources, Inc.
Pursuant to the Forbearance and Debt Conversion Agreement, RMB agreed to accept, upon the closing of the Merger,
$20,000,000 in cash plus 8,361,327 shares of our common stock in full satisfaction of all indebtedness owed by
Neutron to RMB, allowing us to acquire Neutron on a debt-free basis. The Forbearance and Debt Conversion
Agreement provides for the right of RMB to have its shares of our common stock registered for resale on similar
terms to that set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement between the Company and RCF.
On August 31, 2012, in connection with the closing of the Merger, we issued 162,939 shares of our common
stock to Roth Capital Partners, LLC ("Roth"), Neutron's financial advisor, to satisfy certain obligations incurred by
Neutron in connection with the Merger.
We are registering the shares to permit the selling stockholders and their pledgees, donees, transferees and
other successors-in-interest that receive their shares from a selling stockholder as a gift, partnership distribution or
other non-sale related transfer after the date of this prospectus to resell the shares when and as they deem
appropriate. We have agreed to maintain the effectiveness of this registration statement until the earlier of (i) the first
date on which all of the shares covered by this prospectus are sold pursuant to an effective registration statement
registering such securities for resale, or (ii) the first date on which the shares covered by this prospectus cease to be
Registrable Securities, which is defined generally as the date all such shares have been sold pursuant to Rule 144 or
an effective registration statement or are held by a non-affiliate of the Company and may be sold pursuant to Rule 144
without being subject to volume or other restrictions set forth in Rule 144 under the Securities Act.
The following table sets forth:
12
•
•
•
•
the name of the selling stockholders;
the number and percent of shares of our common stock that the selling stockholders beneficially owned
prior to the offering for resale of the shares under this prospectus;
the number of shares of our common stock that may be offered for resale for the account of the selling
stockholders under this prospectus; and
the number and percent of shares of our common stock to be beneficially owned by the selling
stockholders after the offering of the resale shares (assuming all of the offered resale shares are sold by
the selling stockholders).
The number of shares in the column "Number of Shares Being Offered" represents all of the shares that each
selling stockholder may offer under this prospectus. We do not know how long the selling stockholders will hold the
shares before selling them or how many shares they will sell and we currently have no agreements, arrangements or
understandings with any of the selling stockholders regarding the sale of any of the resale shares. The shares offered
by this prospectus may be offered from time to time by the selling stockholders listed below.
This table is prepared solely based on information supplied to us by the listed selling stockholders, any
Schedules 13D or 13G and Forms 3 and 4, and other public documents filed with the SEC, and assumes the sale of
all of the resale shares. The applicable percentages of beneficial ownership are based on an aggregate of 158,746,746
shares of our common stock issued and outstanding on September 25, 2012, adjusted as may be required by rules
promulgated by the SEC.
Stockholders
Resource Capital Fund V L.P.(1)(2)
RMB Australia Holdings Limited(3)
Roth Capital Partners, LLC(4)(5)
 
TOTAL
Shares Beneficially
Owned
Prior to Offering
Number
44,590,041 
8,361,327 
162,939 
  
53,114,307
Percent
28.1% 
5.3%
*
33.5%
Shares Beneficially
Owned
After Offering
Number
Number of
Shares Being
Offered
44,590,041 
8,361,327 
162,939 
  
53,114,307
Percent
* 
* 
* 
  
*
0 
0 
0 
  
0
*
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Less than 1%
The general partner of Resource Capital Fund V L.P. ("RCF") is Resource Capital Associates V L.P.
("Associates V"). The general partner of Associates V is RCA V GP Ltd. ("RCA V"). Each of RCF, Associates
V and RCA V may be deemed to have sole voting and dispositive power over, and therefore beneficial
ownership of, the shares listed. The investment and voting control of RCA V is exercised by Messrs. Ryan T.
Bennett, Ross R. Bhappu, Russ Cranswick, James McClements, Henderson G. Tuten and Ms. Sherri
Croasdale (collectively, the "Principals"). Each of the Principals disclaims beneficial ownership of the common
stock of URI, except to the extent of each of their pecuniary interest therein.
Pursuant to a Stockholders' Agreement between RCF and the Company, so long as RCF and its affiliates own
or hold shares of common stock which in the aggregate exceeds 5% of our issued and outstanding common
stock, RCF will be entitled to have one designee placed in nomination for a seat on our board of directors. At
our 2012 annual meeting, the Board nominated John H. Pfahl, who had been identified by RCF as its designee,
and Mr. Pfahl was elected as a director at that meeting. Mr. Pfahl is not a principal of RCF, Associates V or
RCA V and does not exercise any voting or investment control over the shares owned by RCF.
13
Gregory Steven Gay, Arnold Vogel and Michael Louis Schonfeld are each a director of RMB Australia Holdings
Limited and exercise the voting and dispositive powers with regard to the shares being offered by this selling
stockholder.
Byron Roth and Gordon Roth as Officers of Roth Capital Partners, LLC ("Roth") exercise the voting and
dispositive powers with regard to the shares being offered by this selling stockholder. Roth is a U.S. registered
broker-dealer. For investment banking services provided to Neutron in connection with the Merger, Neutron paid
Roth a fee for rendering its fairness opinion and the Company issued the 162,939 shares of our common stock
to Roth. Since this selling stockholder received its securities as compensation for investment banking
services, it is not an "underwriter" within meaning of the Securities Act. In addition, at the time of its
acquisition of the Company's securities, this selling stockholder had no agreements or understandings, directly
or indirectly, with any person to distribute the securities registered for resale hereunder.
(5)
Roth in the past has provided and may in the future provide investment banking and other financial services to
URI and its affiliates for which Roth and its affiliates have received or will receive compensation. In particular,
in June, July and November 2010, Roth entered into underwriting agreements with the Company with respect to
the sale and offering of shares of our common stock, for which it received $600,000, $84,000 and $477,000,
respectively.
The selling stockholders, which term includes their transferees, pledgees or donees or their successors-in-
interest, may sell the shares being offered from time to time in one or more transactions:
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
on the NASDAQ Capital Market or otherwise;
in ordinary brokers' transactions, which may include long or short sales;
in transactions involving cross or block trades or otherwise in the over-the-counter market;
through broker-dealers, who may act as agents or principals;
in "at the market" offerings to or through market makers into an existing market for the shares;
in other ways not involving market makers or established markets, including direct sales to purchasers
in negotiated transactions;
through a bidding or auction process;
through one or more underwriters on a firm commitment or best efforts basis;
through the writing of options, swaps or other derivatives, whether listed on an exchange or otherwise; or
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
through a combination of such methods of sale or by any other legally available means.
In addition, subject to compliance with applicable law, the selling stockholders may enter into option, derivative
or hedging transactions with broker-dealers who may engage in short sales of common stock in the course of hedging
the positions they assume with the selling stockholders, and any related offers or sales of shares may be made under
this prospectus. In some circumstances, for example, the selling stockholders may write call options, put options or
other derivative instruments with respect to the shares, which they settle through delivery of the shares. These option,
derivative and hedging transactions may require the delivery to a broker, dealer or other financial institution of shares
offered under this prospectus, and that broker, dealer or other financial institution may resell those shares under this
prospectus.
14
The selling stockholders may sell the shares at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, at prices related to
those market prices, at negotiated prices or at fixed prices, which may be changed from time to time. The selling
stockholders also may sell the shares pursuant to Rule 144 or other available exemptions adopted under the
Securities Act. The selling stockholders may effect transactions by selling shares directly to purchasers or to or
through broker-dealers. The broker-dealers may act as agents or principals. Broker-dealers, underwriters or agents
may receive compensation in the form of discounts, concessions or commissions from the selling stockholders or the
purchasers of the shares, or both. The compensation of any particular broker-dealer, underwriter or agent may be in
excess of customary commissions. Any commissions received by them and any profit on the resale of shares may
be deemed to be underwriting compensation. Because the selling stockholders and broker-dealers that participate with
the selling stockholders in the distribution of shares may be deemed to be "underwriters" within the meaning of
Section 2(11) of the Securities Act, the selling stockholders may be subject to the prospectus delivery requirements
of the Securities Act.
The selling stockholders may donate, pledge or otherwise transfer their shares in a non-sale related transaction
to any person so long as the transfer complies with applicable securities laws. As a result, donees, pledgees,
transferees and other successors in interest that receive such shares as a gift, distribution or other non-sale related
transfer may offer shares of common stock under this prospectus.
The selling stockholders have advised us that they have not entered into any agreements, understandings or
arrangements with any underwriters or broker-dealers regarding the sale of their securities. There is no underwriter or
coordinating broker acting in connection with the proposed sale of shares by the selling stockholders.
The shares will be sold through registered or licensed brokers or dealers if required under applicable state
securities laws. In addition, in certain states the shares may not be sold unless they have been registered or qualified
for sale in the applicable state or an exemption from the registration or qualification requirement is available and is
complied with.
Under applicable rules and regulations under the Exchange Act, any person engaged in the distribution of the
shares may not simultaneously engage in market making activities with respect to our common stock for a period of
two business days prior to the commencement of such distribution. In addition, each selling stockholder will be
subject to applicable provisions of the Exchange Act and the associated rules and regulations under the Exchange
Act, including Regulation M, which provisions may limit the timing of purchases and sales of shares of our common
stock by the selling stockholders. Certain persons participating in an offering may engage in over-allotment, stabilizing
transactions, short-covering transactions and penalty bids in accordance with Regulation M under the Exchange Act
that stabilize, maintain or otherwise affect the price of the offered securities. If any such activities may occur, they
will be described in the applicable prospectus supplement or a document incorporated by reference to the extent
required. We will make copies of this prospectus available to the selling stockholders and have informed them that if
they are deemed to be an underwriter, they will need to deliver copies of this prospectus to purchasers at or prior to
the time of any sale of the shares.
We will receive no proceeds from the sale of shares by selling stockholders pursuant to this prospectus. We will
bear all costs, expenses and fees in connection with the registration of the shares, except that the selling
stockholders will bear all commissions and discounts, if any, attributable to the sales of the shares. We will indemnify
the selling stockholders, and the selling stockholders will indemnify us, and may agree to indemnify any underwriter,
broker-dealer or agent that participates in transactions involving sales of the shares, against certain liabilities,
including liabilities arising under the Securities Act.
Upon notification to us by a selling stockholder that any material arrangement has been entered into with a
broker-dealer or other agent for the sale or purchase of shares, including through a block
15
trade, special offering, exchange distribution, secondary distribution, or purchase by a broker or dealer, we will file a
supplement to this prospectus, if required, disclosing:
the name of the participating broker-dealers;
•
•
the number of shares involved;
the price at which such shares were sold;
the commissions paid or discounts or concessions allowed to such broker-dealers, where applicable;
that such broker-dealers did not conduct any investigation to verify the information set out or
incorporated by reference in this prospectus; and
•
•
•
•
other facts material to the transaction.
A prospectus supplement or document incorporated by reference may be filed to disclose additional information
with respect to any sale or other distribution of the shares.
The maximum commission or discount to be received by any member of the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority, Inc., or independent broker-dealer, will not be greater than 8% of the initial gross proceeds from the sale of
any security sold in the offering.
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK
Our authorized capital stock consists of 200,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001 per share. As
of September 25, 2012, 158,746,746 shares of our common stock were issued and outstanding, all of which are fully
paid and non-assessable. There are approximately 2,985,231 shares of our common stock issuable upon exercise of
outstanding stock options. There are 998,771 shares of our common stock issuable upon the exercise of outstanding
warrants.
In connection with the execution of the Investment Agreement, on March 1, 2012, we entered into a
Stockholders' Agreement with RCF. Under the Stockholders' Agreement, RCF was entitled to have one designee
placed in nomination for a seat on our board of directors at our 2012 annual meeting. RCF is also granted the right to
participate in future equity offerings by us in proportion to its percentage ownership of the outstanding shares of our
common stock.
There are no other preemptive, subscription, conversion or redemption rights pertaining to our common stock.
The absence of preemptive rights could result in a dilution of the interest of existing stockholders should additional
shares of common stock be issued. Holders of our common stock are entitled to receive such dividends as may be
declared by our Board of Directors out of assets legally available therefore and to share ratably in our assets upon
liquidation.
Each share of our common stock is entitled to one vote for all purposes and cumulative voting is not permitted
in the election of directors. Accordingly, the holders of more than fifty percent of all of the outstanding shares of our
common stock can elect all of the directors. Matters to be voted upon by the holders of our common stock require the
affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast at a stockholders meeting at which a quorum is present. The presence,
in person or by proxy, of the holders of one-third of our outstanding shares is necessary to constitute a quorum at a
stockholders meeting
Corporate Stock Transfer, Denver, Colorado is the transfer agent and registrar for our common stock.
The validity of the issuance of the shares of common stock offered hereby will be passed upon for us by
Baker & Hostetler LLP, Denver, Colorado.
LEGAL MATTERS
16
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Uranium Resources, Inc. for each of the fiscal years ended
December 31, 2011, December 31, 2010 and December 31, 2009, and the effectiveness of internal control over
financial reporting as of December 31, 2011, incorporated by reference in this prospectus and registration statement
have been audited by Hein & Associates LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their
report, incorporated by reference herein, and are incorporated by reference in reliance upon that report given on the
authority of Hein & Associates LLP as experts in accounting and auditing.
The information regarding our uranium mineralized materials in New Mexico incorporated by reference in this
prospectus is included in reliance on the report submitted by Behre Dolbear & Company (USA), Inc., an independent
private mining consulting firm, and has been included herein in reliance on the authority of such firm as experts in
geology and engineering.
The information related to Neutron's properties that constitute the Cibola Project, Ambrosia Lake Project and
Edgemont Project including non-reserved mineralized material incorporated by reference in this prospectus and
registration statement is included in reliance on the following independent technical reports, each of which were
completed by Broad Oak Associates, an independent engineer: (i) the Technical Report on the Uranium Resources at
The Ambrosia Lake Uranium Project, McKinley County, New Mexico, USA, dated January 18, 2011; (ii) the Technical
Report on the Uranium Resources at The Cibola Project, Cibola, McKinley and Sandoval Counties, New Mexico, USA,
dated January 14, 2011; and (iii) the Technical Report on the Uranium Resources on The Edgemont Uranium Project,
Fall River County, South Dakota, USA, dated January 18, 2011, and has been incorporated by reference herein in
reliance on the authority of such firm as experts in geology and engineering
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and special reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. You may
read and copy any reports, statements or other information that we file at the SEC's public reference room at 100 F
Street, N.E., Washington, District of Columbia 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for more information on
the public reference room. Our SEC filings are also available to the public from commercial retrieval services and at
the website maintained by the SEC at www.sec.gov. The reports and other information filed by us with the SEC are
also available at our website. The address of the Company's website is www.uraniumresources.com. Information
contained on our website or that can be accessed through our website is not incorporated by reference into this
prospectus.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
We incorporate by reference the filed documents listed below, except as superseded, supplemented or modified
by this prospectus, and any future filings we will make with the SEC under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the
Exchange Act:
•
•
•
•
our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2011;
our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q and Form 10-Q/A for the quarterly period ended March 31, 2012;
our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2012;
our definitive Proxy Statement for our Annual Meeting of Stockholders held on June 4, 2012 (solely to
the extent specifically incorporated by reference into our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year
ended December 31, 2011); and
17
•
our Current Reports on Form 8-K filed on March 7, 2012, April 4, 2012, April 11, 2012, May 14, 2012,
May 17, 2012, June 7, 2012, June 22, 2012, July 17, 2012, July 31, 2012, August 9, 2012, August 24,
2012, August 30, 2012, September 5, 2012, September 7, 2012 and September 26, 2012 and on
Form 8-K/A filed on June 7, 2012.
The reports and other documents that we file with the SEC after the date of this prospectus will update,
supplement and, where applicable, supersede the information contained in this prospectus or incorporated by
reference in this prospectus. You may request and obtain a copy of these filings, at no cost, by writing or telephoning
us at the following address or phone number:
Uranium Resources, Inc.
405 State Highway Bypass 121,
Building A, Suite 110
Lewisville, Texas 75067
Attn: Thomas H. Ehrlich
(972) 219-3330
18
You should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus. We have not authorized anyone to
provide you with information different from that contained in this prospectus or any prospectus supplement.
This prospectus is not an offer of these securities in any jurisdiction where an offer and sale is not permitted.
The information contained in this prospectus is accurate only as of the date of this prospectus, regardless of
the time of delivery of this prospectus or any sale of our common stock.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Disclosure Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
About This Prospectus
Summary
Offering
Risk Factors
Use of Proceeds
Selling Stockholders
Plan of Distribution
Description of Common Stock
Legal Matters
Experts
Where You Can Find More Information
Documents Incorporated by Reference
Page  
i 
 
ii 
 
 
1 
1 
 
2 
 
11 
 
 
12 
14 
 
16 
 
16 
 
 
17 
17 
 
 
17
53,114,307 Shares
of Common Stock
Uranium Resources, Inc.
Prospectus
, 2012
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 14.    Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution.
The following table sets forth an estimate of the fees and expenses relating to the issuance and distribution of
the securities being registered hereby, other than underwriting discounts and commissions, all of which shall be borne
by Uranium Resources, Inc. (the "Registrant" or the "Company"). All of such fees and expenses, except for the SEC
Registration Fee, are estimated:
SEC registration fee
Legal fees and expenses
Accounting fees and expenses
Miscellaneous fees and expenses
Item 15.    Indemnification of Officers and Directors
$ 3,105 
  $ 10,000 
  $ 5,000 
  $ 10,000
Under Delaware law, a corporation may indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made
a party to an action (other than an action by or in the right of the corporation) by reason of his service as a director or
officer of the corporation, or his service, at the corporation's request, as a director, officer, employee or agent of
another corporation or other enterprise, against expenses (including attorneys' fees) that are actually and reasonably
incurred by him ("Expenses"), and judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement that are actually and reasonably
incurred by him, in connection with the defense or settlement of such action, provided that he acted in good faith and
in a manner he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the corporation's best interests, and, with respect to
any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful. Although
Delaware law permits a corporation to indemnify any person referred to above against Expenses in connection with
the defense or settlement of an action by or in the right of the corporation, provided that he acted in good faith and in
a manner he reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the corporation's best interests, if such person has been
judged liable to the corporation, indemnification is only permitted to the extent that the Court of Chancery (or the court
in which the action was brought) determines that, despite the adjudication of liability, such person is entitled to
indemnity for such Expenses as the court deems proper. The Delaware General Corporation Law (the "DGCL") also
provides for mandatory indemnification of any director, officer, employee or agent against Expenses to the extent
such person has been successful in any proceeding covered by the statute. In addition, the DGCL provides the
general authorization of advancement of a director's or officer's litigation expenses in lieu of requiring the authorization
of such advancement by the board of directors in specific cases, and that indemnification and advancement of
expenses provided by the statute shall not be deemed exclusive of any other rights to which those seeking
indemnification or advancement of expenses may be entitled under any bylaw, agreement or otherwise.
Our Bylaws and Restated Certificate of Incorporation provide for indemnification of our directors and officers and
for advancement of litigation expenses to the fullest extent permitted by current Delaware law. In addition, the
Company has entered into an indemnification agreement with each director and officer that provides for
indemnification and advancement of litigation expenses to fullest extent permitted by the DCGL.
We maintain a policy of directors and officers liability insurance which reimburses us for expenses which we
may incur in connection with the foregoing indemnity provisions and which may provide direct indemnification to
directors and officers where we are unable to do so.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 (the "Securities Act") may be
permitted to our directors, officers and controlling persons pursuant to the above, we
II-1
have been advised that in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the
Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable.
Item 16.    Exhibits
5.1  Opinion of Baker & Hostetler LLP as to the legality of the securities being registered.
23.1  Consent of Baker & Hostetler LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1).
23.2  Consent Hein & Associates LLP, independent certified public accountants for the Registrant.
23.3  Consent of Behre Dolbear & Company (USA)
23.4  Consent of Broad Oak Associates
24  Power of Attorney (included on signature page).
Item 17.    Undertakings.
(A)
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(1)
To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to this
registration statement:
To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933, as
amended;
To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration
statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the
aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the registration
statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of securities
offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was registered)
and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be
reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the
aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than 20 percent change in the
maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the "Calculation of Registration Fee" table in the
effective registration statement; and
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously
disclosed in the registration statement or any material change to such information in the
registration statement;
provided, however, that subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) above do not apply if the information required to be
included in a post-effective amendment by those subparagraphs is contained in periodic reports filed with or
furnished to the Commission by the registrant pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934 that are incorporated by reference in this registration statement.
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, each
such post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the
securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the
initial bona fide offering thereof.
To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being
registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
II-2
That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser:
(i)
(ii)
Each prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3)shall be deemed to be part of
the registration statement as of the date the filed prospectus was deemed part of and included in
the registration statement; and
Each prospectus required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(2), (b)(5), or (b)(7) as part of a
registration statement in reliance on Rule 430B relating to an offering made pursuant to
Rule 415(a)(1)(i), (vii), or (x) for the purpose of providing the information required by section 10(a)
of the Securities Act of 1933 shall be deemed to be part of and included in the registration
statement as of the earlier of the date such form of prospectus is first used after effectiveness or
the date of the first contract of sale of securities in the offering described in the prospectus. As
provided in Rule 430B, for liability purposes of the issuer and any person that is at that date an
underwriter, such date shall be deemed to be a new effective date of the registration statement
relating to the securities in the registration statement to which that prospectus relates, and the
offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part
of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by
reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement
will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such effective date, supersede or
modify any statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of
the registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such effective
date.
That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act of 1933 to any
purchaser in the initial distribution of the securities: the undersigned registrant undertakes that in a
primary offering of securities of the undersigned registrant pursuant to this registration statement,
regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the securities are
offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the undersigned
registrant will be a seller to the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such
purchaser:
Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering
required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
(i)
(ii)
Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned
registrant or used or referred to by the undersigned registrant;
The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material
information about the undersigned registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the
undersigned registrant; and
Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant to the
purchaser.
(iii)
(iv)
(6)
That, for purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, each filing
of the registrant's annual report pursuant to Section 13(a) or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934 (and, where applicable, each filing of an employee benefit plan's annual report pursuant to
Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) that is incorporated by reference in this
registration statement shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities
offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide
offering thereof.
II-3
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted to directors,
officers and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the registrant has
been advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public
policy as expressed in the Securities Act of 1933 and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for
indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a
director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is
asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant
will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of
appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the
Securities Act of 1933 and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
II-4
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, Uranium Resources, Inc. has duly caused this
registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of
Lewisville, State of Texas, on September 28, 2012.
URANIUM RESOURCES, INC.
By:   /s/ DONALD C. EWIGLEBEN
Name:   Donald C. Ewigleben
  Title:
President and Chief Executive Officer
Each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and appoints Thomas H. Ehrlich as his or her
true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for him or her and in his or
her name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments (including, without limitation,
post-effective amendments) to this registration statement, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and other
documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and hereby grants to such
attorney-in-fact and agent, full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and
necessary to be done, as fully to all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying
and confirming all that said attorney-in-fact and agent, or his or her substitute or substitutes, may lawfully do or cause
to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by the
following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
Title
/s/ DONALD C. EWIGLEBEN
Donald C. Ewigleben
President and Chief Executive
Officer and Director (Principal
Executive Officer)
/s/ THOMAS H. EHRLICH
Thomas H. Ehrlich
Vice President—Finance and Chief
Financial Officer (Principal Financial
and Accounting Officer)
/s/ PAUL K. WILLMOTT
Director and Executive Chairman
Paul K. Willmott
/s/ TERENCE J. CRYAN
Director
Terence J. Cryan
/s/ MARVIN K. KAISER
Director
Marvin K. Kaiser
/s/ JOHN H. PFAHL
Director
John H. Pfahl
Date
September 28, 2012
September 28, 2012
September 28, 2012
September 28, 2012
September 28, 2012
September 28, 2012
II-5
EXHIBIT INDEX
Description of Document
Exhibit
Number
5.1  Opinion of Baker & Hostetler LLP as to the legality of the securities being registered.
23.1  Consent of Baker & Hostetler LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1).
23.2  Consent Hein & Associates LLP, independent certified public accountants for the Registrant.
23.3  Consent of Behre Dolbear & Company (USA)
23.4  Consent of Broad Oak Associates
24  Power of Attorney (included on signature page).