
Matsa Resources Limited 
Decem000000000000000000000000000000000000000
000ber 2012
LIMITED
ABN 48 106 732 487
ASX Announcement
23rd  August 2016
Matsa Expands Lake Carey Gold Project
Highlights
  Matsa  has  acquired  the  rights  to  two  additional  Exploration  Licence 
Applications covering an area of ~38km2 and located immediately north 
and east of the Fortitude gold deposit
  This strategic acquisition significantly increases the prospectivity and size 
of  Matsa’s  Lake  Carey  gold  project  in  the  highly  prospective  Laverton 
Tectonic Zone to ~151km2
  The acquired licences cover 8km of the Fortitude Shear and 2.2km of the
Bindah Shear, the key mineralised structures at the Lake Carey project
  There are a number of priority exploration targets including:


the BIF hosted Intrepid Prospect where previous drilling achieved 
intercepts up to 7m @ 2.37g/t Au; and the
Fortitude North Prospect where previous limited, broadly spaced 
aircore drilling has returned intercepts of up to 3m @ 1.18g/t Au
  The Lake Carey gold project is located in an area that hosts a number of 
world class deposits (Granny Smith, Sunrise Dam,  Wallaby) and adjoins 
Matsa’s existing Mt Weld gold project to the north thereby now creating 
a substantial combined gold project area of ~334km2 in a highly prolific 
gold field.
CORPORATE SUMMARY
Executive Chairman
Paul Poli
Director
Frank Sibbel
Director & Company Secretary
Andrew Chapman
Shares on Issue
144.7 million
Unlisted Options
7.8 million @ $0.25 - $0.40
Top 20 shareholders
Hold 52.15%
Share Price on 22nd August 2016
26 cents
Market Capitalisation
$37.62 million
Head Office: 
              Tel: +61 8 9230 3555 Fax: +61 8 9227 0370 
Bangkok Office:   Unit 1808, Pacific Place 2, 142 Sukhumvit Road, Klongtoey, Bangkok 10110    Tel: +66 0 2653 0258 Fax: +66 0 2653 0258
Suite 11, 139 Newcastle Street, Perth Western Australia 6000
reception@matsa.com.au
www.matsa.com.au
Matsa Resources Limited
Matsa is pleased to advise that it has entered into an agreement to acquire two Exploration Licence 
Applications,  E39/1864  (30km2)  and  E39/1863  (8km2),  located  immediately  north  and  east 
respectively of the Fortitude gold deposit, from Willie Grocer Pty Ltd, thereby significantly increasing 
the  prospectivity  and  increasing  the  area  available  for  exploration  in  the  Lake  Carey  gold  project 
(Acquisition of the Lake Carey gold project was described in MAT announcement to the ASX 22nd July 2016).
Matsa’s  100%  owned  Lake  Carey  gold  project  (LCGP)  is  now  ~151km2  in  extent  and  is  located 
approximately 220km northeast of Kalgoorlie-Boulder and 70km south of Laverton within the North-
eastern  Goldfields  of  Western  Australia.      The  project  is  located  in  the  highly  productive  Laverton 
Tectonic Zone (LTZ) 25km south of AngloGold Ashanti’s Sunrise Dam gold mine, 60km south of Gold 
Fields’  Granny Smith gold mine and 12 km southeast of Saracen Minerals’ Red October gold mine 
(Figure 1).
Figure 1:  Location of Lake Carey Project and Recently Acquired Tenements
Page 2
Matsa Resources Limited
Geology & Prospectivity
Prospective basement geology in E39/1863 and E39/1864 is largely concealed beneath transported 
cover associated with Lake Carey, and historic drilling has been comparitively superficial comprising 
mostly widly spaced shallow aircore drilling (Figure 2). Available historic drilling is summarised in Table 
1 with key anomalous drill intersections included in the text of this anouncement.  Salient aspects of 
past exploration are outlined in Appendix 1.
The new tenements cover the strike extensions of the highly prospective Fortitude and Bindah Shears 
and include the Intrepid Prospect and the Fortitude North and Fortitiude South targets (Figure 2).
Figure 2 - Lake Carey Project Showing Newly Acquired Licences Over Interpreted Geology with all Existing
Drilling Coloured By Gold Assay
Fortitude North Target
The Fortitude North Target comprises 5.5km of the Fortitude Shear, north-northwest of the Fortitude 
gold  deposit.    While  a  significant  part  of  this  target  is  covered  by  Lake  Carey,  geophysical 
interpretations and broad spaced reconnaissance aircore drilling indicate that the the Fortitude Shear 
is widening to the north with a number of prospective splay structures being interpreted. In addition,
Page 3
Matsa Resources Limited
3D magnetic inversion studies have suggested a series of lithologically contrasting units, including BIF 
and porphyry, being traversed by the shear. Such lithostructural settings are known to be potentially 
highly prospective.
The  existing  drill  spacing  is  largely  800m  x  100m  with  some  300m  x  100m  infill  and  comprises  90 
aircore holes. Best historic aircore drill intersections to date include 2m @ 5.5g/t Au in hole LCAC356, 
1m @ 3.0g/t Au in hole LCAC354 and 3m @ 1.18g/t Au in AC hole INAC120.
Drilling has also shown that the depth of the transported Lake Carey overburden is highly variable and 
can reach depths greater than 80m in the far north.
The  drilling  to  date  has  confirmed  the  extension  of  the  Fortitude  Shear  Zone  and  associated  gold 
anomalism but is of insufficient density to define specific follow-up targets. In addition, very few holes 
have tested the highly prospective eastern shear contact between the intermediate volcanics and the 
Mafic volcanics.
Intrepid Prospect
The  Intrepid  Prospect  is  a  substantial  magnetic  anomaly  associated  with  interpreted  D1  thrust 
repeated, folded and faulted BIF units hosted within an intermediate volcaniclastic package proximal 
to the Bindah Shear. The prospect was discovered by Aurora Gold in 1999 with further exploration by 
Midas Resources including geophysical surveys and drilling of a single diamond hole.
To date 158 aircore holes have been drilled within a 3km x 1km area over the magnetic targets. Best 
historic drill intersections include 43m @ 0.43g/t Au, including 7m @ 2.37g/t Au, in AC hole INAC043 
and  30m  @ 0.12g/t  Au,  including  3m  @ 1.11g/t  Au,  in  AC  hole  INAC046,  both related to  BIF  style 
mineralisation at the western end of the prospect, proximal to the Bindah Shear. A single diamond 
core hole was drilled by Midas in 2010 beneath the peak AC intersections which revealed a high degree 
of structural complexity and returned a best result of 0.6m @ 1.70g/t Au.
Matsa plans to follow up these encouraging intersections using modern geophysical techniques and 
additional drilling.
Fortitude South Target
The  Fortitude  South  Target  comprises  2km  of  the  Fortitude  Shear,  south-southeast  of  the  the 
Fortitude gold deposit. While a significant part of this target is covered by Lake Carey, geophysical 
interpretations  suggest that  the  historic  aircore  drilling  in  the  area was  drilled too  far to  the  east. 
Additional drilling extending the current drill lines to the west to test the Fortitude Shear position will 
be investigated by the Company.
Tenement
Aircore
RC
DDH
Holes
Metres
Holes
Metres
Holes
Metres
E39/1863
154
4,410
E39/1864
320
23,792
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
344.6
Table 1 - Historic Drilling Within Newly Acquired Licences
Page 4
Matsa Resources Limited
Acquisition Terms
Matsa has acquired a 100% interest in Exploration Licence applications E39/1863 and E39/1864 and 
mining information, for a total consideration of $100,000 of which $26,000 has been paid as a deposit 
with the balance upon grant of the licences.
For further information please contact:
+61 8 9230 3555 
+61 8 9227 0370 
reception@matsa.com.au 
www.matsa.com.au
Paul Poli 
Executive Chairman 
 
Phone   
 
Fax 
 
Email 
Web 
 
 
Competent Person Statement 
The  information  in  this  report  that  relates  to  Exploration  results,  is  based  on  information  compiled  by  David 
Fielding, who is a Fellow of the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy.  David Fielding is a full time 
employee of Matsa Resources Limited. David Fielding has sufficient experience which is relevant to the style of 
mineralisation and the type of ore deposit under consideration and the activity which he is undertaking to qualify 
as a Competent  Person as defined in  the 2012 Edition of the ‘Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration 
Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves’. David Fielding consents to the inclusion in the report of the matters 
based on his information in the form and context in which it appears.
Page 5
Matsa Resources Limited
Appendix 1  - Matsa Resources Limited
Section 1 Sampling Techniques and Data 
(Criteria in this section apply to all succeeding sections.)
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Sampling 
techniques
Nature and quality of sampling (eg cut channels, random chips, or specific 
specialised industry standard measurement tools appropriate to the minerals 
under investigation, such as down hole gamma sondes, or Portable XRF 
instruments, etc). These examples should not be taken as limiting the broad 
meaning of sampling.
Measures taken to ensure sample representivity and the appropriate calibration 
of any measurement tools or systems used. 
 
Aspects of the determination of mineralisation that are Material to the Public 
Report. In cases where ‘industry standard’ work has been done this would be 
relatively simple (eg ‘reverse circulation drilling was used to obtain 1 m samples 
from which 3 kg was pulverised to produce a 30 g charge for fire assay’). In 
other cases more explanation may be required, such as where there is coarse 
gold that has inherent sampling problems. Unusual commodities or 
mineralisation types (eg submarine nodules) may warrant disclosure of detailed 
information. 
Drill type (eg core, reverse circulation, open-hole hammer, rotary air blast, 
auger, Bangka, sonic, etc) and details (eg core diameter, triple or standard 
tube, depth of diamond tails, face-sampling bit or other type, whether core is 
oriented and if so, by what method, etc).
Drilling 
techniques
AC Drilling 
The historic AC drilling that falls within the newly acquired licences was drilled by Aurora 
Gold between 1993 to 2002 or Midas Resources between 2003 and 2013. Sampling 
techneques as described in the available DMP Annual Reports are consistent with 
industry standards including 2-6m composite sampling using spears. Resampling on 1m 
basis of any gold anomalous composite sample was routinely undertaken. 
 
Diamond Drilling 
The single DDH drilled at the Intrepid Prospect was completed by Midas resources. 
Sample processing as described in the DMP Annual Report is consistent with industry 
standard with half core being taken for assay. 
 
Very little outcrop in the project area. Geophysics was used to pick a drill direction 
orthogonal to the strike of the targeted structures. During drilling, hole directions were 
changed as required to ensure best sample representation of the mineralisation.
AC Drilling 
Standard AC drilling was used to collect representative samples on 1m intervals. These 
were then geologically logged in detail and sampled for assay on 2-6m composits. Gold 
anomalous samples were then resampled on 1m basis. 
 
Diamond Drilling 
 
Standard DDH was used to collect representative samples. The core was logged in detail 
and samples of half core were cut using a diamond saw. 
The AC drilling was undertaken by different drilling contractors using similar equipment 
(some truck and some track mounted) to collect a representative sample using aircore 
blade bits. Where possible holes were drilled to “blade refusal”. 
 
The single diamond hole at Intrepid was drilled HQ3 to 104m and then completed in 
NQ2 to final depth of 344m.
Page 6
Matsa Resources Limited
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Drill sample 
recovery
Method of recording and assessing core and chip sample recoveries and results 
assessed.
Logging
Measures taken to maximise sample recovery and ensure representative nature 
of the samples. 
 
Whether a relationship exists between sample recovery and grade and whether 
sample bias may have occurred due to preferential loss/gain of fine/coarse 
material. 
Whether core and chip samples have been geologically and geotechnically 
logged to a level of detail to support appropriate Mineral Resource estimation, 
mining studies and metallurgical studies. 
 
Whether logging is qualitative or quantitative in nature. Core (or costean, 
channel, etc) photography. 
 
The total length and percentage of the relevant intersections logged.
AC Drilling 
All AC drill samples were collected on 1m basis and either laid out on the ground in rows 
of 10 or captured in plastic bags and laid in rows of 10. AC drilling does not allow for any 
reliable method or recording recovery. Samples of varying interval were collected by the 
geologist into numbered bags with the details being carefully recorded. 
 
Diamond Drilling 
The handling of diamond core followed industry standards with core placed in carefully 
marked trays with wooden blocks marking drilling runs. Full recovery measurements 
were recorded during the logging process. Sample intervals were selected by the logging 
geologist and the samples were cut (half core) using a diamond saw. Samples of varying 
interval were collected by the geologist into numbered bags with the details being 
carefully recorded. 
The reported drilling contractors over the life of the project were all reputable and the 
drilling programs were supervised by experienced geologists.
It is possible in the case of wet AC drilling that some bias may occur. However, AC 
drilling is used to sampling detect anomalies which are then followed up using more 
reliable drilling techniques.
All drilling samples were geologically logged in detail. None of the drilling being reported 
in this announcement is being used in resource estimates.
Geological logging and assaying collects both qualitative and quantative data.
All drill holes were fully geologically logged.
Sub-sampling 
techniques 
and sample 
preparation
If core, whether cut or sawn and whether quarter, half or all core taken.
Drill core was sawn in half.
If non-core, whether riffled, tube sampled, rotary split, etc and whether 
sampled wet or dry.
AC samples were spear sampled.
Page 7
Matsa Resources Limited
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
For all sample types, the nature, quality and appropriateness of the sample 
preparation technique. 
 
Quality control procedures adopted for all sub-sampling stages to maximise 
representivity of samples.
Measures taken to ensure that the sampling is representative of the in situ 
material collected, including for instance results for field duplicate/second-half 
sampling. 
 
Whether sample sizes are appropriate to the grain size of the material being 
sampled.
Sample prepration involved total prepration at a reputable assay laboratory.
Prior to 2003, little QA/QC proceedures were in place other than the internal checks 
used by the assay laboratories. 
 
After 2003 more routine QA/QC was introduced including assay standards and duplicate 
samples. While this was sometimes inconsistent for regional drilling, any subsequent 
resource drilling was carefully quality controlled 
1m Resampling of anomalous composite AC samples was routinely undertaken. 
Only 1 DDH is reported under this release with no need for duplicate sampling.
The collected samples are considered appropriate.
Quality of 
assay data and 
laboratory 
tests
The nature, quality and appropriateness of the assaying and laboratory 
procedures used and whether the technique is considered partial or total.
The samples were all sent to reputable laboratories and used industry standard sample 
preprationa and assaying techniques of that time. The assy technique was considered 
total.
For geophysical tools, spectrometers, Portable XRF instruments, etc, the 
parameters used in determining the analysis including instrument make and 
model, reading times, calibrations factors applied and their derivation, etc. 
 
Nature of quality control procedures adopted (eg standards, blanks, duplicates, 
external laboratory checks) and whether acceptable levels of accuracy (ie lack 
of bias) and precision have been established.
Verification of 
sampling and 
assaying
The verification of significant intersections by either independent or alternative 
company personnel. 
 
The use of twinned holes. 
 
Documentation of primary data, data entry procedures, data verification, data
N/A
Prior to 2003, little QA/QC proceedures were in place other than the internal checks 
used by the assay laboratories. 
 
After 2003 more routine QA/QC was introduced including assay standards and duplicate 
samples. While this was sometimes inconsistent for regional drilling, any subsequent 
resource drilling was carefully quality controlled 
The data has been reviewed numerous times by different companies and geologists.
N/A
Detailed logging has been digitally captured and a database rebuild was undertaken by
Page 8
Matsa Resources Limited
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
storage (physical and electronic) protocols. 
 
Discuss any adjustment to assay data.
Commentary
Midas during 2008-2009.
N/A
Location of 
data points
Accuracy and quality of surveys used to locate drill holes (collar and down-hole 
surveys), trenches, mine workings and other locations used in Mineral Resource 
estimation. 
 
Specification of the grid system used.
The drill holes have been located by handheld GPS with an accuracy of +/- 5m.
Early drilling was captured on an AMG84 grid with subsequent data being captured on 
an MGA94 grid. Grid transformations have been undertaken on the ealier drilling.
Quality and adequacy of topographic control.
Very little topographic relief in the area (maximum 10m).
Data spacing 
and 
distribution
Data spacing for reporting of Exploration Results. 
 
Whether the data spacing and distribution is sufficient to establish the degree 
of geological and grade continuity appropriate for the Mineral Resource and 
Ore Reserve estimation procedure(s) and classifications applied. 
Whether sample compositing has been applied.
Spacing of drill holes has varied depending on the targeting being tested.
N/A
AC drill holes were composited from 2-6m but anomalous samples were subsequently 
resampled.
Orientation of 
data in 
relation to 
geological 
structure
Whether the orientation of sampling achieves unbiased sampling of possible 
structures and the extent to which this is known, considering the deposit type.
If the relationship between the drilling orientation and the orientation of key 
mineralised structures is considered to have introduced a sampling bias, this 
should be assessed and reported if material.
N/A
N/A
The measures taken to ensure sample security.
Unkonwn
The results of any audits or reviews of sampling techniques and data.
The drilling database was rebuilt in 2008-2009 and is considered reliable.
Sample 
security
Audits or 
reviews
Page 9
Matsa Resources Limited
Section 2 Reporting of Exploration Results 
 (Criteria listed in the preceding section also apply to this section.)
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
Mineral 
tenement and 
land tenure 
status
Exploration done 
by other parties
Geology
Drill hole 
Information
Data 
aggregation 
methods
  Type, reference name/number, location and ownership including
The acquired EL’s are summarized as follows:
agreements or material issues with third parties such as joint ventures, 
partnerships, overriding royalties, native title interests, historical sites, 
wilderness or national park and environmental settings.
  The security of the tenure held at the time of reporting along with any
known impediments to obtaining a license to operate in the area.
  Acknowledgment and appraisal of exploration by other parties.
  Deposit type, geological setting and style of mineralisation.
  A summary of all information material to the understanding of the
exploration results including a tabulation of the following information for 
all Material drill holes: 
o  easting and northing of the drill hole collar 
o  elevation or RL (Reduced Level – elevation above sea level in metres)
of the drill hole collar
o  dip and azimuth of the hole 
o  down hole length and interception depth 
o  hole length. 
If the exclusion of this information is justified on the basis that the 
information is not Material and this exclusion does not detract from the 
understanding of the report, the Competent Person should clearly explain 
why this is the case. 
In reporting Exploration Results, weighting averaging techniques, 
maximum and/or minimum grade truncations (eg cutting of high grades) 
and cut-off grades are usually Material and should be stated.


Acquisition of the captioned EL’s whereby both licences will be transferred to 
Matsa immediately upon granting with Matsa holding a 100% interest 
thereafter. 
The tenements are located on Vacant Crown Land. 
No issues are foreseen to hinder heritage agreements being reached with the 
Kurrku native title claimants during the application process. 
Most significant exploration has been carried out by Aurora Minerals (1992 – 
2002) and Midas Gold (2003 – 2010). See section 1 
No significant drilling campaigns were carried out post 2010. 
Structurally controlled orogenic quartz vein hosted gold mineralisation.
Drill hole locations are provided in plan to illustrate the Intrepid exploration 
target and coverage of past drilling along the Fortitude shear. 
Historic drillholes are summarised in Table 1. 
Drillholes with >0.5 g/t Au are listed in the report text.
Not applicable as only individual intercepts are described.
Page 10
Matsa Resources Limited
Criteria
JORC Code explanation
Commentary
  Where aggregate intercepts incorporate short lengths of high grade
results and longer lengths of low grade results, the procedure used for 
such aggregation should be stated and some typical examples of such 
aggregations should be shown in detail.
  The assumptions used for any reporting of metal equivalent values should
be clearly stated.
  These relationships are particularly important in the reporting of


Exploration Results. 
If the geometry of the mineralisation with respect to the drill hole angle is 
known, its nature should be reported. 
If it is not known and only the down hole lengths are reported, there 
should be a clear statement to this effect (eg ‘down hole length, true 
width not known’).
Relationship 
between 
mineralisation 
widths and 
intercept lengths
All drill hole intercepts measured in down hole metres.  Drilling has been 
carried out as closely as possible to achieve an orthogonal intercept on steeply 
dipping mineralisation.
Diagrams
  Appropriate maps and sections (with scales) and tabulations of intercepts
should be included for any significant discovery being reported These 
should include, but not be limited to a plan view of drill hole collar 
locations and appropriate sectional views.
suitable plans showing historic drilling in the two recently acquired EL’s are 
included in the body of the report.
Balanced 
reporting
Other 
substantive 
exploration data
  Where comprehensive reporting of all Exploration Results is not
Not applicable
practicable, representative reporting of both low and high grades and/or 
widths should be practiced to avoid misleading reporting of Exploration 
Results.
  Other exploration data, if meaningful and material, should be reported
Not applicable.
including (but not limited to): geological observations; geophysical survey 
results; geochemical survey results; bulk samples – size and method of 
treatment; metallurgical test results; bulk density, groundwater, 
geotechnical and rock characteristics; potential deleterious or 
contaminating substances.
Further work
  The nature and scale of planned further work (eg tests for lateral
Not applicable.
extensions or depth extensions or large-scale step-out drilling).
  Diagrams clearly highlighting the areas of possible extensions, including
the main geological interpretations and future drilling areas, provided 
this information is not commercially sensitive.
Page 11