
EX-10.1 4 exhibit101-amendmentno10to.htm EXHIBIT 10.1 Exhibit
EXECUTION VERSION
AMENDMENT NO. 10 TO 
CREDIT AGREEMENT
This Amendment No. 10 to Credit Agreement (this "Amendment") dated as of August 11, 2016 is
among Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the "Borrower"),
the Guarantor (as defined below), the Lenders (as defined in the below-mentioned Credit
Agreement) party hereto, and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent
(in such capacity, the "Administrative Agent") and as collateral agent (in such capacity, the
"Collateral Agent") for the Lenders.
RECITALS
A.The Borrower, the Lenders and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as the Administrative
Agent, are parties to that certain Credit Agreement dated as of December 20, 2011, as amended
by that certain Agreement and Amendment No. 1 to Credit Agreement dated as of April 23, 2012,
as amended by that certain Agreement and Amendment No. 2 to Credit Agreement dated as of
November 26, 2012, as amended by that certain Agreement and Amendment No. 3 to Credit
Agreement dated as of November 5, 2013, as amended by that certain Amendment No. 4 to
Credit Agreement dated as of April 11, 2014, as amended by that certain Agreement and
Amendment No. 5 to Credit Agreement dated as of November 17, 2014, as amended by that
certain Amendment No. 6 to Credit Agreement dated as of February 12, 2015, as amended by
that certain Agreement and Amendment No. 7 to Credit Agreement dated as of November 30,
2015, as amended by that certain Agreement and Amendment No. 8 to Credit Agreement dated
as of April 29, 2016 and as amended by that certain Agreement and Amendment No. 9 to Credit
Agreement dated as of May 31, 2016 (as the same may be amended, modified or supplemented
from time to time, the "Credit Agreement").
B.    In connection with such Credit Agreement, Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a Delaware limited
partnership and owner of 100% of the membership interests in the Borrower, executed and
delivered that certain Guaranty dated as of December 20, 2011 (as the same may be amended,
modified or supplemented from time to time, the "Guaranty") in favor of the Administrative Agent
for the benefit of the Guaranteed Parties (as defined in the Guaranty) pursuant to which it became
a Guarantor.
C.    The Borrower contemporaneously herewith is acquiring certain Oil and Gas Properties
accretive to the Borrowing Base and has requested certain amendments to the Credit
Agreement.
D.    All of the Lenders have agreed to amend the Credit Agreement on the terms and conditions
set forth herein.
THEREFORE, the parties hereto hereby agree as follows:
Amendment No. 10 
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC 
Credit Agreement
ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS
Section 1.01    Terms Defined Above. As used in this Amendment, each of the terms defined in
the opening paragraph and the Recitals above shall have the meanings assigned to such terms
therein.
Section 1.02    Terms Defined in the Credit Agreement. Each term defined in the Credit
Agreement and used herein without definition shall have the meaning assigned to such term in
the Credit Agreement, unless expressly provided to the contrary.
Section 1.03    Other Definitional Provisions. The words "hereby", "herein", "hereinafter",
"hereof", "hereto" and "hereunder" when used in this Amendment shall refer to this Amendment
as a whole and not to any particular Article, Section, subsection or provision of this Amendment.
Section, subsection and Schedule references herein are to such Sections, subsections and
Schedules to this Amendment unless otherwise specified. All titles or headings to Articles,
Sections, subsections or other divisions of this Amendment or the schedules hereto, if any, are
only for the convenience of the parties and shall not be construed to have any effect or meaning
with respect to the other content of such Articles, Sections, subsections, other divisions or
schedules, such other content being controlling as the agreement among the parties hereto.
Whenever the context requires, reference herein made to the single number shall be understood
to include the plural; and likewise, the plural shall be understood to include the singular. Words
denoting gender shall be construed to include the masculine, feminine and neuter, when such
construction is appropriate; and specific enumeration shall not exclude the general but shall be
construed as cumulative. Definitions of terms defined in the singular or plural shall be equally
applicable to the plural or singular, as the case may be, unless otherwise indicated.
Section 1.04    Incorporation by Reference. The Recitals to this Amendment are incorporated
herein by reference and made a part hereof for all purposes as though set forth in this
Amendment verbatim.
ARTICLE II
     
AMENDMENTS
Section 2.01    Amendments to Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement, including the
Schedules and Exhibits thereto, as applicable, is hereby amended as and to the extent set forth
on Exhibit A hereto (i) to delete the stricken text (indicated textually in the same manner as the
following example: stricken text) and (ii) to add the double-underlined text (indicated textually in
the same manner as the following example: double-underlined text).
--
Amendment No. 10 
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC 
Credit Agreement
ARTICLE III
     
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
Section 3.01    Borrower Representations and Warranties. The Borrower represents and warrants
that (a) the representations and warranties contained in the Credit Agreement and the
representations and warranties contained in the other Loan Documents are true and correct in all
material respects on and as of the Effective Date (defined below) as if made on and as of such
date, except to the extent that such representations and warranties specifically refer to an earlier
date, in which case they shall be true and correct in all material respects as of such earlier date;
and (b) the Liens under the Security Documents are valid and subsisting and secure Borrower's
obligations under the Loan Documents.
Section 3.02    Guarantor's Representations and Warranties. Guarantor represents and warrants
that (a) the representations and warranties of Guarantor contained in the Guaranty and the
representations and warranties contained in the other Loan Documents to which Guarantor is a
party are true and correct in all material respects on and as of the Effective Date as if made on
and as of such date, except to the extent that such representations and warranties specifically
refer to an earlier date, in which case they shall be true and correct as of such earlier date; (b) no
Default or Event of Default has occurred which is continuing; and (c) the Liens under the Security
Documents to which Guarantor is a party are valid and subsisting and secure Guarantor's
obligations under the Loan Documents.
ARTICLE IV
     
CONDITIONS; ETC.
Section 4.01    The Credit Agreement shall be amended as provided herein upon the date all of
the following conditions precedent have been met (the "Effective Date"):
(a)    The Administrative Agent's receipt of the following, each of which shall be originals or
telecopies (followed promptly by originals) unless otherwise specified, each properly executed
by an Authorized Officer of the Borrower, each dated the Effective Date (or, in the case of
certificates of governmental officials, a recent date before the Effective Date) and each in form
and substance reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent and each of the Lenders party
hereto:
(i)    counterparts of this Amendment executed by the Borrower, the Administrative Agent, and
each of the Lenders, sufficient in number for distribution to the Administrative Agent, each Lender
and the Borrower;
(ii)    such certificates of resolutions or other action, incumbency certificates and/or other
certificates of Authorized Officers of the Borrower as the Administrative Agent may require
evidencing the identity, authority and capacity of each Authorized Officer thereof authorized to act
as an Authorized Officer in connection with this Amendment and the other Loan Documents to
which the Borrower is a party or is to be a party;
--
Amendment No. 10 
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC 
Credit Agreement
(iii)    such documents and certifications as the Administrative Agent may reasonably require to
evidence that the Borrower is duly organized or formed, and that the Borrower is validly existing,
in good standing and qualified to engage in business in each jurisdiction where its ownership,
lease or operation of properties or the conduct of its business requires such qualification, except
to the extent that failure to do so could not reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse
Change;
(iv)    a certificate signed by an Authorized Officer of the Borrower as of the Effective Date
certifying that:
(A)    to the knowledge of such responsible officer, as of the Effective Date, all the conditions
precedent set forth in Section 4.01 of this Amendment have been satisfied or waived; and
(B)    immediately before and after giving effect to the PES Acquisition and this Agreement, there
has been no event or circumstance since December 31, 2015, that has had or that could be
reasonably be expected to have, either individually or in the aggregate, a Material Adverse
Change; and
(v)    a representation certificate of an Authorized Officer of the Borrower certifying, as of the
Effective Date, as to the value of Oil and Gas Properties constituting part of the Mortgaged
Property as a percentage of the value of all Oil and Gas Properties of the Borrower, such
valuation to be based upon the most recent Reserve Report and other acquisition-related
information available to such officer;
(b)    All of the information (other than projections) made available by the Borrower to the
Administrative Agent prior to the Effective Date shall be complete and correct in all material
respects, and no changes or developments shall have occurred, and no new or additional
information shall have been received or discovered by the Administrative Agent or the Lenders
regarding the Borrower after June 30, 2016 that (A) either individually or in the aggregate could
reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Change or (B) purports to adversely affect
the Loan Documents or the rights of the Lenders thereunder;
(c)    The Borrower shall have received the cash proceeds of the 2016 Preferred Units; and
(d)    (i) The PES Acquisition Agreement shall not have been amended, waived or otherwise
modified, and no consent thereunder shall have been given, in each case that is materially
adverse to the Administrative Agent or the Lenders, unless consented to by the Administrative
Agent (not to be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned) and (ii) the PES Acquisition
shall have been, or shall concurrently with the funding of the Loans be, consummated in
accordance with the terms of the PES Acquisition Agreement.
Without limiting the generality of the provisions of Section 10.1 of the Credit Agreement, for
purposes of determining compliance with the conditions specified in this Section 4.01, each
Lender that has signed this Amendment shall be deemed to have consented to, approved or
accepted
--
Amendment No. 10 
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC 
Credit Agreement
or to be satisfied with, each document or other matter required thereunder to be consented to or
approved by or acceptable or satisfactory to a Lender unless the Administrative Agent shall have
received notice from such Lender prior to the proposed Effective Date specifying its objection
thereto.
Section 4.02    Post-Closing Conditions. To the extent not delivered as of the Effective Date,
within 30 days after the Effective Date (or such longer period as may be agreed to by the
Administrative Agent), the Borrower shall deliver to the Administrative Agent such Security
Documents as are necessary for the Borrower to be in compliance with Section 6.15 of the Credit
Agreement. The failure to comply with this Section 4.02 shall constitute an Event of Default under
the Credit Agreement.
Section 4.03    Attorneys' Fees and Expenses. The Borrower shall have paid or reimbursed the
Administrative Agent for all of its reasonable out-of-pocket costs and expenses incurred in
connection with this Amendment, any other documents prepared in connection herewith and the
transactions contemplated hereby, including, without limitation, the fees and disbursements of
the Administrative Agent's outside legal counsel, in each case, pursuant to all invoices of the
Administrative Agent and/or such counsel presented to the Borrower for payment prior to the
Effective Date.
ARTICLE V
     
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 5.01    Effect on Loan Documents; Acknowledgements.
(a)    Each of the Borrower, the Guarantor, Administrative Agent, the LC Issuers and the Lenders
does hereby adopt, ratify, and confirm the Credit Agreement and each other Loan Document, as
amended hereby, and acknowledges and agrees that the Credit Agreement and each other Loan
Document, as amended hereby, is and remains in full force and effect, and the Borrower and the
Guarantor acknowledge and agree that their respective liabilities and obligations under the
Credit Agreement and the other Loan Documents are not impaired in any respect by this
Amendment.
(b)    From and after the Effective Date, all references to the Credit Agreement and the Loan
Documents shall mean such Credit Agreement and such Loan Documents as amended by this
Amendment.
(c)    This Amendment is a Loan Document for the purposes of the provisions of the other Loan
Documents. Without limiting the foregoing, any breach of representations, warranties, and
covenants under this Amendment shall be a Default under the Credit Agreement, subject to all
applicable cure or grace periods provided for under the Credit Agreement.
(d)    Captions. Section captions used in this Amendment are for convenience only and shall not
affect the construction of this Amendment.
--
Amendment No. 10 
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC 
Credit Agreement
(e)    Administrative Agent, LC Issuer and Lenders Make No Representations or Warranties.
None of the Administrative Agent, the LC Issuer nor any Lender (a) makes any representation or
warranty nor assumes any responsibility with respect to any statements, warranties, or
representations made in or in connection with the Loan Documents or the execution, legality,
validity, enforceability, genuineness, sufficiency, or value of the Credit Agreement, the Loan
Documents, or any other instrument or document furnished pursuant thereto or (b) makes any
representation or warranty nor assumes any responsibility with respect to the financial condition
of the Borrower or any other Person or the performance or observance by such Persons of any of
their obligations under the Loan Documents, or any other instrument or document furnished
pursuant thereto.
(f)    Lender Consent to Hugoton Basin. The Lenders consent to the Hugoton Basin Divestiture.
Section 5.02    Reaffirmation of the Guaranty. Guarantor hereby ratifies, confirms, acknowledges
and agrees that its obligations under the Guaranty are in full force and effect and that Guarantor
continues to unconditionally and irrevocably guarantee the full and punctual payment, when due,
whether at stated maturity or earlier by acceleration or otherwise, of the Guaranteed Obligations
(as defined in the Guaranty), as such Guaranteed Obligations may have been amended by this
Agreement, and its execution and delivery of this Amendment does not indicate or establish an
approval or consent requirement by Guarantor under the Guaranty in connection with the
execution and delivery of amendments to the Credit Agreement, the Notes or any of the other
Loan Documents (other than the Guaranty or any other Loan Document to which Guarantor is a
party).
Section 5.03    Counterparts. This Amendment may be separately executed in any number of
counterparts and by different parties hereto in separate counterparts, each of which when so
executed shall be deemed to constitute one and the same agreement. This Amendment shall
become effective when it shall have been executed by Administrative Agent and when
Administrative Agent shall have received counterparts hereof that, when taken together, bear the
signatures of each of the other parties hereto. This Amendment may be transmitted and/or signed
by facsimile, telecopy or electronic mail. The effectiveness of any such documents and
signatures shall, subject to applicable Law, have the same force and effect as manually-signed
originals and shall be binding on all Restricted Persons and Lender Parties. The Administrative
Agent may also require that any such documents and signatures be confirmed by a manually-
signed original thereof; provided, however, that the failure to request or deliver the same shall not
limit the effectiveness of any facsimile document or signature.
Section 5.04    Successors and Assigns. This Amendment shall be binding upon and inure to the
benefit of the parties hereto and their respective successors and assigns permitted pursuant to
the Credit Agreement.
Section 5.05    Invalidity. In the event that any one or more of the provisions contained in this
Amendment shall for any reason be held invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any respect, such
invalidity, illegality or unenforceability shall not affect any other provision of this Amendment.
--
Amendment No. 10 
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC 
Credit Agreement
Section 5.06    Governing Law. This Amendment shall be deemed to be a contract made under
and shall be governed by, construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the State of
New York and the laws of the United States, without regard to principles of conflicts of laws.
Section 5.07    RELEASE. For good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of
which are hereby acknowledged, each Credit Party hereby, for itself and its successors and
assigns, fully and without reserve, releases, acquits, and forever discharges each of the Lender
Parties and each Lender CounterParty, its respective successors and assigns, officers, directors,
employees, representatives, trustees, attorneys, agents and affiliates (collectively the "Released
Parties" and individually a "Released Party") from any and all actions, claims, demands, causes
of action, judgments, executions, suits, liabilities, costs, damages, expenses or other obligations
of any kind and nature whatsoever, direct and/or indirect, at law or in equity, whether now
existing or hereafter asserted, whether absolute or contingent, whether due or to become due,
whether disputed or undisputed, whether known or unknown (INCLUDING, WITHOUT
LIMITATION, ANY OFFSETS, REDUCTIONS, REBATEMENT, CLAIMS OF USURY OR
CLAIMS WITH RESPECT TO THE NEGLIGENCE OF ANY RELEASED PARTY) (collectively,
the "Released Claims"), for or because of any matters or things occurring, existing or actions
done, omitted to be done, or suffered to be done by any of the Released Parties, in each case, on
or prior to the effective date of this Amendment and are in any way directly or indirectly arising out
of or in any way connected to any of this Amendment, the Credit Agreement or any other Loan
Document (collectively, the "Released Matters"). In entering into this Amendment, each Credit
Party consulted with, and has been represented by, legal counsel and expressly disclaim any
reliance on any representations, acts or omissions by any of the Released Parties and hereby
agrees and acknowledges that the validity and effectiveness of the releases set forth herein do
not depend in any way on any such representations, acts and/or omissions or the accuracy,
completeness or validity hereof. The provisions of this Section 5.07 shall survive the termination
of this Amendment, the Credit Agreement and the other Loan Documents and payment in full of
the Obligations.
Section 5.08    Entire Agreement. THIS AMENDMENT, THE CREDIT AGREEMENT AS
AMENDED BY THIS AMENDMENT, THE NOTES, AND THE OTHER LOAN DOCUMENTS
CONSTITUTE THE ENTIRE UNDERSTANDING AMONG THE PARTIES HERETO WITH
RESPECT TO THE SUBJECT MATTER HEREOF AND SUPERSEDE ANY PRIOR
AGREEMENTS, WRITTEN OR ORAL, WITH RESPECT THERETO.
THERE ARE NO UNWRITTEN ORAL AGREEMENTS AMONG THE PARTIES.
[The remainder of this page has been left blank intentionally.]
--
Amendment No. 10 
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC 
Credit Agreement
EXECUTED to be effective as of the date first above written.
BORROWER:
MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC, a 
Delaware limited liability company
By:    Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a 
    Delaware limited partnership, its 
    Sole Member
By:    Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a 
    Delaware limited liability company, 
    Its General Partner
By:/s/ Jeffrey R. Olmstead     
        Jeffrey R. Olmstead 
        President and Chief Executive Officer
GUARANTOR:
MID-CON ENERGY PARTNERS, LP, a 
Delaware limited partnership
By:    Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company, 
    Its General Partner
By: /s/ Jeffrey R. Olmstead     
        Jeffrey R. Olmstead 
        President and Chief Executive Officer
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT AND COLLATERAL AGENT:
WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION as Administrative Agent, as Collateral
Agent, as an LC Issuer and as a Lender
By:/s/ Brett Steele             
Name:    Brett Steele 
Title:     Director
LENDERS:
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA 
as an LC Issuer and as a Lender
By:/s/ Mark Lumpkin, Jr.         
Name:    Mark Lumpkin, Jr. 
Title:     Authorized Signatory
BOKF, NA, d/b/a The Bank of Texas, 
as a Lender
By: /s/ Thomas E. Stelmar, Jr.      
Name:    Thomas E. Stelmar, Jr. 
Title:     Senior Vice President
COMERICA BANK, 
as a Lender
By:/s/ Chad Stephenson         
Name:    Chad Stephenson 
Title:    Vice President
THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA, 
as a Lender
By:/s/ Mark Sparrow 
Name:    Mark Sparrow 
Title:    Director
MUFG UNION BANK, N.A., 
as a Lender
By:/s/ Brian Hawk             
Name:    Brian Hawk 
Title:    Vice President
FROST BANK, 
as a Lender
By:/s/ Philip M. Mortimer         
Name:    Philip M. Mortimer 
Title:    Assistant Vice President
EXHIBIT A TO AMENDMENT NO. 10 TO CREDIT AGREEMENT
EXHIBIT A TO AMENDMENT NO. 9 TO CREDIT AGREEMENT        
COMPILED CREDIT AGREEMENT
Amendment No. 1 – April 23, 2012 
Amendment No. 2 – November 26, 2012 
Amendment No. 3 – November 5, 2013 
Amendment No. 4 – April 11, 2014 
Amendment No. 5 – November 17, 2014 
Amendment No. 6 – February 12, 2015 
Amendment No. 7 – November 30, 2015 
Amendment No. 8 – April 29, 2016 
Amendment No. 9 – May 31, 2016 
Amendment No. 10 – August 11, 2016
____________________________________________________
MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC
as Borrower
and
WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION 
as Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent
and
CERTAIN FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
as Lenders
____________________________________________________ 
WELLS FARGO SECURITIES, LLC
As Sole Arranger and Bookrunner
Originally dated December 20, 2011
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE I - Definitions and References    1
Section 1.1 Defined Terms    1
Section 1.2 Exhibits and Schedules; Additional Definitions    22
Section 1.3 Amendment of Defined Instruments    2223
Section 1.4 Terms Generally; References and Titles    2223
Section 1.5 Calculations and Determinations    23
Section 1.6 Joint Preparation; Construction of Indemnities and Releases    23
ARTICLE II - The Loans and Letters of Credit    2324
Section 2.1 Commitment to Lend; Notes    2324
Section 2.2 Requests for Loans    24
Section 2.3 Continuations and Conversions of Existing Loans    25
Section 2.4 Use of Proceeds    26
Section 2.5 Interest Rates and Fees    26
Section 2.6 Optional Prepayments    27
Section 2.7 Mandatory Prepayments    27
Section 2.8 Initial Borrowing Base    29
Section 2.9 Subsequent Determinations of Borrowing Base    29
Section 2.10 Borrower's Reduction of Borrowing Base    30
Section 2.11 Letters of Credit    30
Section 2.12 Requesting Letters of Credit    31
Section 2.13 Reimbursement and Participations    32
Section 2.14 Letter of Credit Fees    3433
Section 2.15 No Duty to Inquire    34
i
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
Section 2.16 Cash Collateral    35
Section 2.17 Obligations of Lenders Several    36
Section 2.18 Defaulting Lenders    36
ARTICLE III - Payments to Lenders    3837
Section 3.1 General Procedures    3837
Section 3.2 Increased Costs    38
Section 3.3 Illegality    4039
Section 3.4 Funding Losses    40
Section 3.5 Taxes    40
Section 3.6 Alternative Rate of Interest    4342
Section 3.7 Mitigation Obligations; Replacement of Lenders    43
Section 3.8 Payments by Borrower; Presumptions by Agent    44
ARTICLE IV - Conditions Precedent    44
Section 4.1 Conditions Precedent to Closing    44
Section 4.2 Additional Conditions Precedent    46
ARTICLE V - Representations and Warranties    47
Section 5.1 No Default    47
Section 5.2 Organization and Good Standing    47
Section 5.3 Authorization    47
Section 5.4 No Conflicts or Consents    47
Section 5.5 Enforceable Obligations    4847
Section 5.6 Initial Proforma Financial Statements    4847
Section 5.7 [Reserved]    48
Section 5.8 Full Disclosure    48
Section 5.9 Litigation    48
ii
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
Section 5.10 Labor Disputes and Acts of God    48
Section 5.11 ERISA Plans and Liabilities    4948
Section 5.12 Environmental and Other Laws    4948
Section 5.13 Names and Places of Business    49
Section 5.14 Borrower’s Subsidiaries    49
Section 5.15 Title to Properties; Licenses    5049
Section 5.16 Government Regulation    50
Section 5.17 Insider    50
Section 5.18 Solvency    50
Section 5.19 Leases and Contracts; Performance of Obligations    5150
Section 5.20 Sale of Production    51
Section 5.21 Operation of Oil and Gas Properties    51
Section 5.22 Ad Valorem and Severance Taxes    5251
Section 5.23 Hedging Contracts    52
Section 5.24 Anti-Terrorism; Anti-Money Laundering; Etc    52
Section 5.25 EEA Financial Institutions    52
ARTICLE VI - Affirmative Covenants    52
Section 6.1 Payment and Performance    5352
Section 6.2 Books, Financial Statements and Reports    5352
Section 6.3 Other Information and Inspections    55
Section 6.4 Notice of Material Events and Change of Address    55
Section 6.5 Maintenance of Properties    56
Section 6.6 Maintenance of Existence and Qualifications    56
Section 6.7 Payment of Trade Liabilities, Taxes, etc    56
Section 6.8 Insurance    56
iii
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
Section 6.9 Performance on Borrower’s Behalf    57
Section 6.10 Interest    57
Section 6.11 Compliance with Agreements and Law    57
Section 6.12 Environmental Matters; Environmental Reviews    5857
Section 6.13 Evidence of Compliance    58
Section 6.14 Agreement to Deliver Security Documents    58
Section 6.15 Additional Collateral    5958
Section 6.16 Perfection and Protection of Security Interests and Liens    59
Section 6.17 Bank Accounts; Offset    59
Section 6.18 Production Proceeds    6059
Section 6.19 Mortgaged Property Covenants    60
Section 6.20 Leases and Contracts; Performance of Obligations    60
Section 6.21 Representation to Continue to be True    6160
Section 6.22 Guaranties of Borrower’s Subsidiaries    61
Section 6.23 Hedging Contracts    61
ARTICLE VII - Negative Covenants    62
Section 7.1 Indebtedness    62
Section 7.2 Limitation on Liens    62
Section 7.3 Hedging Contracts    64
Section 7.4 Limitation on Mergers, Issuances of Securities    65
Section 7.5 Limitation on Sales of Property    65
Section 7.6 Limitation on Restricted Payments    66
Section 7.7 Limitation on Investments; Nature of Business    66
Section 7.8 Limitation on Credit Extensions    68
Section 7.9 Transactions with Affiliates    68
iv
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
Section 7.10 Prohibited Contracts; Multiemployer ERISA Plans    68
Section 7.11 Subsidiaries    68
Section 7.12 Current Ratio    68
Section 7.13 Leverage Ratio    6968
Section 7.14 Amendments to Organizational Documents    69
ARTICLE VIII - Events of Default and Remedies    70
Section 8.1 Events of Default    70
Section 8.2 Remedies    72
Section 8.3 Application of Proceeds after Acceleration    72
ARTICLE IX - Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent    73
Section 9.1 Appointment and Authority    73
Section 9.2 Exculpation, Administrative Agent’s and Collateral Agent’s Reliance, Etc    73
Section 9.3 Reliance by Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent    74
Section 9.4 Non-Reliance on Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent and Other Lenders    74
Section 9.5 Rights as a Lender    7574
Section 9.6 Sharing of Set-Offs and Other Payments    75
Section 9.7 Investments    75
Section 9.8 Resignation of Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent    7675
Section 9.9 Delegation of Duties    76
Section 9.10 No Other Duties    7776
Section 9.11 Administrative Agent May File Proofs of Claim    77
Section 9.12 Guaranty Matters    77
Section 9.13 Collateral Matters    77
Section 9.14 Lender Hedging Obligations    79
ARTICLE X - Miscellaneous    79
v
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
Section 10.1 Waivers and Amendments; Acknowledgements    79
Section 10.2 Survival of Agreements; Cumulative Nature    81
Section 10.3 Notices; Effectiveness; Electronic Communication    81
Section 10.4 Expenses; Indemnity; Damage Waiver    82
Section 10.5 Successors and Assigns; Joint and Several Liability    8483
Section 10.6 Confidentiality    86
Section 10.7 Governing Law; Submission to Process    87
Section 10.8 Limitation on Interest    88
Section 10.9 Termination; Limited Survival    88
Section 10.10 Severability    89
Section 10.11 Counterparts    89
Section 10.12 Waiver of Jury Trial, Punitive Damages, etc    89
Section 10.13 USA PATRIOT Act Notice    89
Section 10.14 Right of Set-Off    90
Section 10.15 Acknowledgement and Consent to Bail-In of EEA Financial Institutions    90
Schedules and Exhibits:
Schedule 1    -    Lenders Schedule
Schedule 2    -    Disclosure Schedule
Schedule 3    -    Security Schedule
Schedule 4    -    Insurance Schedule
Schedule 5     -    Existing Hedges
Schedule 7.1     -    Additional Permitted Indebtedness
Schedule 7.2     -    Additional Permitted Liens
vi
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
Exhibit A    -    Promissory Note
Exhibit B    -    Borrowing Notice
Exhibit C    -    Continuation/Conversion Notice
Exhibit D    -    Repayment Notice
Exhibit E    -    Certificate Accompanying Financial Statements
Exhibit F    -    Assignment and Assumption
vii
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
CREDIT AGREEMENT
THIS CREDIT AGREEMENT originally made as of December 20, 2011, by and among MID-
CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (herein called
“Borrower”), ROYAL BANK OF CANADA (herein called “Predecessor Administrative Agent”) and
the Lenders originally party thereto, as amended from time to time including pursuant to
Amendment No. 7 (defined below) pursuant to which Predecessor Administrative Agent resigned
as Administrative Agent, the Predecessor Collateral Agent resigned Collateral Agent and Wells
Fargo Bank, National Association was appointed and became Administrative Agent, Collateral
Agent and an LC Issuer. In consideration of the mutual covenants and agreements contained
herein the parties hereto agree as follows:
ARTICLE I - Definitions and References
Section 1.1 
    Defined Terms. As used in this Agreement, each of the following terms has the meaning given
to such term in this Section 1.1 or in the sections and subsections referred to below:
"2016 Preferred Units" means the MLP's units of convertible Equity issued in exchange for up to
$25,000,000 of cash, with (i) a five-year conversion term, (ii) quarterly distributions payable (x) in
cash at an annual rate of 8% or (y) in the event that this Agreement prevents payment of a cash
distribution, in kind (PIK Units) at an annual rate of 10%, (iii) a $2.15 per unit conversion price at
the option of holder, (iv) customary registration rights, (v) a mandatory redemption for cash
provision at the holder's election on the fifth anniversary of issuance, (vi) a $50,000 per quarter
monitoring fee, and (vii) otherwise on terms and conditions satisfactory to the Administrative
Agent.
“Adjusted Base Rate” means, on any day, the Base Rate for such day plus the Base Rate Margin
for such day, provided that the Adjusted Base Rate charged by any Person shall never exceed
the Highest Lawful Rate.
“Adjusted Eurodollar Rate” means, for any Eurodollar Loan for any day during any Interest Period
therefor, the rate per annum equal to the sum of (a) the Eurodollar Margin for such day plus (b)
the rate per annum (rounded upwards, if necessary, to the nearest 1/100 of 1%) determined by
Administrative Agent to be equal to the quotient obtained by dividing (i) the Eurodollar Rate for
such Eurodollar Loan for such Interest Period by (ii) 1 minus the Reserve Requirement for such
Eurodollar Loan for such Interest Period, provided that no Adjusted Eurodollar Rate charged by
any Person shall ever exceed the Highest Lawful Rate. The Adjusted Eurodollar Rate for any
Eurodollar Loan shall change whenever the Eurodollar Margin or the Reserve Requirement
changes.
“Administrative Details Form” means an Administrative Details Form in a form supplied by
Administrative Agent.
“Affiliate” means, as to a specified Person, another Person that directly or indirectly (through one
or more intermediaries or otherwise) Controls, is Controlled by, or is under common Control with,
the Person.
“Administrative Agent” means prior to the Seventh Amendment Effective Date, Royal Bank of
Canada, and from and after the Seventh Amendment Effective Date means, Wells Fargo Bank,
National Association, as Administrative Agent hereunder, and its successors in such capacity.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
“Administrative Agent's Office” means the Administrative Agent's address and, as appropriate,
account as set forth on the Lenders Schedule, or such other address or account as the
Administrative Agent may from time to time notify to the Borrower and the Lenders.
“Agreement” means this Credit Agreement, as amended by Amendment No. 1, Amendment No.
2, Amendment No. 3, Amendment No. 4, Amendment No. 5, Amendment No. 6 and Amendment
No. 7.
“Amendment No. 1” means that certain Agreement and Amendment No. 1 to Credit Agreement
dated as of April 23, 2012, among the Borrower, the Guarantor, Royal Bank of Canada, as
Administrative Agent, a Lender and as LC Issuer and all of the Lenders.
“Amendment No. 2” means that certain Agreement and Amendment No. 2 to Credit Agreement
dated as of November 26, 2012, among the Borrower, the Guarantor, Royal Bank of Canada, as
Administrative Agent, a Lender and as LC Issuer and all of the Lenders.
“Amendment No. 3” means that certain Agreement and Amendment No. 3 to Credit Agreement
dated as of November 5, 2013, among the Borrower, the Guarantor, Royal Bank of Canada, as
Administrative Agent, a Lender and as LC Issuer and all of the Lenders.
“Amendment No. 4” means that certain Amendment No. 4 to Credit Agreement dated as of April
11, 2014, among the Borrower, the Guarantor, Royal Bank of Canada, as Administrative Agent, a
Lender and as LC Issuer and all of the Lenders.
“Amendment No. 5” means that certain Amendment No. 5 to Credit Agreement dated as of
November 17, 2014, among the Borrower, the Guarantor, Royal Bank of Canada, as
Administrative Agent, a Lender and as LC Issuer and all of the Lenders.
“Amendment No. 6” means that certain Amendment No. 6 to Credit Agreement dated as of
February 12, 2015, among the Borrower, the Guarantor, Royal Bank of Canada, as
Administrative Agent, a Lender and as LC Issuer and the Required Lenders.
“Amendment No. 7” means that certain Agreement and Amendment No. 7 to Credit Agreement
dated as of November 30, 2015, among the Borrower, the Guarantor, Royal Bank of Canada, as
resigning Administrative Agent, resigning Collateral Agent, the Required Lenders and Wells
Fargo Bank, National Association, as successor Administrative Agent, successor Collateral
Agent, and as an LC Issuer.
“Amendment No. 8” means that certain Amendment No. 8 to Credit Agreement dated as of April
29, 2016, among the Borrower, the Guarantor, the Lenders, and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as the
Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent, and an LC Issuer.
“Amendment No. 9” means that certain Amendment No. 9 to Credit Agreement dated as of June
1,May 31, 2016, among the Borrower, the Guarantor, the Lenders, and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.,
as the Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent, and an LC Issuer.
“Amendment No. 10” means that certain Amendment No. 10 to Credit Agreement dated as of
August 11, 2016, among the Borrower, the Guarantor, the Lenders, and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.,
as the Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent, and an LC Issuer.
“Anti-Corruption Laws” means all laws, rules, and regulations of any jurisdiction applicable to the
Borrower or Guarantor or their Subsidiaries from time to time concerning or relating to bribery or
corruption.
“Applicable Lending Office” means a Lender’s Domestic Lending Office (in the case of Base Rate
Loans) and such Lender’s Eurodollar Lending Office (in the case of Eurodollar Loans).
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
2
“Applicable Utilization Level” means, with respect to Loans, on any date, the level set forth below
that corresponds to the percentage at the close of business on such day equivalent to the (i)
aggregate amount of outstanding Facility Usage at such time divided by (ii) the Borrowing Base
then in effect (the “Utilization Percentage”):
Applicable Utilization LevelUtilization Percentage
Level I
Level II
Level III
Level IV
Level V
Level VI
Level VII
less than 25%
equal to or greater than 25%, but less than 50%
equal to or greater than 50%, but less than 75%
equal to or greater than 75%, but less than 90%
equal to or greater than 90%, but less than 100%
equal to or greater than 100%, but less than 110%
equal to or greater than 110%
“Approved Counterparty” means a counterparty to a Hedging Contract that at the time of entering
into such Hedging Contract either (a) is a Lender Counterparty or (b) is aan unsecured Person
whose senior unsecured long-term debt obligations are rated A- or higher by S&P or A3 or higher
by Moody’s.
“Approved Fund” means any Fund that is administered or managed by (a) a Lender, (b) an
Affiliate of a Lender or (c) an entity or an Affiliate of an entity that administers or manages a
Lender.
“Arranger” means Wells Fargo Securities, LLC.
“Assignment and Assumption” means an assignment and assumption entered into by a Lender
and an Eligible Assignee (with the consent of any party whose consent is required by Section
10.5(b)) and accepted by Administrative Agent, substantially in the form of Exhibit F or any other
form approved by Administrative Agent.
“Available Cash” has the meaning ascribed to such term in the MLP Partnership Agreement as in
effect on the Closing Date, with such amendments thereto as consented to in writing by the
Required Lenders.
“Bail-In Action” means the exercise of any Write-Down and Conversion Powers by the applicable
EEA Resolution Authority in respect of any liability of an EEA Financial Institution.
“Bail-In Legislation” means, with respect to any EEA Member Country implementing Article 55 of
Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of the European Union, the
implementing law for such EEA Member Country from time to time which is described in the EU
Bail-In Legislation Schedule.
“Base Rate” means, means for any day, the highest of (a) the variable per annum rate of interest
so designated from time to time by Administrative Agent as its “ prime rate”, (b) the Federal Funds
Rate plus one-half percent (0.50%) per annum, and (c) the Adjusted Eurodollar Rate (computed
without inclusion of the Eurodollar Margin) for a one month Interest Period on such day (or if such
day is not a Business Day, the immediately preceding Business Day) plus one percent (1.00%),
provided that the Base Rate charged
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
3
by any Person shall never exceed the Highest Lawful Rate; provided further, that for the
avoidance of doubt, the Eurodollar Rate used to determine the Adjusted Eurodollar Rate in this
definition for any day shall be based on the ICE Benchmark Administration LIBO Rate appearing
on Reuters Libor Rates LIBOR01(or on any successor or substitute page of such service, or any
successor to or substitute for such service, providing rate quotations comparable to those
currently provided on such page of such service, as determined by the Administrative Agent from
time to time for purposes of providing quotations of interest rates applicable to dollar deposits in
the London interbank market) at approximately 11:00 a.m., London time on such day. The “prime
rate” is a reference rate set by Administrative Agent in the United States and does not necessarily
represent the lowest or best rate being charged to any customer. Any change in the Base Rate
due to a change in the “prime rate”, the Federal Funds Rate, or the Adjusted Eurodollar Rate
shall take place immediately without notice or demand of any kind. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, if the Base Rate is less than zero, such rate shall be deemed to be zero for purposes
of this Agreement.
“Base Rate Loan” means a Loan which bears interest at the Adjusted Base Rate.
“Base Rate Margin” means, on any date, the number of basis points set forth below based on the
Applicable Utilization Level on such date:
Applicable Utilization LevelBase Rate Margin
Level I
Level II
Level III
Level IV
Level V
Level VI
Level VII
100.0
125.0
150.0
175.0
200.0
250.0
275.0
“Borrower” means Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
“Borrowing” means a borrowing of new Loans of a single Type (and, in the case of Eurodollar
Loans, with the same Interest Period) pursuant to Section 2.1 or a Continuation or Conversion of
existing Loans into a single Type (and, in the case of Eurodollar Loans, with the same Interest
Period) pursuant to Section 2.3.
“Borrowing Base” means, at the particular time in question, either the amount provided for in
Section 2.8 or the amount determined by Administrative Agent and Required Lenders (or all
Lenders in the case of an increase in the Borrowing Base) in accordance with the provisions of
Section 2.9.
“Borrowing Base Deficiency” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.7(b).
“Borrowing Notice” means a written or telephonic request, or a written confirmation, made by
Borrower which meets the requirements of Section 2.2.
“Business Day” means a day, other than a Saturday or Sunday, on which commercial banks are
open for business with the public in New York, New York. Any Business Day in any way relating
to Eurodollar Loans (such as the day on which an Interest Period begins or ends) must also be a
day on which, in the
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
4
judgment of Administrative Agent, significant transactions in dollars are carried out in the
interbank eurocurrency market.
“Capital Lease” means, as applied to any Person, any lease of any property by such Person as
lessee which would, in accordance with GAAP, be required to be classified and accounted for as
a capital lease on the balance sheet of such Person.
“Capital Lease Obligation” of any Person means the obligations of such Person to pay rent or
other amounts under Capital Leases, and the amount of such obligations at any time shall be the
capitalized amount thereof at such time determined in accordance with GAAP.
“Cash Collateralize” means to pledge and deposit with or deliver to Administrative Agent, for the
benefit of Administrative Agent or LC Issuer (as applicable) and the Lenders, as collateral for LC
Obligations or obligations of Lenders to fund participations in respect of either thereof (as the
context may require), cash or deposit account balances or, if LC Issuer benefitting from such
collateral shall agree in its discretion, other credit support, in each case pursuant to
documentation in form and substance satisfactory to (a) Administrative Agent and (b) LC Issuer.
“Cash Collateral” shall have a meaning correlative to the foregoing and shall include the
proceeds of such cash collateral and other credit support.
“Cash Equivalents” means Investments in:
(a)    marketable obligations, maturing within 12 months after acquisition thereof, issued or
unconditionally guaranteed by the United States or an instrumentality or agency thereof and
entitled to the full faith and credit of the United States;
(b)    demand deposits, and time deposits (including certificates of deposit) maturing within 12
months from the date of deposit thereof, with any office of any Lender or with a domestic office of
any national or state bank or trust company which is organized under the Laws of the United
States or any state therein, which has capital, surplus and undivided profits of at least
$500,000,000, and whose long term certificates of deposit have at least the third highest credit
rating given by either Rating Agency;
(c)    repurchase obligations with a term of not more than seven days for underlying securities of
the types described in clause (a) above entered into with any commercial bank meeting the
specifications of clause (b) above;
(d)    open market commercial paper, maturing within 270 days after acquisition thereof, which
has the highest or second highest credit rating given by either Rating Agency; and
(e)    money market or other mutual funds which have the highest or second highest credit rating
given by either Rating Agency and substantially all of whose assets comprise securities of the
types described in clauses (a) through (d) above.
“Change in Law” means the adoption of any law, rule or regulation after the date of this
Agreement, any change in any law, rule or regulation or in the interpretation or application thereof
by any Governmental Authority after the date of this Agreement or compliance by any Lender or
the LC Issuer (or, for purposes of Section 3.2(e), by any lending office of such Lender or by such
Lender’s or the LC Issuer’s holding company, if any) with any request, guideline or directive
(whether or not having the force of law) of any Governmental Authority made or issued after the
date of this Agreement; provided that notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, (1) the
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and all requests, rules, guidelines
or directives thereunder or issued in connection therewith and (1) all requests,
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
5
rules, guidelines or directives promulgated by the Bank for International Settlements, the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (or any successor or similar authority) or the United States
regulatory authorities, in each case pursuant to Basel III, shall in each case be deemed to be a
“Change in Law,” regardless of the date enacted, adopted or issued.
“Change of Control” means (i) any Person, entity or group (other than a Mid-Con Entity) acquires
beneficial ownership (within the meaning of Rule 13d‑3 of the Securities and Exchange
Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) of 66 2/3% or more of the equity
interests in the MLP, (ii) the MLP shall fail to own, directly or indirectly, 100% of the equity
interests in the Borrower, or (iii) General Partner ceases to be the sole general partner of
Borrower.
“Closing Date” means the date on which all of the conditions precedent set forth in Section 4.1
and Section 4.2 shall have been satisfied or waived.
“Collateral” means all property of any kind which is subject to a Lien in favor of Lenders and
Lender Counterparties (or in favor of Administrative Agent or Collateral Agent for the benefit of
Lenders and Lender Counterparties) or which, under the terms of any Security Document, is
purported to be subject to such a Lien; in each case that secures the Obligations.
“Collateral Agent” means prior to the Seventh Amendment Effective Date, Royal Bank of
Canada, and from and after the Seventh Amendment Effective Date means Wells Fargo Bank,
National Association, in its capacity as collateral agent under any of the Security Documents, or
any successor collateral agent.
“Commitment” means, with respect to each Lender, the commitment of such Lender to make
Loans and to acquire participations in Letters of Credit hereunder, in an aggregate principal
amount at any one time outstanding not to exceed the amount set forth opposite such Lender’s
name on Schedule 1 “Lenders Schedule” under the column heading “Commitment”.
“Commitment Fee Rate” means, on any date, the number of basis points set forth below based on
the Applicable Utilization Level on such date:
Applicable Utilization LevelCommitment Fee Rate Margin
Level I
Level II
Level III
Level IV
Level V
Level VI
Level VII
“Commitment Period” means the period from and including the Closing Date until the Revolver
Maturity Date (or, if earlier, the day on which the obligations of Lenders to make Loans hereunder
and the obligations of LC Issuer to issue Letters of Credit hereunder have been terminated or the
Notes first become due and payable in full).
37.5
37.5
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
6
“Consolidated” refers to the consolidation of any Person, in accordance with GAAP, with its
properly consolidated subsidiaries. References herein to a Person’s Consolidated financial
statements, financial position, financial condition, liabilities, etc. refer to the consolidated financial
statements, financial position, financial condition, liabilities, etc. of such Person and its properly
consolidated subsidiaries.
“Consolidated Cash Balance” means, at any time, the aggregate amount of cash and cash
equivalents, marketable securities, treasury bonds and bills, certificates of deposit, investments
in money market funds and commercial paper, in each case, held or owned by (whether directly
or indirectly), credited to the account of, or otherwise reflected as an asset on the balance sheet
of, the Credit Parties.
“Consolidated Cash Balance Threshold” means, at any time when Facility Usage is below the
Borrowing Base, $10,000,000; provided that, to the extent that the Borrowing Base exceeds
$110,000,000 at any time, the Consolidated Cash Balance Threshold shall be deemed to equal
the sum of (x) $10,000,000 plus (y) $0.10 for every $1.00 that the Borrowing Base exceeds
$110,000,000; provided, further, that, under no circumstance shall the Consolidated Cash
Balance Threshold be deemed to be greater than $25,000,000; provided, further, that if, other
than due to the application of the immediately preceding proviso, the Consolidated Cash
Balance Threshold would have been in excess of $25,000,000, the Administrative Agent shall,
promptly upon the request of the Borrower, discuss in good faith an adjustment to the
Consolidated Cash Balance Threshold.
“Consolidated EBITDAX” means, for each trailing four Fiscal Quarter period the sum of (i) the
Consolidated Net Income of the MLP during such period, plus (ii) without duplication and to the
extent reflected as a charge in the statement of such Consolidated Net Income for such period,
the sum of interest expense (including realized and unrealized losses on interest rate derivative
contracts) plus (iii) all income or franchise taxes, if any, payable by the MLP or its Subsidiaries
which were deducted in determining, such Consolidated Net Income, plus (iv) all depreciation,
amortization (including amortization of good will and debt issuance costs), depletion, exploration
expense and other non-cash charges (including (1) any provision for the reduction in the carrying
value of assets recorded in accordance with GAAP and including those resulting from the
requirements of ASC Topics 815, 410 or 360 and unrealized losses on commodity derivative
contracts and realized losses upon the early termination or other monetization of commodity
derivative contracts, (2) impairment of goodwill and long-lived assets (including Oil and Gas
Properties), (3) accretion of asset retirement obligations, (4) losses on sale of assets, and (5)
noncash unit-based compensation expense) that were deducted in determining such
Consolidated Net Income, plus (v) fees and expenses expensed and paid cash in connection
with the MLP IPO and the credit facility provided under this Agreement minus, without duplication
and to the extent included in the statement of such Consolidated Net Income for such period the
sum of (vi) all interest income (including the realized and unrealized gains on interest rate
derivative contracts), (vii) gains on sales of assets, and (viii) all non-cash items of income or gain
which were included in determining such Consolidated Net Income (including (x) those resulting
from the requirements of ASC Topics 815, 410 or 360 and including unrealized gains on
commodity derivative contracts and realized gains upon the early termination or other
monetization of commodity derivative contracts, (y) income tax benefits, and (z) unrealized gains
on commodity derivative contracts).
“Consolidated Excess Cash Flow” means, with respect to the Borrower on a Consolidated basis,
as of any applicable date of determination thereof for the calendar month then ended, an amount
equal to (a) cash receipts for such calendar month, minus (b) lease operating expenses paid
during such calendar month, minus (c) Consolidated Interest Charges paid in cash during such
calendar month, minus (d) amounts actually paid in cash in respect of production taxes and total
federal, state, local and foreign income, and similar taxes
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
7
for such calendar month, minus (e) the aggregate amount of all regularly scheduled principal
payments or prepayments of Indebtedness made by Borrower and its Subsidiaries during such
calendar month, minus (f) capital expenditures actually made during such month, minus (g) to the
extent permitted under Section 7.15, general and administrative expenses paid during such
calendar month minus (h) $150,000 of cash minus (i) prorated costs and revenues attributable to
the Hugoton Basin Divestiture which was effective as of May 1, 2016 minus (j) the purchase price
escrow deposit required under the PES Acquisition Agreement.
“Consolidated Funded Indebtedness” means as of any date, the sum of the following (without
duplication): (a) all Indebtedness (other than the 2016 Preferred Units) which is classified as
“long-term indebtedness” on a Consolidated balance sheet of the MLP and its Consolidated
Subsidiaries prepared as of such date in accordance with GAAP (but excluding nominal
indebtedness under interest rate Hedging Contracts) and any current maturities and other
principal amount in respect of such Indebtedness due within one year but which was classified
as “long-term indebtedness” at the creation thereof, (b) Indebtedness for borrowed money of the
MLP and its Consolidated Subsidiaries outstanding under a revolving credit or similar agreement
providing for borrowings (and renewals and extensions thereof) over a period of more than one
year, notwithstanding the fact that any such borrowing is made within one year of the expiration
of such agreement, (c) all Indebtedness in respect of Capital Lease Obligations of the MLP and
its Consolidated Subsidiaries, and (d) other Indebtedness (other than the 2016 Preferred Units)
of the MLP and its Consolidated Subsidiaries on which interest accrues.
“Consolidated Interest Charges” means, for any period, all of Borrower’s Consolidated interest
paid or accrued during such period on Indebtedness (including premium payments, capitalized
interest, amortization of original issue discount, and the interest component of any deferred
payment obligations and capital lease obligations).
“Consolidated Net Income” means, for any period, the net income (or loss) of the MLP and its
Consolidated Subsidiaries (including Borrower) for such period determined in accordance with
GAAP. Consolidated Net Income shall not include (i) any gain or loss from the sale of assets
other than in the ordinary course of business, or (ii) any non-cash income, gains, losses or
charges resulting from the requirements of ASC Topics 815, 410 or 360.
“Continuation” shall refer to the continuation pursuant to Section 2.3 hereof of a Eurodollar Loan
as a Eurodollar Loan from one Interest Period to the next Interest Period.
“Continuation/Conversion Notice” means a written or telephonic request, or a written
confirmation, made by Borrower which meets the requirements of Section 2.3.
“Contributing Parties” means collectively Mid-Con Energy I, LLC, a Delaware limited liability
company, and Mid-Con Energy II, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
“Control” means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction
of the management or policies of a Person, whether through the ability to exercise voting power,
by contract or otherwise. “Controlling” and “Controlled” have meanings correlative thereto.
“Conversion” shall refer to a conversion pursuant to Section 2.3 or Article III of one Type of Loan
into another Type of Loan.
“Credit Parties” means the Borrower and the Guarantors.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
8
“Debtor Relief Laws” means the Bankruptcy Code of the United States, and all other liquidation,
conservatorship, bankruptcy, assignment for the benefit of creditors, moratorium, rearrangement,
receivership, insolvency, reorganization, or similar debtor relief Laws of the United States or
other applicable jurisdictions from time to time in effect and affecting the rights of creditors
generally.
“Default” means (a) any Event of Default and (b) any default, event or condition which would, with
the giving of any requisite notices or the passage of any requisite periods of time, or both,
constitute an Event of Default.
“Default Rate” means, at the time in question (a) with respect to any Base Rate Loan, the rate per
annum equal to two percent (2%) above the Adjusted Base Rate then in effect for such Loan, and
(b) with respect to any Eurodollar Loan, the rate per annum equal to two percent (2%) above the
Adjusted Eurodollar Rate then in effect for such Loan, provided in each case that no Default Rate
charged by any Person shall ever exceed the Highest Lawful Rate.
“Defaulting Lender” means any Lender (i) which has defaulted in its obligation to fund Loans
hereunder within three Business Days of the date required to be funded by it hereunder, (ii)
which has failed to fund any portion of its participations in LC Obligations required to be funded
by it hereunder within three Business Days of the date required to be funded by it hereunder, (iii)
which has otherwise failed to pay over to Administrative Agent or any other Lender any other
amount required to be paid by it hereunder within three Business Days of the date when due,
unless the subject of a good faith dispute, (iv) which has notified the Borrower, the Administrative
Agent or any Lender, in writing, or has made a public statement to the effect, that such Lender
does not intend or expect to comply with any of its funding obligations under this Agreement or
generally under other agreements in which it commits to extend credit, (v) which has failed, within
3 business days after request by the Administrative Agent or the Borrower to provide a
certification in writing from an authorized officer of such Lender that it will comply with its
obligations (and is financially able to meet such obligations) to fund prospective Loans and
participations in then outstanding Letters of Credit under this Agreement, provided that such
Lender shall cease to be a Defaulting Lender pursuant to this clause (v) upon receipt of such
certification in form and substance satisfactory to the Administrative Agent and the Borrower, or
(vi) which becomes, or has a parent that has (a) become insolvent or the subject of a proceeding
under any Debtor Relief Law (other than Governmental Authority ownership of such Lender or
such Lender’s parent entity controlling such Lender) or (b) become the subject of a Bail-In Action.
“Determination Date” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.9.
“Disclosure Report” means either a notice given by Borrower under Section 6.4 or a certificate
given by Borrower’s chief financial officer under Section 6.2(b).
“Disclosure Schedule” means Schedule 2 hereto.
“Dollar” and “$” means lawful money of the United States.
“Domestic Lending Office” means, with respect to any Lender, the office of such Lender specified
as its “Domestic Lending Office” below its name on the Lenders Schedule, or such other office as
such Lender may from time to time specify to Borrower and Administrative Agent; with respect to
LC Issuer, the office, branch or agency through which it issues Letters of Credit; and, with respect
to Administrative Agent, the office, branch, or agency through which it administers this
Agreement.
“Eighth Amendment Effective Date” means the date Amendment No. 8 by its terms becomes
effective.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
9
“EEA Financial Institution” means (a) any credit institution or investment firm established in any
EEA Member Country which is subject to the supervision of an EEA Resolution Authority, (b) any
entity established in an EEA Member Country which is a parent of an institution described in
clause (a) of this definition, or (c) any financial institution established in an EEA Member Country
which is a subsidiary of an institution described in clauses (a) or (b) of this definition and is
subject to consolidated supervision with its parent.
“EEA Member Country” means any of the member states of the European Union, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, and Norway.
“EEA Resolution Authority” means any public administrative authority or any person entrusted
with public administrative authority of any EEA Member Country (including any delegee) having
responsibility for the resolution of any EEA Financial Institution.
“Eligible Assignee” means (a) a Lender, (b) an Affiliate of a Lender, (c) an Approved Fund, and
(d) any other Person (other than a natural person) approved by (i) Administrative Agent, (ii) in the
case of any assignment of a Commitment, LC Issuer, and (iii) unless a Default has occurred and
is continuing, Borrower (each such approval not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed);
provided that notwithstanding the foregoing, “Eligible Assignee” shall not include (x) Borrower or
any of Borrower’s Affiliates or Subsidiaries or (y) any Person organized outside the United States
if Borrower would be required to pay withholding taxes on interest or principal owed to such
Person.
“Engineering Report” means the Initial Engineering Report and each engineering report
delivered pursuant to Section 6.2.
“Environmental Laws” means any and all Laws relating to the environment or to emissions,
discharges, releases or threatened releases of pollutants, contaminants, chemicals, or industrial,
toxic or hazardous substances or wastes into the environment including ambient air, surface
water, ground water, or land, or otherwise relating to the manufacture, processing, distribution,
use, treatment, storage, disposal, transport, or handling of pollutants, contaminants, chemicals, or
industrial, toxic or hazardous substances or wastes.
“Equity” in a Person means any share of capital stock issued by such Person, any general or
limited partnership interest, profits interest, capital interest, membership interest, or other equity
interest in such Person, any option, warrant or any other right to acquire any share of capital
stock or any partnership, profits, capital, membership or other equity interest in such Person, and
any other voting security issued by such Person.
“ERISA” means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended from time to
time, and any successor statutes or statute, together with all rules and regulations promulgated
with respect thereto.
“ERISA Affiliate” means Borrower and all members of a controlled group of corporations and all
trades or businesses (whether or not incorporated) under common control that, together with
Borrower, are treated as a single employer under Section 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986.
“ERISA Plan” means any employee pension benefit plan subject to Title IV of ERISA maintained
by any ERISA Affiliate with respect to which any Restricted Person has a fixed or contingent
liability.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
10
“EU Bail-In Legislation Schedule” means the EU Bail-In Legislation Schedule published by the
Loan Market Association (or any successor person), as in effect from time to time.
“Eurodollar Lending Office” means, with respect to any Lender, the office of such Lender
specified as its “Eurodollar Lending Office” below its name on the Lenders Schedule (or, if no
such office is specified, its Domestic Lending Office), or such other office of such Lender as such
Lender may from time to time specify to Borrower and Administrative Agent.
“Eurodollar Loan” means a Loan that bears interest at the Adjusted Eurodollar Rate.
“Eurodollar Margin” means, and on any date, the number of basis points set forth below based on
the Applicable Utilization Level on such date:
Applicable Utilization LevelEurodollar Margin
Level I
Level II
Level III
Level IV
Level V
Level VI
Level VII
200.0
225.0
250.0
275.0
300.0
350.0
375.0
“Eurodollar Rate” means, for any Eurodollar Loan within a Borrowing and with respect to the
related Interest Period therefore:
(a) the interest rate per annum (carried out to the fifth decimal place) equal to the rate determined
by Administrative Agent to be the offered rate based on the ICE Benchmark Administration LIBO
Rate appearing on Reuters Libor Rates LIBOR01(or on any successor or substitute page of such
service, or any successor to or substitute for such service, providing rate quotations comparable
to those currently provided on such page of such service, as determined by the Administrative
Agent from time to time for purposes of providing quotations of interest rates applicable to dollar
deposits in the London interbank market) with a term equivalent to such Interest Period,
determined at approximately 11:00 a.m., London time, two Business Days prior to the first day of
such Interest Period, or
(b) in the event the rate referenced in the preceding subsection (a) is not available, the rate per
annum determined by the Administrative Agent as the rate of interest at which deposits in U.S.
dollars (for delivery on the first day of such Interest Period) in same day funds in the approximate
amount of the applicable Eurodollar Loan and with a term equivalent to such Interest Period
would be offered by its London branch to major banks in the London Inter-Bank Market at their
request at approximately 11:00 a.m. (London time) two Business Days prior to the first day of
such Interest Period.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Eurodollar Rate is less than zero, such rate shall be deemed
to be zero for all purposes of this Agreement.
“Event of Default” has the meaning given to such term in Section 8.1.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
11
“Excess Cash” means, at any time, the amount of the Consolidated Cash Balance in excess of
the Consolidated Cash Balance Threshold (other than (i) any cash set aside to pay royalty
obligations, working interest obligations, production payments, severance taxes and similar
obligations of any Credit Party then due and owing to third parties and for which such Credit
Party has issued checks or has initiated wires or ACH transfers (or will issue checks or initiate
wires or ACH transfers within one (1) Business Day) in order to pay such obligations, (ii) any
cash set aside to pay in the ordinary course of business amounts (other than obligations
described in clause (i) above) of any Credit Party then due and owing to unaffiliated third parties
and for which such Credit Party has issued checks or has initiated wires or ACH transfers in
order to pay such amounts, and (iii) any cash or cash equivalents of any Credit Party constituting
purchase price deposits held in escrow by an unaffiliated third party pursuant to a binding and
enforceable purchase and sale agreement with an unaffiliated third party containing customary
provisions regarding the payment and refunding of such deposits).
“Excess Cash Flow Report” means a report, in form and substance satisfactory to Administrative
Agent, certified by the Chief Financial Officer of the Borrower setting forth, in reasonable detail,
the calculation of Consolidated Excess Cash Flow for the previous month and the basis therefor.
“Excluded Taxes” means, with respect to Administrative Agent, any Lender, LC Issuer or any
other recipient of any payment to be made by or on account of any obligation of Borrower
hereunder, (a) taxes imposed on or measured by its overall net income (however denominated),
and franchise taxes imposed on it (in lieu of net income taxes), by the jurisdiction (or any political
subdivision thereof) under the laws of which such recipient is organized or in which its principal
office is located or, in the case of any Lender, in which its Applicable Lending Office is located,
(b) any branch profits taxes imposed by the United States or any similar tax imposed by any other
jurisdiction in which Borrower is located, (c) in the case of a Foreign Lender (other than an
assignee pursuant to a request by Borrower under Section 3.7(b)), any withholding tax that is
imposed on amounts payable to such Foreign Lender at the time such Foreign Lender becomes
a party hereto (or designates a new lending office) or is attributable to such Foreign Lender’s
failure or inability (other than as a result of a Change in Law) to comply with Section 3.5(e),
except to the extent that such Foreign Lender (or its assignor, if any) was entitled, at the time of
designation of a new lending office (or assignment), to receive additional amounts from Borrower
with respect to such withholding tax pursuant to Section 3.5(a), and (d) any United States
withholding tax imposed by FATCA.
“Existing Hedging Contracts” means the Hedging Contracts set forth in Schedule 5 hereto.
“Facility Usage” means, at the time in question, the aggregate principal amount of outstanding
Loans and existing LC Obligations at such time.
“FATCA” means the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act of 2009, Sections 1471 through 1474
of the Internal Revenue Code and any regulations or official interpretations thereof.
“Federal Funds Rate” means, for any day, the rate per annum (rounded upwards, if necessary, to
the nearest 1/100th of one percent) equal to the weighted average of the rates on overnight
Federal funds transactions with members of the Federal Reserve System arranged by Federal
funds brokers on such day, as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on the
Business Day next succeeding such day, provided that (a) if the day for which such rate is to be
determined is not a Business Day, the Federal Funds Rate for such day shall be such rate on
such transactions on the next preceding Business Day as so published on the next succeeding
Business Day, and (b) if such rate is not so published for any day, the Federal Funds Rate for
such day shall be the average rate quoted to Administrative Agent on such day on such
transactions
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
12
as determined by Administrative Agent. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Federal Funds Rate
shall be less than zero, such rate shall be deemed to be zero for purposes of this Agreement.
“Fiscal Quarter” means a three‑month period ending on March 31, June 30, September 30 or
December 31 of any year.
“Fiscal Year” means a twelve‑month period ending on December 31 of any year.
“Flood Insurance Laws” means, to the extent applicable to any Restricted Person or any
Collateral, the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 and the Flood Disaster Protection Act of
1973, and the regulations (including Regulation H), each as it may be amended, reformed or
otherwise modified from time to time.
“Foreign Lender” means any Lender that is organized under the laws of a jurisdiction other than
that in which Borrower is resident for tax purposes. For purposes of this definition, the United
States, each State thereof and the District of Columbia shall be deemed to constitute a single
jurisdiction.
“Fronting Exposure” means, at any time there is a Defaulting Lender, with respect to LC Issuer,
such Defaulting Lender’s Percentage Share of the outstanding LC Obligations other than LC
Obligations as to which such Defaulting Lender’s participation obligation has been reallocated to
other Lenders or Cash Collateralized in accordance with the terms hereof.
“Fund” means any Person (other than a natural person) that is (or will be) engaged in making,
purchasing, holding or otherwise investing in commercial loans and similar extensions of credit
in the ordinary course of its business.
“GAAP” means those generally accepted accounting principles and practices which are
recognized as such by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (or any generally recognized
successor) and which, in the case of Restricted Persons and their Consolidated Subsidiaries, are
applied for all periods after the Closing Date in a manner consistent with the manner in which
such principles and practices were applied to the Initial Financial Statements. If any change in
any accounting principle or practice is required by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (or
any such successor) in order for such principle or practice to continue as a generally accepted
accounting principle or practice, all reports and financial statements required hereunder with
respect to any Restricted Person or with respect to any Restricted Person and its Consolidated
Subsidiaries may be prepared in accordance with such change, but all calculations and
determinations to be made hereunder may be made in accordance with such change only after
notice of such change is given to each Lender, and Required Lenders, Administrative Agent and
Borrower agree to negotiate in good faith in respect of the modification of any covenants
hereunder that are affected by such change in order to cause them to measure substantially the
same financial performance as the covenants in effect immediately prior to such change.
“General Partner” means Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, the
sole general partner of the MLP.
“Governmental Authority” means the government of the United States or any other nation, or of
any political subdivision thereof, whether state or local, and any agency, authority,
instrumentality, regulatory body, court, central bank or other entity exercising executive,
legislative, judicial, taxing, regulatory or administrative powers or functions of or pertaining to
government (including any supra-national bodies such as the European Union or the European
Central Bank).
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
13
“Guarantor” means the MLP and each Subsidiary of Borrower that guarantees the Obligations
pursuant to Section 6.22.
“Hazardous Materials” means any substances regulated under any Environmental Law, whether
as pollutants, contaminants, or chemicals, or as industrial, toxic or hazardous substances or
wastes, or otherwise.
“Hedge Monetization Transaction” means the series of transactions occurring in the first Fiscal
Quarter of 2015 whereby Borrower restructured existing Hedging Contracts to which it is a party
to hedge additional future oil and gas production for the period through the fourth Fiscal Quarter
of 2016.
“Hedging Contract” means (a) any agreement providing for options, swaps, floors, caps, collars,
forward sales or forward purchases involving interest rates, commodities or commodity prices,
equities, currencies, bonds, or indexes based on any of the foregoing, (b) any option, futures or
forward contract traded on an exchange, and (c) any other derivative agreement or other similar
agreement or arrangement.
“Hedge Close‑Outs” means one or a series of transactions whereby Borrower has agreed to
close‑out and terminate, by not later than July 1, 2016, existing Hedge Contracts covering
production for the months of July through September 2016.
“Highest Lawful Rate” means, with respect to each Lender Party to whom Obligations are owed,
the maximum nonusurious rate of interest that such Lender Party is permitted under applicable
Law to contract for, take, charge, or receive with respect to such Obligations. All determinations
herein of the Highest Lawful Rate, or of any interest rate determined by reference to the Highest
Lawful Rate, shall be made separately for each Lender Party as appropriate to assure that the
Loan Documents are not construed to obligate any Person to pay interest to any Lender Party at
a rate in excess of the Highest Lawful Rate applicable to such Lender Party.
"Hugoton Basin Divestiture" means Borrower's sale, to be consummated not later than August
19, 2016, of certain Hugoton Basin Oil and Gas Properties for approximately $18,000,000 in cash
(subject to usual and customary post-closing adjustments).
“Indebtedness” of any Person means Liabilities in any of the following categories:
(a)    Liabilities for borrowed money,
(b)    Liabilities constituting an obligation to pay the deferred purchase price of property or
services,
(c)    Liabilities evidenced by a bond, debenture, note, loan agreement, or similar instrument,
(d)    Liabilities which (i) would under GAAP be shown on such Person’s balance sheet as a
liability, and (ii) are payable more than one year from the date of creation thereof (other than
reserves for taxes and reserves for contingent obligations),
(e)    Liabilities arising under Hedging Contracts (on a net basis to the extent netting is provided
for in the applicable Hedging Contract), excluding any portion thereof which would be accounted
for as an interest expense under GAAP,
(f)    Liabilities constituting principal under Capital Leases Obligations,
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
14
(g)    Liabilities arising under conditional sales or other title retention agreements relating to
property purchased by such Person,
(h)    Liabilities owing under direct or indirect guaranties of Liabilities of any other Person or
otherwise constituting obligations to purchase or acquire or to otherwise protect or insure a
creditor against loss in respect of Liabilities of any other Person (such as obligations under
working capital maintenance agreements, agreements to keep‑well, or agreements to purchase
Liabilities, assets, goods, securities or services), but excluding endorsements in the ordinary
course of business of negotiable instruments in the course of collection,
(i)    Liabilities (for example, repurchase agreements, mandatorily redeemable preferred stock
and sale/leaseback agreements) consisting of an obligation to purchase or redeem securities or
other property, if such Liabilities arise out of or in connection with the sale of or issuance of the
same or similar securities or property, but excluding the 2016 Preferred Units,
(j)    Liabilities with respect to letters of credit or applications or reimbursement agreements
therefor,
(k)    Liabilities with respect to payments received in consideration of oil, gas, or other minerals
yet to be acquired or produced at the time of payment (including obligations under “take‑or‑pay”
contracts to deliver gas in return for payments already received and the undischarged balance of
any production payment created by such Person or for the creation of which such Person directly
or indirectly received payment), or
(l)    Liabilities with respect to other obligations to deliver goods or services in consideration of
advance payments therefore;
provided, however, that the “Indebtedness” of any Person shall not include Liabilities that were
incurred by such Person on ordinary trade terms to vendors, suppliers, or other Persons
providing goods and services for use by such Person in the ordinary course of its business,
unless and until such Liabilities are outstanding more than 90 days past the original invoice or
billing date thereof.
“Indemnified Taxes” means Taxes other than Excluded Taxes.
“Initial Engineering Report” means the internal engineering report concerning Oil and Gas
Properties of the Contributing Parties as of June 30, 2011, audited by Cawley Gillespie and
Associates, Inc.
“Initial Proforma Financial Statements” means (a) the proforma consolidated balance sheet of the
Borrower and its Subsidiaries, and (b) a 12-month financial forecast for the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis, both prepared by Borrower, which shall be identical to
such statements contained in the MLP’s registration statement on Form S-1, as amended and
declared effective by the SEC.
“Insurance Schedule” means Schedule 4 attached hereto.
“Interest Payment Date” means (a) with respect to each Base Rate Loan, the last Business Day
of each March, June, September and December, and (b) with respect to each Eurodollar Loan,
the last day of the Interest Period that is applicable thereto and, if such Interest Period is six
months in length, the date specified by Administrative Agent which is approximately three months
after such Interest Period begins.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
15
“Interest Period” means, with respect to each particular Eurodollar Loan in a Borrowing, the
period specified in the Borrowing Notice or Continuation/Conversion Notice applicable thereto,
beginning on and including the date specified in such Borrowing Notice or
Continuation/Conversion Notice (which must be a Business Day), and ending one, two, three or
six months thereafter, as Borrower may elect in such notice; provided that: (a) any Interest Period
which would otherwise end on a day which is not a Business Day shall be extended to the next
succeeding Business Day unless such Business Day falls in another calendar month, in which
case such Interest Period shall end on the next preceding Business Day; and (b) any Interest
Period which begins on the last Business Day in a calendar month (or on a day for which there is
no numerically corresponding day in the calendar month at the end of such Interest Period) shall
end on the last Business Day in a calendar month.
“Internal Revenue Code” means the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended
from time to time and any successor statute or statutes, together with all rules and regulations
promulgated with respect thereto.
“Investment” means any investment, made directly or indirectly, in any Person or any property,
whether by purchase, acquisition of shares of capital stock, indebtedness or other obligations or
securities or by loan, advance, capital contribution or otherwise and whether made in cash, by
the transfer of property, or by any other means.
“Law” means any statute, law, regulation, ordinance, rule, treaty, judgment, order, decree, permit,
concession, franchise, license, agreement or other governmental restriction of the United States
or any state or political subdivision thereof or of any foreign country or any department, province
or other political subdivision thereof.
“LC Application” means any application for a Letter of Credit hereafter made by Borrower to LC
Issuer.
“LC Issuer” means prior to the Seventh Amendment Effective Date, Royal Bank of Canada, and
from and after the Seventh Amendment Effective Date means Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association, in its capacity as the issuer of Letters of Credit hereunder, and its successors in
such capacity. From and after the Seventh Amendment Effective Date, Royal Bank of Canada
shall have no obligation to issue, renew, amend or extend any Letters of Credit previously issued
by it. Administrative Agent may, with the consent of Borrower and the Lender in question, appoint
any Lender hereunder as an LC Issuer in place of or in addition to Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association.
“LC Obligations” means, at the time in question, the sum of all Matured LC Obligations plus the
maximum amounts which LC Issuer might then or thereafter be called upon to advance under all
Letters of Credit then outstanding.
“LCS Acquisition” means the acquisition by Borrower of certain Oil and Gas Properties of L.C.S.
Production Company and its affiliates pursuant to the L.C.S. Acquisition Agreement.
“LCS Acquisition Agreement” means that certain Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as
of October 7, 2014, among Borrower and L.C.S. Production Company, SPA-Petco, LP, SPA
Petco OSU, LLC, A.G. Hill Oil and Gas LP and A.G. Hill Oil and Gas II LP.
“LC Sublimit” means $5,000,000.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
16
“Lender Counterparty” means any Lender Party or any Affiliate of a Lender Party that is a
counterparty to a Hedging Contract with Borrower.
“Lender Hedging Obligations” means all obligations arising from time to time under Hedging
Contracts entered into from time to time between Borrower or any Guarantor and a counterparty
that is a Lender or an Affiliate of a Lender; provided that (a) if such counterparty ceases to be a
Lender hereunder or an Affiliate of a Lender hereunder, Lender Hedging Obligations shall only
include such obligations to the extent arising from transactions entered into at the time such
counterparty was a Lender hereunder or an Affiliate of a Lender hereunder, without giving effect
to any extension, increases, or modifications thereof which are made after such swap
counterparty ceases to be a Lender hereunder or an Affiliate of a Lender hereunder and (b) when
any Lender or an Affiliate of a Lender assigns or otherwise transfers any interest held by it under
any Hedging Contract to any other Person pursuant to the terms of such agreement, the
obligations thereunder shall only constitute Lender Hedging Obligations if such assignee or
transferee is also then a Lender or an Affiliate of a Lender.
“Lender Parties” means Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent, LC Issuer, and all Lenders.
“Lenders” means (a) each signatory hereto (other than Borrower), including Wells Fargo Bank,
National Association, in its capacity as a Lender hereunder, rather than as Administrative Agent
or LC Issuer, (b) the party identified as “New Lender” (as defined in Amendment No. 2), (c) the
party identified as “New Lender” (as defined in Amendment No. 3), and (d) the parties identified
as “New Lenders” (as defined in Amendment No. 5) and the successors of each such party as
Lender hereunder pursuant to Section 10.5.
“Lenders Schedule” means Schedule 1 attached hereto.
“Letter of Credit” means each letter of credit issued by Royal Bank of Canada, as LC Issuer
hereunder prior to the Seventh Amendment Effective Date and any letter of credit issued by Wells
Fargo Bank, National Association, as LC Issuer (or any other Lender appointed as LC Issuer by
the Administrative Agent with the consent of Borrower and the agreement of such Lender to be
an LC Issuer) hereunder at the application of Borrower.
“Letter of Credit Fee Rate” means, on any date, with respect to each Letter of Credit, the number
of basis points set forth below based on the Applicable Utilization Level on such date:
Applicable Utilization LevelLetter of Credit Fee Rate
Level I
Level II
Level III
Level IV
Level V
Level VI
Level VII
“Letter of Credit Termination Date” means the date that is 5 Business Days prior to the Revolver
Maturity Date or if such day is not a Business Day, the next preceding Business Day.
200.0
225.0
250.0
275.0
300.0
350.0
375.0
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
17
“Liabilities” means, as to any Person, all indebtedness, liabilities and obligations of such Person,
whether matured or unmatured, liquidated or unliquidated, primary or secondary, direct or
indirect, absolute, fixed or contingent, and whether or not required to be considered pursuant to
GAAP.
“Lien” means, with respect to any property or assets, any right or interest therein of a creditor to
secure Liabilities owed to it or any other arrangement with such creditor which provides for the
payment of such Liabilities out of such property or assets or which allows such creditor to have
such Liabilities satisfied out of such property or assets prior to the general creditors of any owner
thereof, including any lien, mortgage, security interest, pledge, deposit, production payment,
rights of a vendor under any title retention or conditional sale agreement or lease substantially
equivalent thereto, tax lien, mechanic’s or materialman’s lien, or any other charge or
encumbrance for security purposes, whether arising by Law or agreement or otherwise, but
excluding any right of offset which arises without agreement in the ordinary course of business.
“Lien” also means any filed financing statement, any registration of a pledge (such as with an
issuer of uncertificated securities), or any other arrangement or action which would serve to
perfect a Lien described in the preceding sentence, regardless of whether such financing
statement is filed, such registration is made, or such arrangement or action is undertaken before
or after such Lien exists.
“Liquidation” means the sale, assignment, novation, amendment, liquidation, unwind or
termination of all or any part of any Hedging Contract (other than, in each case, at its scheduled
maturity).
“Loan” has the meaning given it in Section 2.1.
“Loan Documents” means this Agreement, the Notes, the Security Documents, Letters of Credit,
LC Applications, Amendment No. 1, Amendment No. 2, Amendment No. 3, Amendment No. 4,
Amendment No. 5, Amendment No. 6, Amendment No. 7, Amendment No. 8, Amendment No.
99, Amendment No. 10 and all other agreements, certificates, documents, instruments and
writings at any time delivered in connection herewith or therewith (exclusive of term sheets,
commitment letters, correspondence and similar documents used in the negotiation hereof,
except to the extent the same contain information about Borrower or its Affiliates, properties,
business or prospects or specify fees to be paid).
“Material Adverse Change” means a material adverse change, from the state of affairs existing as
of the date of this Agreement, or as represented or warranted in any Loan Document, in (a) the
business, operations, property or condition (financial or otherwise) of the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries taken as a whole or on any of the businesses, assets or liabilities acquired or
assumed by the Borrower in connection with the Merger Agreement, (b) the ability of any
Restricted Party to perform any of its obligations under any Loan Document, (c) the validity or
enforceability of any Loan Document or (d) the rights and remedies of or benefits available to the
Administrative Agent, any LC Issuer or any Lender under any Loan Document.
“Material Acquisition” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 7.13.
“Material Disposition” has the meaning ascribed to such term in Section 7.13.
“Matured LC Obligations” means all amounts paid by LC Issuer on drafts or demands for payment
drawn or made under or purported to be under any Letter of Credit and all other amounts due and
owing to LC Issuer under any LC Application for any Letter of Credit, to the extent the same have
not been repaid to LC Issuer (with the proceeds of Loans or otherwise) on the same Business
Day as the amounts were paid by the LC Issuer.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
18
“Maximum Drawing Amount” means at the time in question the sum of the maximum amounts
which LC Issuer might then or thereafter be called upon to advance under all Letters of Credit
which are then outstanding.
“Maximum Credit Amount” means the amount of $250,000,000.00.
“Merger Agreement” means that certain Contribution, Conveyance, Assumption and Merger
Agreement dated December 20, 2011 between the Contributing Parties and Borrower, pursuant
to which the Contributing Parties were merged with and into Borrower, with Borrower being the
survivor.
“Mid-Con Entity” means any Person Controlled by any one or more of Jeffrey R. Olmstead,
Charles R. Olmstead or S. Craig George.
“MLP” means Mid-Con Energy Partners, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership, the sole member of
Borrower.
“MLP Partnership Agreement” means the Agreement of Limited Partnership of the MLP, dated
December 20, 2011, by and among the General Partner and the other Persons party thereto..
“Moody’s” means Moody’s Investors Service, Inc, and any successor thereto that is a nationally
recognized rating agency.
“Ninth Amendment Effective Date” means June 1, 2016.
“Note” has the meaning given to such term in Section 2.1.
“Obligations” means (i) all Liabilities from time to time owing by any Restricted Person to any
Lender Party under or pursuant to any of the Loan Documents, including all LC Obligations and
(ii) all Lender Hedging Obligations. “Obligation” means any part of the Obligations.
“Oil and Gas Properties” means (i) all oil, gas and/or mineral leases, oil, gas or mineral
properties, mineral servitudes and/or mineral rights of any kind (including mineral fee interests,
lease interests, farmout interests, overriding royalty and royalty interests, working interests, net
profits interests, oil payment interests, production payment interests and other types of mineral
interests), and all oil and gas gathering, treating, storage, processing and handling assets, (ii)) all
pipelines, and (iii) all platforms, wells, wellhead equipment, pumping units, flowlines, tanks,
buildings, injection facilities, saltwater disposal facilities, compression facilities, gathering
systems, and other equipment.
“Omnibus Agreement” means that certain Omnibus Agreement dated December 20, 2011
between the General Partner and Borrower.
“Organizational Documents” means, with respect to any corporation, the certificate or articles of
incorporation and the bylaws; with respect to any limited liability company, the certificate or
articles of formation or organization and operating or limited liability company agreement; and
with respect to any partnership, joint venture, trust or other form of business entity, the
partnership, joint venture or other applicable agreement of formation or organization and any
agreement, instrument, filing or notice with respect thereto filed in connection with its formation or
organization with the applicable Governmental
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
19
Authority in the jurisdiction of its formation or organization and, if applicable, any certificate or
articles of formation or organization of such entity.
“Other Taxes” means all present or future stamp or documentary taxes or any other excise or
property taxes, charges or similar levies arising from any payment made hereunder or under any
other Loan Document or from the execution, delivery or enforcement of, or otherwise with respect
to, this Agreement or any other Loan Document.
"Overadvances" means amounts of Credit Facility Usage in excess of the Borrowing Base, which
amount on the Ninth Amendment Effective Date is $53,000,000.
“Overadvance Period” means the period from and including the Ninth Amendment Effective Date
to and including November 1, 2016.
“Participant” has the meaning given to such term in clause (d) of Section 10.5.
"Pending Acquisition" has the meaning given to such term in clause (c) of Section 7.3.
“Percentage Share” means, with respect to any Lender (a) when used in Sections 2.1 or 2.5, in
any Borrowing Notice or when no Loans are outstanding hereunder, the percentage set forth
opposite such Lender’s name on the Lenders Schedule, or, if applicable, on an Assignment and
Assumption, and (b) when used otherwise, the percentage obtained by dividing (i) the sum of the
unpaid principal balance of such Lender’s Loans at the time in question plus the Matured LC
Obligations which such Lender has funded pursuant to Section 2.12(c) plus the portion of the
Maximum Drawing Amount which such Lender might be obligated to fund under Section 2.12(c)
by (ii) the sum of the aggregate unpaid principal balance of all Loans at such time plus the
aggregate amount of LC Obligations outstanding at such time.
“Permitted Lien” has the meaning given to such term in Section 7.2.
"Permitted Overadvances" means Overadvances outstanding prior to November 1, 2016, less
Excess Cash Flow, payments received by the Borrower in connection with or as a result of
Hedge Close‑Outs and the net proceeds from the Hugoton Basin Divestiture.
“Person” means any natural person, corporation, limited liability company, trust, joint venture,
association, company, partnership, Governmental Authority or other entity.
"PES Acquisition" means the purchase of certain Oil and Gas Properties in Nolan County, Texas
for approximately $19,500,000 pursuant to the PES Acquisition Agreement.
"PES Acquisition Agreement" means that certain Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as
of July 28, 2016, between Borrower and an undisclosed seller.
"PIK Units" means the 2016 Preferred Units issued as in-kind distributions.
“Predecessor Administrative Agent” means Royal Bank of Canada.
“Predecessor Collateral Agent” means Royal Bank of Canada.
“Projected Oil and Gas Production” means the projected production of oil or gas (measured by
volume unit or BTU equivalent, not sales price) for the term of the contracts or a particular month,
as
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
20
applicable, from reserves that are, at the time in question, Proved Reserves attributable to Oil and
Gas Properties owned by the Restricted Persons that are located in or offshore of the United
States, as such production is projected in the Engineering Report most recently delivered, after
deducting projected production from any properties or interests sold or under contract for sale that
had been included in such report and after adding projected production from any properties or
interests that had not been reflected in such report but that are reflected in a separate or
supplemental report meeting the requirements of Section 6.2(c) or (d) and otherwise are
satisfactory to Administrative Agent.
“Proved Reserves” means Proved Reserves” as defined in the Petroleum Resources
Management System as in effect at the time in question (in this definition, the “PRMS”) prepared
by the Oil and Gas Reserves Committee of the Society of Petroleum Engineers and reviewed
and jointly sponsored by the World Petroleum Council, the American Association of Petroleum
Geologists and the Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers (or any generally recognized
successor organizations). “Proved Developed Producing Reserves” or "PDP" means Proved
Reserves that are categorized as “Developed Producing Reserves” in the PRMS, “Proved
Developed Nonproducing Reserves” means Proved Reserves that are categorized as
“Developed Nonproducing Reserves” in the PRMS, and “Proved Undeveloped Reserves” means
Proved Reserves that are categorized as “Undeveloped Reserves” in the PRMS.
“Rating Agency” means either S&P or Moody’s.
“Regulation D” means Regulation D of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System as
from time to time in effect.
“Regulation H” means Regulation H of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System as
from time to time in effect.
“Related Parties” means, with respect to any Person, such Person’s Affiliates and the partners,
directors, officers, employees, agents and advisors of such Person and of such Person’s
Affiliates.
“Repayment Notice” means a notice of repayment of a Borrowing pursuant to Section 2.6 or 2.7,
substantially in the form of Exhibit D or any other form approved by the Administrative Agent.
“Required Lenders” means (a) at any time when one or more Lenders is a Defaulting Lender,
Lenders whose aggregate Percentage Shares equal or exceed 66-2/3% of the difference
between (i) 100% and (ii) the sum of the Percentage Shares of all Defaulting Lenders, (b) at any
time there is only one Lender, such Lender shall be the “Required Lenders”, and (c) at all other
times, Lenders whose aggregate Percentage Shares equal or exceed 66-2/3%; provided if there
are two Lenders and neither is a Defaulting Lender, “Required Lenders” shall mean both
Lenders.
“Reserve Requirement” means, at any time, the maximum rate at which reserves (including any
marginal, special, supplemental, or emergency reserves) are required to be maintained under
regulations issued from time to time by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(or any successor) by member banks of the Federal Reserve System against “Eurocurrency
liabilities” (as such term is used in Regulation D). Without limiting the effect of the foregoing, the
Reserve Requirement shall reflect any other reserves required to be maintained by such member
banks with respect to (a) any category of liabilities which includes deposits by reference to which
the Adjusted Eurodollar Rate is to be determined, or (b) any category of extensions of credit or
other assets which include Eurodollar Loans.
“Restricted Payment” means any dividend or other distribution (whether in cash, securities or
other property) with respect to any Equity interests in the Borrower or any of the other Restricted
Persons, or any
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
21
payment (whether in cash, securities or other property), including any sinking fund or similar
deposit, on account of the purchase, redemption, retirement, acquisition, cancellation or
termination of any such Equity interests in the Borrower or any of the other Restricted Persons or
any option, warrant or other right to acquire any such Equity interests in the Borrower or any of
the other Restricted Persons.
“Restricted Person” means collectively the MLP, Borrower, each Subsidiary of Borrower now in
existence or created or acquired in the future, and each other Guarantor.
“Revolver Maturity Date” means November 5, 2018.
“Sanction(s)” means any sanction administered or enforced by the United States Government
(including without limitation, the U.S. Department of the Treasury's The Office of Foreign Assets
Control), the United Nations Security Council, the European Union, Her Majesty's Treasury or
other relevant sanctions authority.
“Sanctioned Country” means any country or territory to the extent that such country or territory
itself is the subject of any Sanction.
“SEC” means the Securities and Exchange Commission or any successor Governmental
Authority.
“Security Documents” means the instruments listed in the Security Schedule and all other
security agreements, deeds of trust, mortgages, chattel mortgages, pledges, guaranties, financing
statements, continuation statements, extension agreements and other agreements or instruments
now, heretofore, or hereafter delivered by any Restricted Person to Administrative Agent in
connection with this Agreement or any transaction contemplated hereby to secure or guarantee
the payment of any part of the Obligations or the performance of any Restricted Person’s other
duties and obligations under the Loan Documents.
“Security Schedule” means Schedule 3 hereto.
“Seventh Amendment Effective Date” means the date Amendment No. 7 by its terms becomes
effective.
“SFAS” means Statement of Financial Accounting Standard No. 133 or No. 143, as promulgated
by the Financial Accounting Standards Board.
“S&P” means Standard & Poor’ Ratings Group, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.,
and any successor thereto that is a nationally recognized rating agency
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person, any corporation, association, partnership, limited
liability company, joint venture, or other business or corporate entity, enterprise or organization
which is directly or indirectly (through one or more intermediaries) controlled by or owned fifty
percent or more by such Person.
"Subject PSA" has the meaning given such term in clause (c) of Section 7.3.
"Sweep Termination Date" means the date on which Facility Usage is less than 85% of
Borrowing Base.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
22
“Taxes” means all present or future taxes, levies, imposts, duties, deductions, withholdings,
assessments, fees or other charges imposed by any Governmental Authority, including any
interest, additions to tax or penalties applicable thereto.
"Tenth Amendment Effective Date” means the date Amendment No. 10 by its terms becomes
effective.
“Termination Event” means (a) the occurrence with respect to any ERISA Plan of (i) a reportable
event described in Section 4043(c)(5) or (6) of ERISA or (ii) any other reportable event described
in Section 4043(c) of ERISA other than a reportable event not subject to the provision for 30-day
notice to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation pursuant to a waiver by such corporation
under Section 4043(a) or 4043(b)(4) of ERISA, or (b) the withdrawal of any ERISA Affiliate from
an ERISA Plan during a plan year in which it was a “substantial employer” as defined in Section
4001(a)(2) of ERISA, or (c) the filing of a notice of intent to terminate any ERISA Plan or the
treatment of any ERISA Plan amendment as a termination under Section 4041(c) of ERISA, or (d)
the institution of proceedings to terminate any ERISA Plan by the Pension Benefit Guaranty
Corporation under Section 4042 of ERISA, or (e) any other event or condition which might
constitute grounds under Section 4042 of ERISA for the termination of, or the appointment of a
trustee to administer, any ERISA Plan.
“Tribunal” means any government, any arbitration panel, any court or any governmental
department, commission, board, bureau, agency or instrumentality of the United States or any
state, province, commonwealth, nation, territory, possession, county, parish, town, township,
village or municipality, whether now or hereafter constituted or existing.
“Type” means, with respect to any Loans, the characterization of such Loans as either Base Rate
Loans or Eurodollar Loans.
“United States” and “U.S.” mean the United States, its fifty states and the District of Columbia.
“Unused Borrowing Base” means, at any time of determination, the Borrowing Base minus the
Facility Usage.
“Write-Down and Conversion Powers” means, with respect to any EEA Resolution Authority, the
write-down and conversion powers of such EEA Resolution Authority from time to time under the
Bail-In Legislation for the applicable EEA Member Country, which write-down and conversion
powers are described in the EU Bail-In Legislation Schedule.
Section 1.2 
    Exhibits and Schedules; Additional Definitions. All Exhibits and Schedules attached to this
Agreement are a part hereof for all purposes. Reference is hereby made to the Security Schedule
for the meaning of certain terms defined therein and used but not defined herein, which
definitions are incorporated herein by reference.
Section 1.3 
    Amendment of Defined Instruments. Unless the context otherwise requires or unless otherwise
provided herein the terms defined in this Agreement which refer to a particular agreement,
instrument or document also refer to and include all renewals, extensions, modifications,
amendments and restatements of such agreement, instrument or document, provided that nothing
contained in this section shall be construed to authorize any such renewal, extension,
modification, amendment or restatement. References to any document, instrument, or agreement
(a) shall include all exhibits, schedules, and
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
23
other attachments thereto, and (b) shall include all documents, instruments, or agreements
issued or executed in replacement thereof.
Section 1.4 
    Terms Generally; References and Titles. The definitions of terms herein shall apply equally to
the singular and plural forms of the terms defined. Whenever the context may require, any
pronoun shall include the corresponding masculine, feminine and neuter forms. The words
“include,” “includes” and “including” shall be deemed to be followed by the phrase “without
limitation.” The word “will” shall be construed to have the same meaning and effect as the word
“shall.” References to a Person’s “discretion” means its sole and absolute discretion. Unless the
context requires otherwise (a) any reference herein to any Person shall be construed to include
such Person’s successors and assigns, (b) the words “herein,” “hereof” and “hereunder,” and
words of similar import, shall be construed to refer to this Agreement in its entirety and not to any
particular provision hereof, (c) all references herein to Articles, Sections, Exhibits and Schedules
shall be construed to refer to Articles and Sections of, and Exhibits and Schedules to, this
Agreement, (d) any reference to any law or regulation herein shall, unless otherwise specified,
refer to such law or regulation as amended, modified or supplemented from time to time and (e)
the words “asset” and “property” shall be construed to have the same meaning and effect and to
refer to any and all tangible and intangible assets and properties, including cash, securities,
accounts and contract rights. Titles appearing at the beginning of any subdivisions are for
convenience only and do not constitute any part of such subdivisions and shall be disregarded in
construing the language contained in such subdivisions. The phrases “this section” and “this
subsection” and similar phrases refer only to the sections or subsections hereof in which such
phrases occur. The word “or” is not exclusive. Accounting terms have the meanings assigned to
them by GAAP, as applied by the accounting entity to which they refer. References to “days” shall
mean calendar days, unless the term “Business Day” is used.
Section 1.5 
    Calculations and Determinations. All calculations under the Loan Documents of interest
chargeable with respect to Eurodollar Loans and of fees shall be made on the basis of actual
days elapsed (including the first day but excluding the last) and a year of 360 days. All other
calculations of interest made under the Loan Documents shall be made on the basis of actual
days elapsed (including the first day but excluding the last) and a year of 365 or 366 days, as
appropriate. Each determination by a Lender Party of amounts to be paid under Article III or any
other matters which are to be determined hereunder by a Lender Party (such as any Business
Day, Adjusted Eurodollar Rate, Reserve Requirement or Interest Period) shall, in the absence of
manifest error, be conclusive and binding. Unless otherwise expressly provided herein or unless
Required Lenders otherwise consent all financial statements and reports furnished to any Lender
Party hereunder shall be prepared and all financial computations and determinations pursuant
hereto shall be made in accordance with GAAP. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all financial
statements delivered hereunder shall be prepared, and all financial covenants contained herein
shall be calculated, without giving effect to any election under Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards 159 (or any similar accounting principal) permitting a Person to value its financial
liabilities at the fair value thereof.
Section 1.6 
    Joint Preparation; Construction of Indemnities and Releases. This Agreement and the other
Loan Documents have been reviewed and negotiated by sophisticated parties with access to
legal counsel and no rule of construction shall apply hereto or thereto which would require or
allow any Loan Document to be construed against any party because of its role in drafting such
Loan Document. All
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
24
indemnification and release provisions of this Agreement shall be construed broadly (and not
narrowly) in favor of the Persons receiving indemnification or being released.
ARTICLE II - The Loans and Letters of Credit
Section 2.1 
    Commitment to Lend; Notes. Subject to the terms and conditions hereof, each Lender agrees,
severally and not jointly, to make loans to Borrower (herein called such Lender’s “Loans”) upon
Borrower’s request from time to time during the Commitment Period, provided that (a) subject to
Sections 3.3, 3.4 and 3.6, all Lenders are requested to make Loans of the same Type in
accordance with their respective Percentage Shares and as part of the same Borrowing, (b) after
giving effect to such Loans, the aggregate amount of all Loans by such Lender does not exceed
such Lender’s Commitment, and (c) after giving effect to such Loans, Facility Usage does not
exceed the Borrowing Base in effect at such time. The aggregate amount of all Loans in any
Borrowing must be greater than or equal to $1,000,000 or any higher integral multiple of
$1,000,000, or must equal the remaining availability under the Borrowing Base. Borrower may
have no more than three (3) Borrowings of Eurodollar Loans outstanding at any time. The
obligation of Borrower to repay to each Lender the aggregate amount of all Loans made by such
Lender, together with interest accruing in connection therewith, shall be evidenced by a single
promissory note (herein called such Lender’s “Note”) made by Borrower payable to the order of
such Lender in the form of Exhibit A with appropriate insertions. It is expressly understood that
Lenders’ commitment to make Loans is determined only by reference to its Commitment and the
Borrowing Base from time to time in effect, and the aggregate face amount of the Notes and the
amount specified in the Security Documents are specified at a greater amount only for the
convenience of the parties to avoid the necessity of preparing and recording supplements to the
Security Documents. The amount of principal owing on any Lender’s Note at any given time shall
be the aggregate amount of all Loans theretofore made by such Lender minus all payments of
principal theretofore received by such Lender on such Note. Interest on each Note shall accrue
and be due and payable as provided herein and therein. Each Note shall be due and payable as
provided herein and therein, and shall be due and payable in full on the Revolver Maturity Date.
Subject to the terms and conditions hereof, Borrower may borrow, repay, and reborrow hereunder
when no Overadvances are outstanding.
Section 2.2 
    Requests for Loans. Borrower must give to Administrative Agent written notice (or telephonic
notice promptly confirmed in writing) of any requested Borrowing of new Loans to be advanced
by Lenders. Each such notice constitutes a “Borrowing Notice” hereunder and must:
a.specify (i) the aggregate amount of any such Borrowing of new Base Rate Loans, and the date
on which such Base Rate Loans are to be advanced, or (ii) the aggregate amount of any such
Borrowing of new Eurodollar Loans, the date on which such Eurodollar Loans are to be
advanced (which shall be the first day of the Interest Period which is to apply thereto), the length
of the applicable Interest Period, and the Consolidated Cash Balance (without regard to the
requested Borrowing) and the pro forma Consolidated Cash Balance (giving effect to the
requested Borrowing); and
b.be received by Administrative Agent not later than noon, New York time, on (i) the first
Business Day preceding the day on which Base Rate Loans are to be made, or (ii) the third
Business Day preceding the day on which Eurodollar Loans are to be made.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
25
Each such written request or confirmation must be made in the form and substance of the
“Borrowing Notice” attached hereto as Exhibit B, duly completed. Each such telephonic request
shall be deemed a representation, warranty, acknowledgment and agreement by Borrower as to
the matters which are required to be set out in such written confirmation. Upon receipt of any
such Borrowing Notice, Administrative Agent shall give each Lender prompt notice of the terms
thereof. If all conditions precedent to such new Loans have been met, each Lender will on the
date requested promptly remit to Administrative Agent, at Administrative Agent’s Office, the
amount of such Lender’s new Loan in immediately available funds, and upon receipt of such
funds, unless to its actual knowledge any conditions precedent to such Loan have been neither
met nor waived as provided herein, Administrative Agent shall promptly make such Loans
available to Borrower. Unless Administrative Agent shall have received notice from a Lender
prior to the proposed date of any Borrowing that such Lender will not make available to
Administrative Agent such Lender’s share of such Borrowing, Administrative Agent may assume
in its discretion that such Lender has made such share available on such date in accordance
with this Section 2.2 and may, in reliance upon such assumption, make available to Borrower a
corresponding amount. In such event, if a Lender has not in fact made its share of the applicable
Borrowing available to Administrative Agent, then the applicable Lender and Borrower severally
agree to pay to Administrative Agent forthwith on demand such corresponding amount with
interest thereon, for each day from and including the date such amount is made available to
Borrower to but excluding the date of payment to the Administrative Agent, at (i) in the case of a
payment to be made by such Lender, the greater of the Federal Funds Rate and a rate
determined by Administrative Agent in accordance with banking industry rules on interbank
compensation and (ii) in the case of a payment to be made by Borrower, the interest rate
applicable to Base Rate Loans. If Borrower and such Lender shall pay such interest to
Administrative Agent for the same or an overlapping period, Administrative Agent shall promptly
remit to Borrower the amount of such interest paid by Borrower for such period. If such Lender
pays its share of the applicable Borrowing to Administrative Agent, then the amount so paid shall
constitute such Lender’s Loan included in such Borrowing. Any payment by Borrower shall be
without prejudice to any claim Borrower may have against a Lender that shall have failed to
make such payment to Administrative Agent.
Section 2.3 
    Continuations and Conversions of Existing Loans. Borrower may make the following elections
with respect to Loans already outstanding: to convert Base Rate Loans to Eurodollar Loans, to
convert Eurodollar Loans to Base Rate Loans on the last day of the Interest Period applicable
thereto, and to continue Eurodollar Loans beyond the expiration of such Interest Period by
designating a new Interest Period to take effect at the time of such expiration. In making such
elections, Borrower may combine existing Loans made pursuant to separate Borrowings into one
new Borrowing or divide existing Loans made pursuant to one Borrowing into separate new
Borrowings, provided that Borrower may have no more than three (3) Borrowings of Eurodollar
Loans outstanding at any time. To make any such election, Borrower must give to Administrative
Agent written notice (or telephonic notice promptly confirmed in writing) of any such Conversion
or Continuation of existing Loans, with a separate notice given for each new Borrowing. Each
such notice constitutes a “Continuation/Conversion Notice” hereunder and must:
c.specify the existing Loans which are to be Continued or Converted;
d.specify (i) the aggregate amount of any Borrowing of Base Rate Loans into which such existing
Loans are to be continued or converted and the date on which such Continuation or Conversion
is to occur, or (ii) the aggregate amount of any Borrowing of Eurodollar Loans into which such
existing Loans are to be continued or converted, the date on which such Continuation or
Conversion is to occur (which shall be the first day of the Interest
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
26
Period which is to apply to such Eurodollar Loans), and the length of the applicable Interest
Period; and
e.be received by Administrative Agent not later than noon, New York time, on (i) the day on which
any such Continuation or Conversion to Base Rate Loans is to occur, or (ii) the third Business
Day preceding the day on which any such Continuation or Conversion to Eurodollar Loans is to
occur.
Each such written request or confirmation must be made in the form and substance of the
“Continuation/Conversion Notice” attached hereto as Exhibit C, duly completed. Each such
telephonic request shall be deemed a representation, warranty, acknowledgment and agreement
by Borrower as to the matters which are required to be set out in such written confirmation. Upon
receipt of any such Continuation/Conversion Notice, Administrative Agent shall give each Lender
prompt notice of the terms thereof. Each Continuation/Conversion Notice shall be irrevocable
and binding on Borrower. During the continuance of any Default, Borrower may not make any
election to convert existing Loans into Eurodollar Loans or continue existing Loans as Eurodollar
Loans. If (due to the existence of a Default or for any other reason) Borrower is prohibited hereby
from giving any Continuation/Conversion Notice with respect to a Borrowing of existing
Eurodollar Loans at least three days prior to the end of the Interest Period applicable thereto,
such Eurodollar Loans shall automatically be converted into Base Rate Loans at the end of such
Interest Period. No new funds shall be repaid by Borrower or advanced by any Lender in
connection with any Continuation or Conversion of existing Loans pursuant to this section, and
no such Continuation or Conversion shall be deemed to be a new advance of funds for any
purpose; such Continuations and Conversions merely constitute a change in the interest rate
applicable to already outstanding Loans.
Section 2.4 
    Use of Proceeds. This Agreement will be available (i) to provide for the issuance of Letters of
Credit, (ii) to fund a portion of the cash consideration for the merger of the Contributing Parties
into Borrower pursuant to the Merger Agreement on the Closing Date, (iii) to pay fees,
commissions and expenses in connection with (x) this Agreement, (y) the transactions
contemplated by the Merger Agreement and (z) the initial public offering of equity interests in the
MLP, (iv) to finance ongoing working capital requirements and other general corporate purposes
(including financing the LCS Acquisition and financing other acquisitions of certain Oil and Gas
Properties) and (v) for permitted Restricted Payments. In no event shall the funds from any Loan
be used directly or indirectly by any Person for personal, family, household or agricultural
purposes or for the purpose, whether immediate, incidental or ultimate, of purchasing, acquiring
or carrying any “margin stock” (as such term is defined in Regulation U promulgated by the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System) or to extend credit to others directly or indirectly for
the purpose of purchasing or carrying any such margin stock. Borrower represents and warrants
that Borrower is not engaged principally, or as one of Borrower’s important activities, in the
business of extending credit to others for the purpose of purchasing or carrying such margin
stock.
Section 2.5 
    Interest Rates and Fees.
(a)
    Interest Rates. Subject to subsection (b) below, (i) each Base Rate Loan shall bear interest on
each day outstanding at the Adjusted Base Rate in effect on such day and (ii) each Eurodollar
Loan shall bear interest on each day during the related Interest Period at the related Adjusted
Eurodollar Rate in effect on such day.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
27
(b)
    Default Rate. If an Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing under Section
8.1(a), (b), (j)(i), (j)(ii), or (j)(iii), all outstanding Loans shall bear interest at the applicable Default
Rate. In addition, if an Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing (other than under
Section 8.1(a), (b), (j)(i), (j)(ii), or (j)(iii)), Required Lenders may, by notice to Borrower, elect to
have the outstanding Loans bear interest at the applicable Default Rate, whereupon such Loans
shall bear interest at the applicable Default Rate until the earlier of (i) the first date thereafter
upon which there shall be no Event of Default continuing and (ii) the date upon which Required
Lenders shall have rescinded such notice.
(c)
    Commitment Fees. In consideration of each Lender’s commitment to make Loans, Borrower
will pay to Administrative Agent for the account of each Lender commitment fees, determined on
a daily basis by applying the applicable Commitment Fee Rate to such Lender’s Percentage
Share of the Unused Borrowing Base determined at the end of each day during the Commitment
Period. Each commitment fee shall be due and payable in arrears on the last Business Day of
each Fiscal Quarter and at the end of the Commitment Period. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
commitment fee shall accrue on any Defaulting Lender’s Percentage Share of the Unused
Borrowing Base and no Defaulting Lender shall be paid a commitment fee hereunder while it is a
Defaulting Lender.
(d)
    Borrowing Base Increases. As a condition precedent to Borrower’s acceptance of (and to the
effectiveness of) any increase to the Borrowing Base determined by the Lenders pursuant to
Section 2.9, Borrower will pay to Administrative Agent for the account of each Lender, a
Borrowing Base increase fee in an amount to be mutually agreed upon by the Lenders and
Borrower based on then prevailing market conditions. The Borrowing Base will not be increased
and no Borrowing Base increase fee will be incurred with respect to any proposed increase in
the Borrowing Base unless Borrower delivers to Administrative Agent written notice that
Borrower accepts the proposed increase (or a portion thereof) and confirms the amount of the
Borrowing Base increase fee mutually agreed upon by the Lenders and the Borrower.
(e)
    Payment Dates. On each Interest Payment Date relating to Base Rate Loans, Borrower shall
pay to the Lenders all unpaid interest which has accrued on the Base Rate Loans to but not
including such Interest Payment Date. On each Interest Payment Date relating to a Eurodollar
Loan, Borrower shall pay to Lenders all unpaid interest which has accrued on such Eurodollar
Loan to but not including such Interest Payment Date.
Section 2.6 
    Optional Prepayments. Upon delivery of a Repayment Notice to Administrative Agent,
Borrower may, (a) upon one Business Days’ notice to Administrative Agent with respect to any
Base Rate Loan and (b) upon three Business Days’ notice to the Administrative Agent with
respect to any Eurodollar Loan, from time to time and without premium or penalty prepay the
Notes, in whole or in part, provided (i) that the aggregate amounts of all partial prepayments of
principal on the Notes equals $1,000,000 or any higher integral multiple of $100,000, (ii) that
Borrower does not make any prepayments which
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
28
would reduce the unpaid principal balance of any Loan to less than $100,000 without first either
(1) terminating this Agreement or (2) providing assurance satisfactory to Administrative Agent in
its discretion that Lenders’ legal rights under the Loan Documents are in no way adversely
affected by such reduction, and (iii) that if Borrower prepays any Eurodollar Loan on any day
other than the last day of the Interest Period applicable thereto, it shall pay to Lenders any
amounts due under Section 3.4. Each prepayment of principal of a Eurodollar Loan (but not a
Base Rate Loan) under this section shall be accompanied by all interest then accrued and
unpaid on the principal so prepaid. Any principal or interest prepaid pursuant to this section shall
be in addition to, and not in lieu of, all payments otherwise required to be paid under the Loan
Documents at the time of such prepayment
Section 2.7 
    Mandatory Prepayments.
(a)
    If at any time the Facility Usage exceeds the Maximum Credit Amount (whether due to a
reduction in the Maximum Credit Amount in accordance with this Agreement, or otherwise),
Borrower shall immediately prepay the principal of the Loans (and after all Loans are repaid in
full, if there remains an excess, Cash Collateralize the LC Obligations in accordance with
Section 2.16(a)) in an amount at least equal to such excess.
(b)
    If at any time the Facility Usage is less than the Maximum Credit Amount but, after taking into
account any Permitted Overadvances, in excess of the Borrowing Base (such excess being
herein called a “Borrowing Base Deficiency”), Borrower shall, within thirty (30) days after
Administrative Agent gives notice of such fact to Borrower, give notice to Administrative Agent
electing to eliminate the Borrowing Base Deficiency as provided in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) below, or
in any combination of clauses (i), (ii), and (iii); whereupon Borrower shall be obligated to
eliminate such Borrowing Base Deficiency in such manner:
(i)
    on or before the date 60 days after Borrower’s receipt of notice of the Borrowing Base
Deficiency, prepay the principal of the Loans in an aggregate amount at least equal to such
Borrowing Base Deficiency (or, if the Loans have been paid in full, Cash Collateralize the LC
Obligations as required under Section 2.16(a)), such prepayment to be made in full within thirty
(30) days after the date that such notice of Borrowing Base Deficiency is received by Borrower
from Administrative Agent, or
(ii)
    on or before the date 60 days after Borrower’s receipt of notice of the Borrowing Base
Deficiency, prepay the principal of the Loans (and after all Loans are repaid in full, Cash
Collateralize the LC Obligations in accordance with Section 2.16(a)) in up to five (5) monthly
installments in an aggregate amount at least equal to such Borrowing Base Deficiency, with each
such installment equal to or in excess of one-fifth of such Borrowing Base Deficiency, and with
the first such installment to be paid one month after the giving of such notice and the subsequent
installments to be due and payable at one month intervals thereafter until such Borrowing Base
Deficiency has been eliminated; provided, however, Borrower shall have demonstrated to the
satisfaction of Administrative Agent on or before
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
29
the date of the first such payment that Borrower has sufficient available monthly cash from its
Projected Oil and Gas Production to make such payments, or
(iii)
    provide Administrative Agent and/or Collateral Agent with deeds of trust, mortgages, chattel
mortgages, security agreements, financing statements and other security documents in form and
substance similar to the Security Documents previously delivered to Administrative Agent and
otherwise satisfactory to Administrative Agent and/or Collateral Agent, granting, confirming, and
perfecting first and prior liens or security interests in collateral acceptable to the Lenders, to the
extent needed to allow Lenders to increase the Borrowing Base to an amount which eliminates
such Borrowing Base Deficiency, and such Security Documents shall be executed and delivered
to Administrative Agent and/or Collateral Agent within thirty (30) days after Administrative Agent
confirms to Borrower what Collateral will be required. If, prior to any such specification by
Administrative Agent, Lenders determine that the giving of such security documents will not serve
to eliminate such Borrowing Base Deficiency, then, within five (5) Business Days after receiving
notice of such determination from Administrative Agent, Borrower will elect to make, and
thereafter make, the prepayments specified in either of the preceding subsections (i) or (ii) of this
subsection (b).
For clarity and avoidance of doubt, it has been agreed that repayment of Overadvances is
governed by subsections (d), (e), and (f) of this Section 2.7.
(c)
    Borrower shall deliver to Administrative Agent a Repayment Notice in connection with any
amounts prepaid pursuant to this Section 2.7. Each prepayment of principal under this Section
2.7 shall be accompanied by all interest then accrued and unpaid on the principal so prepaid.
Any principal or interest prepaid pursuant to this Section 2.7 shall be in addition to, and not in lieu
of, all payments otherwise required to be paid under the Loan Documents at the time of such
prepayment.
(d)
    On the day the Overadvance Period ends, the Borrower shall make a mandatory prepayment
of the principal of the Loans in an amount, if any, equal to the outstanding
Overadvances.[Reserved]
(e)
    On or before the last Business Day of each calendar month until the Sweep Termination Date,
the Borrower shall prepay the Loans in an amount equal to the greater of (i) 100% of
Consolidated Excess Cash Flow for the previous calendar month, as reflected in the Excess
Cash Flow Report and (ii) the amount set forth in the following table:.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
30
Mandatory Prepayment DateMinimum Amount of Principal to be Repaid
June 30, 2016
July 29, 2016
August 31, 2016
September 30, 2016
October 31, 2016
$331,000
$212,000
$511,000
$449,000
$689,000
(f)
    Upon receipt of payments received in connection with the Hedge Close‑Outs, the Borrower
shall immediately prepay the Loans in an amount equal to such payments.
(g)
    If, on the last Business Day of any week (or on any Business Day if a Default, Event of Default
or Borrowing Base Deficiency has occurred and is continuing) (A) there is outstanding Facility
Usage and (B) there is any Excess Cash as of the end of such Business Day, then the Credit
Parties shall, within one Business Day, (1) prepay the Loans in an aggregate principal amount
equal to the amount of such Excess Cash, and (2) if any Excess Cash remains after prepaying all
of the Loans and there remains LC Obligations, pay to the Administrative Agent on behalf of the
Lenders an amount equal to such excess to be held as Cash Collateral. To the extent that there
are funds on deposit in or credit to, any deposit account or other account maintained with the
Administrative Agent (or any Affiliate thereof) or any Lender (or any Affiliate thereof) on any date
that the Credit Parties are required to prepay Loans (and/or Cash Collateralize LC Obligations,
as applicable) pursuant to this Section, the Credit Parties hereby irrevocably authorize and
instruct the Administrative Agent or such Lender to apply such funds to the prepayment of Loans
(and/or Cash Collateralization of LC Obligations, as applicable).
Section 2.8 
    Initial Borrowing Base. (a) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, during
the period commencing on the NinthTenth Amendment Effective Date and ending on the
effective date of the first Determination Date or adjustment of the Borrowing Base after the
NinthTenth Amendment Effective Date, the amount of the Borrowing Base shall be, subject to
adjustment as provided for herein, $110,000,000. Upon completion of the Hugoton Basin
Divestiture, the Borrowing Base shall be automatically reduced to be $105,000,000.140,000,000.
(b) In the event that the Borrowing Base is subject to a reduction under Section 2.9 during the
Overadvance Period in connection with (i) any disposition to a third party of Oil and Gas
Properties of Borrower other than the Hugoton Basin Divestiture, the Borrowing Base value of
which exceeds five percent (5%) of the then current Borrowing Base, or (ii) any Liquidation of a
Hedging Contract (other than the Hedge Close-outs) which would have the effect of reducing the
Borrowing Base by an amount in excess of five percent (5%) of the then current Borrowing Base,
such reduction shall be made to the Borrowing Base, and
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
31
the Borrower shall immediately upon receipt of such proceeds make a mandatory prepayment of
the Overadvances equal to such amount.
Section 2.9 
    Subsequent Determinations of Borrowing Base. By each March 31 and September 30, of each
year, beginning March 31, 2012, Borrower shall furnish to Administrative Agent all information,
reports and data which Administrative Agent reasonably requests concerning Restricted
Persons’ businesses and properties (including their Oil and Gas Properties and interests and the
reserves and production relating thereto), together with the Engineering Report described in
Section 6.2(d) or (e), as applicable. In addition, Borrower and Required Lenders may each
request one additional Borrowing Base redetermination during the period between each
scheduled Borrowing Base determination. Additionally, Administrative Agent and Required
Lenders may request an additional Borrowing Base redetermination (i) in connection with other
than the Hugoton Basin Divestiture any disposition to a third party of Oil and Gas Properties of
Borrower the Borrowing Base value of which exceeds five percent (5%) of the then current
Borrowing Base, and (ii) in connection with any Liquidation of a Hedging Contract which would
have the effect of reducing the Borrowing Base by an amount in excess of five percent (5%) of the
then current Borrowing Base. In connection with any redetermination of the Borrowing Base,
Borrower will furnish to each Lender all information, reports and data which Administrative Agent
reasonably requests concerning Restricted Persons’ businesses and properties (including their
Oil and Gas Properties and interests and the reserves and production relating thereto). No later
than thirty (30) days after receiving such information, reports and data, Administrative Agent and
Required Lenders shall agree upon an amount for the Borrowing Base (provided that all Lenders
must agree to any increase in the Borrowing Base). If Required Lenders (or all Lenders in the
case of an increase in the Borrowing Base) have not agreed within the thirty day period after
receiving such information, reports and data on a Borrowing Base, the Administrative Agent shall
poll Lenders to ascertain the highest Borrowing Base then acceptable to the Required Lenders
(or all Lenders in the case of an increase in the Borrowing Base) and such amount shall then
become the Borrowing Base. Administrative Agent shall by notice to Borrower designate such
amount as the new Borrowing Base available to Borrower hereunder, which designation shall
take effect immediately on the date such notice is sent (herein called a “Determination Date”) and
shall remain in effect until but not including the next date as of which the Borrowing Base is
redetermined. If Borrower does not furnish all such information, reports and data by the date
specified in the first sentence of this section, Administrative Agent may nonetheless designate
the Borrowing Base at any amount which Required Lenders determine and may redesignate the
Borrowing Base from time to time thereafter until Administrative Agent receives all such
information, reports and data, whereupon Administrative Agent and Required Lenders shall
designate a new Borrowing Base as described above (provided that all Lenders must agree to
any increase in the Borrowing Base). Administrative Agent and Required Lenders shall
determine the amount of the Borrowing Base based upon the loan collateral value which they in
their discretion assign to the various Oil and Gas Properties of the Restricted Persons at the time
in question and based upon such other credit factors (including without limitation the assets,
liabilities, cash flow, hedged and unhedged exposure to price, foreign exchange rate, and
interest rate changes, business, properties, prospects, management and ownership of Borrower
and its Affiliates) as they in their discretion deem significant. It is expressly understood that
Lenders and Administrative Agent have no obligation to agree upon or designate the Borrowing
Base at any particular amount and that Lenders’ commitments to advance funds under the Loans
is determined by reference to the Borrowing Base from time to time in effect and such Lender’s
Commitment, which Borrowing Base shall be used for calculating commitment fees under
Section 2.5(c) and, to the extent permitted by Law and regulatory authorities, for the purposes of
capital adequacy determination and reimbursements under Section 3.2. Furthermore and without
affecting any other provision of this Section 2.9, between September 1, 2016 and November
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
32
1, 2016, one additional non-scheduled Borrowing Base redetermination may be requested by
any Lender and in connection therewith all Lenders must agree to the redetermined Borrowing
Base.
Section 2.10 
    Borrower's Reduction of Borrowing Base. Until the termination of the Commitment Period,
Borrower may, during the fifteen-day period beginning on each Determination Date (each such
period being called in this section an “Option Period”), reduce the Borrowing Base from the
amount designated by Administrative Agent to any lesser amount. To exercise such option,
Borrower must within an Option Period send notice to Administrative Agent of the reduced
amount of the Borrowing Base chosen by Borrower at least 3 Business Days prior to the effective
date of any such Borrowing Base reduction. If Borrower does not affirmatively exercise this option
during an Option Period, the Borrowing Base shall be the amount designated by Administrative
Agent. Any election by Borrower of a reduced Borrowing Base shall continue in effect until the
next date as of which the Borrowing Base is redetermined.
Section 2.11 
    Letters of Credit. Subject to the terms and conditions hereof, Borrower may at any time during
the Commitment Period request LC Issuer to issue, increase the amount of or otherwise amend
or extend, one or more Letters of Credit, provided that, after taking such Letter of Credit into
account:
(a)
    the Facility Usage does not exceed the Borrowing Base at such time; and
(b)
    the aggregate amount of LC Obligations at such time does not exceed the LC Sublimit;
(c)
    the expiration date of such Letter of Credit (as extended, if applicable) is prior to the earliest to
occur of (i) 12 months after the issuance thereof, and (ii) the Letter of Credit Termination Date;
(d)
    such Letter of Credit is not directly or indirectly used to assure payment of or otherwise support
any Indebtedness of any Person other than Indebtedness of any Restricted Person;
(e)
    the issuance of such Letter of Credit will be in compliance with all applicable governmental
restrictions, policies, and guidelines and will not subject LC Issuer to any cost that is not
reimbursable under Article III;
(f)
    the form and terms of such Letter of Credit are acceptable to LC Issuer in its discretion; and
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
33
(g)
    all other conditions in this Agreement to the issuance of such Letter of Credit have been
satisfied.
LC Issuer will honor any such request if the foregoing conditions (a) through (g) (the “LC
Conditions”) have been met as of the date of issuance of such Letter of Credit. LC Issuer may
choose to honor any such request for any Letter of Credit that does not meet all the LC
Conditions, but has no obligation to do so and may refuse to issue any requested Letter of Credit
that does not meet the LC Conditions for any reason that LC Issuer in its sole discretion deems
relevant. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, LC Issuer shall not at any
time be obligated to issue, amend, renew or extend any Letter of Credit if any Lender is at that
time a Defaulting Lender, unless LC Issuer has entered into arrangements, including the delivery
of Cash Collateral, satisfactory to LC Issuer (in its discretion) with Borrower or such Lender to
eliminate LC Issuer’s Fronting Exposure (after giving effect to Section 2.18(a)(iv)) with respect to
the Defaulting Lender arising from the Letter of Credit then proposed to be issued .
Borrower may also at any time during the Commitment Period request that LC Issuer extend the
expiration date of an existing Letter of Credit or modify an existing Letter of Credit (other than an
increase) and LC Issuer will honor such request if the LC Conditions set forth in subsection (c) of
this Section 2.11 are met and no Default exists at the time of such request; provided that in the
case of any such modification (other than an increase), LC Issuer shall have approved such
modification.
Section 2.12 
    Requesting Letters of Credit.
(a)
    Borrower must make written application for any Letter of Credit or amendment or extension of
any Letter of Credit at least 5 Business Days (or such shorter period as LC Issuer may in its
discretion from time to time agree) before the date on which Borrower desires for LC Issuer to
issue such Letter of Credit. By making any such written application, unless otherwise expressly
stated therein, Borrower shall be deemed to have represented and warranted that the LC
Conditions described in Section 2.11 (other than Section 2.11(f)) will be met as of the date of
issuance of such Letter of Credit. Each such written application for a Letter of Credit must be
made in writing in the form customarily used by LC Issuer, the terms and provisions of which, to
the extent not inconsistent with the terms hereof, are hereby incorporated herein by reference (or
in such other form as may mutually be agreed upon by LC Issuer and Borrower).
(b)
    If Borrower requests in any applicable LC Application, LC Issuer may, in its discretion, agree to
issue a Letter of Credit that has automatic extension provisions (each, an “Auto-Extension Letter
of Credit”); provided that any such Auto-Extension Letter of Credit must permit LC Issuer to
prevent any such extension at least once in each 12 month period (commencing with the date of
issuance of such Letter of Credit) by giving prior notice to the beneficiary thereof not later than a
day (the “Non-Extension Notice Date”) in each such 12 month period to be agreed upon at the
time such Letter of Credit is issued. Unless otherwise directed by LC Issuer, Borrower shall not
be required to make a specific request to LC Issuer for any such extension. Once an Auto-
Extension Letter of Credit has been issued, Lenders shall be deemed to have authorized (but
may not require) LC Issuer to permit the extension of such Letter of Credit at any time to an expiry
date
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
34
not later than the Letter of Credit Termination Date; provided, however, that LC Issuer shall not
permit any such extension if (i) LC Issuer has determined that it would not be permitted, or would
have no obligation at such time to issue such Letter of Credit in its revised form (as extended)
under the terms hereof (by reason of the provisions of Section 2.11 or otherwise), or (ii) it has
received notice (which notice may be by telephone or in writing) on or before the day that is 5
Business Days before the Non-Extension Notice Date (1) from Administrative Agent that
Required Lenders have elected not to permit such extension or (2) from Administrative Agent,
any Lender or Borrower that one or more of the applicable conditions specified in Section 4.2 is
not then satisfied, and in each such case directing LC Issuer not to permit such extension.
(c)
    Two Business Days after the LC Conditions for a Letter of Credit have been met as described
in Section 2.11 (or if LC Issuer otherwise desires to issue such Letter of Credit earlier), LC Issuer
will issue such Letter of Credit at LC Issuer’s office in New York, New York. If any provisions of
any LC Application conflict with any provisions of this Agreement, the provisions of this
Agreement shall govern and control. Borrower shall promptly examine a copy of each Letter of
Credit and each amendment thereto that is delivered to it and, in the event of any claim of
noncompliance with Borrower’s instructions or other irregularity, Borrower will immediately notify
LC Issuer.
(d)
    Notwithstanding that a Letter of Credit issued or outstanding hereunder is in support of any
obligations of a Restricted Person other than Borrower, Borrower shall be obligated to reimburse
LC Issuer hereunder for any and all drawings under such Letter of Credit. Borrower hereby
acknowledges that the issuance of Letters of Credit for the benefit of such other Restricted
Persons inures to the benefit of Borrower, and that Borrower’s business derives substantial
benefits from the businesses of such other Restricted Persons
Section 2.13 
    Reimbursement and Participations.
(a)
    Reimbursement by Borrower. Each Matured LC Obligation shall constitute a loan by LC Issuer
to Borrower. Borrower promises to pay to LC Issuer, or to LC Issuer’s order, on demand, the full
amount of each Matured LC Obligation, together with interest thereon at the Default Rate
applicable to Base Rate Loans. The obligation of Borrower to reimburse LC Issuer for each
Matured LC Obligation shall be absolute, unconditional and irrevocable, and shall be paid strictly
in accordance with the terms of this Agreement (including any LC Application) under all
circumstances, including the following: (i) any lack of validity or enforceability of such Letter of
Credit or any other agreement or instrument relating thereto; (ii) the existence of any claim,
counterclaim, set-off, defense or other right that Borrower may have at any time against any
beneficiary or any transferee of such Letter of Credit (or any Person for whom any such
beneficiary or any such transferee may be acting), LC Issuer or any other Person, whether in
connection with this Agreement, the transactions contemplated hereby or by such Letter of Credit
or any agreement or instrument relating thereto, or any unrelated transaction; (iii) any draft,
demand, certificate or other document presented under such Letter of Credit proving to be forged,
fraudulent, invalid or
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
35
insufficient in any respect or any statement therein being untrue or inaccurate in any respect; or
any loss or delay in the transmission or otherwise of any document required in order to make a
drawing under such Letter of Credit; (iv) any payment by LC Issuer under such Letter of Credit
against presentation of a draft or certificate that does not strictly comply with the terms of such
Letter of Credit; or (v) any other circumstance or happening whatsoever, whether or not similar to
any of the foregoing. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it is expressly agreed that
the absolute and unconditional nature of Borrower’s obligations under this section to reimburse
LC Issuer for each drawing under a Letter of Credit will not be excused by the gross negligence
or willful misconduct of LC Issuer. However, the foregoing shall not be construed to excuse LC
Issuer from liability to Borrower to the extent of any direct damages (as opposed to consequential
damages, claims in respect of which are hereby waived by Borrower to the extent permitted by
applicable Law) suffered by Borrower that are caused by LC Issuer’s gross negligence or willful
misconduct in determining whether drafts and other documents presented under a Letter of Credit
comply with the terms thereof.
(b)
    Letter of Credit Advances. If the beneficiary of any Letter of Credit makes a draft or other
demand for payment thereunder then Borrower may, during the interval between the making
thereof and the honoring thereof by LC Issuer, request Lenders to make Loans to Borrower in the
amount of such draft or demand, which Loans shall be made concurrently with LC Issuer’s
payment of such draft or demand and shall be immediately used by LC Issuer to repay the
amount of the resulting Matured LC Obligation. Such a request by Borrower shall be made in
compliance with all of the provisions hereof, provided that for the purposes of calculating Facility
Usage, the amount of such Loans shall be considered, but the amount of the Matured LC
Obligation to be concurrently paid by such Loans shall not be considered.
(c)
    Participation by Lenders. LC Issuer irrevocably agrees to grant and hereby grants to each
Lender, and, to induce LC Issuer to issue Letters of Credit hereunder, each Lender irrevocably
agrees to accept and purchase and hereby accepts and purchases from LC Issuer, on the terms
and conditions hereinafter stated and for such Lender’s own account and risk, an undivided
interest equal to such Lender’s Percentage Share of LC Issuer’s obligations and rights under
each Letter of Credit issued hereunder and the amount of each Matured LC Obligation paid by
LC Issuer thereunder. Each Lender unconditionally and irrevocably agrees with LC Issuer that, if
a Matured LC Obligation is paid under any Letter of Credit for which LC Issuer is not reimbursed
in full by Borrower in accordance with the terms of this Agreement and the related LC Application
(including any reimbursement by means of concurrent Loans or by the application of Cash
Collateral), such Lender shall (in all circumstances and without set-off or counterclaim) pay to
Administrative Agent, for the account of the LC Issuer on demand, in immediately available funds
at Administrative Agent’s Office, such Lender’s Percentage Share of such Matured LC Obligation
(or any portion thereof which has not been reimbursed by Borrower). Each Lender’s obligation to
pay Administrative Agent, for the account of the LC Issuer, pursuant to the terms of this
subsection is irrevocable and unconditional. If any amount required to be paid by any Lender
pursuant to this subsection is paid by such Lender within three Business Days after the date such
payment is due, LC Issuer shall in addition to such amount be entitled to recover from such
Lender, on demand,
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
36
interest thereon calculated from such due date at the Federal Funds Rate. If any amount required
to be paid by any Lender pursuant to this subsection is not paid by such Lender within three
Business Days after the date such payment is due, LC Issuer shall in addition to such amount be
entitled to recover from such Lender, on demand, interest thereon calculated from such due date
at the Default Rate applicable to Base Rate Loans.
(d)
    Distributions to Participants. Whenever LC Issuer has in accordance with this section received
from any Lender payment of such Lender’s Percentage Share of any Matured LC Obligation, if
LC Issuer thereafter receives any payment of such Matured LC Obligation or any payment of
interest thereon (whether directly from Borrower or by application of Cash Collateral or otherwise,
and excluding only interest for any period prior to LC Issuer’s demand that such Lender make
such payment of its Percentage Share), LC Issuer will distribute to Administrative Agent such
Lender’s Percentage Share of the amounts so received by LC Issuer and Administrative Agent
will distribute to such Lender the amounts so received by Administrative Agent from LC Issuer;
provided, however, that if any such payment received by LC Issuer must thereafter be returned by
LC Issuer, such Lender shall return such payment to Administrative Agent who shall promptly
return such payment to LC Issuer.
(e)
    Calculations. A written advice setting forth in reasonable detail the amounts owing under this
section, submitted by LC Issuer to Administrative Agent who in turn shall submit such written
advice to Borrower or any Lender from time to time, shall be conclusive, absent manifest error, as
to the amounts thereof.
(f)
    Defaulting Lender Collateral. If any Lender is a Defaulting Lender, Borrower may from time to
time provide Cash Collateral to LC Issuer, in an amount equal to the Percentage Shares of all
Defaulting Lenders in the LC Obligations (the “Defaulting Lenders’ Percentage”), to secure the
obligations of such Defaulting Lenders under Section 2.13 of this Agreement. Such Cash
Collateral shall be used to reimburse the Defaulting Lenders’ Percentage of drawings under
Letters of Credit and other obligations owing by Defaulting Lenders to LC Issuer. In the event any
such Defaulting Lender is replaced in accordance with Section 3.7, so long as no Default or
Event of Default exists, LC Issuer shall release to Borrower, at Borrower's written request, any
amounts held as Cash Collateral that are attributable to such Defaulting Lender's Percentage
Share of the LC Obligations.
Section 2.14 
    Letter of Credit Fees. In consideration of LC Issuer’s issuance of any Letter of Credit, Borrower
agrees to pay to Administrative Agent, for the account of all Lenders in accordance with their
respective Percentage Shares, a letter of credit issuance fee equal to the Letter of Credit Fee
Rate then in effect (which shall be increased by two percent (2%) per annum during any period in
which interest on the Loans would accrue at the Default Rate), and (b) to such LC Issuer for its
own account, a letter of credit fronting fee at a rate equal to one-eighth of one percent (0.125%)
per annum times the face amount of such Letter of Credit (but in no event less than $500 per
annum); provided, however, any Letter of Credit Fees otherwise payable for the account of a
Defaulting Lender with respect to any Letter of
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
37
Credit as to which such Defaulting Lender has not provided Cash Collateral satisfactory to LC
Issuer pursuant to Section 2.11 shall be payable, to the maximum extent permitted by applicable
Law, to the other Lenders in accordance with the upward adjustments in their respective
Percentages Share allocable to such Letter of Credit pursuant to Section 2.18(a)(iv), with the
balance of such fee, if any, payable to LC Issuer for its own account (except such fee on such
balance shall be proportionately reduced to the extent Borrower has Cash Collateralized such
balance or a part thereof). In addition, Borrower will pay to LC Issuer LC Issuer’s customary fees
for issuance, amendment and drawing of each Letter of Credit. The letter of credit fee and the
letter of credit fronting fee will be calculated based on the face amount of all Letters of Credit
outstanding on each day at the above applicable rate and will be payable quarterly in arrears on
the last Business Day of each March, June, September and December.
Section 2.15 
    No Duty to Inquire.
(a)
Drafts and Demands. LC Issuer is authorized and instructed to accept and pay drafts and
demands for payment under any Letter of Credit without requiring, and without responsibility for,
any determination as to the existence of any event giving rise to said draft, either at the time of
acceptance or payment or thereafter. LC Issuer is under no duty to determine the proper identity
of anyone presenting such a draft or making such a demand (whether by authenticated SWIFT or
otherwise) as the officer, representative or agent of any beneficiary under any Letter of Credit,
and payment by LC Issuer to any such beneficiary when requested by any such purported officer,
representative or agent is hereby authorized and approved. Borrower releases each Lender
Party from, and agrees to hold each Lender Party harmless and indemnified against, any liability
or claim in connection with or arising out of the subject matter of this section, WHICH
INDEMNITY SHALL APPLY WHETHER OR NOT ANY SUCH LIABILITY OR CLAIM IS IN ANY
WAY OR TO ANY EXTENT CAUSED, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, BY ANY NEGLIGENT ACT OR
OMISSION OF ANY KIND BY ANY LENDER PARTY, provided only that no Lender Party shall
be entitled to indemnification for that portion, if any, of any liability or claim which is proximately
caused by its own individual gross negligence or willful misconduct, as determined in a final
judgment.
(b)
    Extension of Maturity. If the maturity of any Letter of Credit is extended by its terms or by Law or
governmental action, if any extension of the maturity or time for presentation of drafts or any other
modification of the terms of any Letter of Credit is made at the request of any Restricted Person,
or if the amount of any Letter of Credit is increased at the request of any Restricted Person, this
Agreement shall be binding upon all Restricted Persons with respect to such Letter of Credit as
so extended, increased or otherwise modified, with respect to drafts and property covered
thereby, and with respect to any action taken by LC Issuer, LC Issuer’s correspondents, or any
Lender Party in accordance with such extension, increase or other modification.
(c)
    Transferees of Letters of Credit. If any Letter of Credit provides that it is transferable, LC Issuer
shall have no duty to determine the proper identity of anyone appearing as transferee of such
Letter of Credit, nor shall LC Issuer be charged with responsibility of any nature or character
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
38
for the validity or correctness of any transfer or successive transfers, and payment by LC Issuer to
any purported transferee or transferees as determined by LC Issuer is hereby authorized and
approved, and Borrower releases each Lender Party from, and agrees to hold each Lender Party
harmless and indemnified against, any liability or claim in connection with or arising out of the
foregoing, WHICH INDEMNITY SHALL APPLY WHETHER OR NOT ANY SUCH LIABILITY OR
CLAIM IS IN ANY WAY OR TO ANY EXTENT CAUSED, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, BY ANY
NEGLIGENT ACT OR OMISSION OF ANY KIND BY ANY LENDER PARTY, provided only that
no Lender Party shall be entitled to indemnification for that portion, if any, of any liability or claim
which is proximately caused by its own individual gross negligence or willful misconduct, as
determined in a final judgment.
Section 2.16 
    Cash Collateral.
(a)
    Certain Credit Support Events. Upon the request of Administrative Agent or LC Issuer (i) if LC
Issuer has honored any full or partial drawing request under any Letter of Credit and such
drawing has resulted in a Matured LC Obligation, or (ii) if, as of 30 days prior to the Revolver
Maturity Date, any LC Obligation for any reason remains outstanding, Borrower shall, in each
case, immediately Cash Collateralize the then outstanding amount of all LC Obligations. If, after
the making of all mandatory prepayments required under Section 2.7, the outstanding LC
Obligations will exceed the Borrowing Base, then in addition to prepayment of the entire principal
balance of the Loans required under Section 2.7, Borrower shall immediately Cash Collateralize
the then outstanding LC Obligations in an amount equal to such excess. At any time that there
shall exist a Defaulting Lender, immediately upon the request of Administrative Agent or LC
Issuer, Borrower shall deliver Cash Collateral to Administrative Agent in an amount sufficient to
cover all Fronting Exposure (after giving effect to Section 2.18(a)(iv) and any Cash Collateral
provided by the Defaulting Lender).
(b)
    Grant of Security Interest. All Cash Collateral (other than credit support not constituting funds
subject to deposit) shall be maintained in blocked, non-interest bearing deposit accounts at
Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent or any Lender. Borrower, and to the extent provided by
any Lender, such Lender, hereby grants to (and subjects to the control of) Administrative Agent,
Collateral Agent or such Lender, for the benefit of Administrative Agent, LC Issuer and the
Lenders, and agrees to maintain, a first priority security interest in all such cash, deposit accounts
and all balances therein, and all other property so provided as Collateral pursuant hereto, and in
all proceeds of the foregoing, all as security for the obligations to which such Cash Collateral
may be applied pursuant to Section 2.16(c). If at any time Administrative Agent determines that
Cash Collateral is subject to any right or claim of any Person other than Administrative Agent as
herein provided, or that the total amount of such Cash Collateral is less than the applicable
Fronting Exposure and other obligations secured thereby, Borrower or the relevant Defaulting
Lender will, promptly upon demand by Administrative Agent, pay or provide to Administrative
Agent additional Cash Collateral in an amount sufficient to eliminate such deficiency.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
39
(c)
    Application. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Agreement, Cash
Collateral provided under any of this Section 2.16 or Section 2.7, 2.11, 2.18, or 8.3 in respect of
Letters of Credit shall be held and applied to the satisfaction of the specific LC Obligations,
obligations to fund participations therein (including, as to Cash Collateral provided by a
Defaulting Lender, any interest accrued on such obligation) and other obligations for which the
Cash Collateral was so provided, prior to any other application of such property as may be
provided for herein.
(d)
    Release. Cash Collateral (or the appropriate portion thereof) provided to reduce Fronting
Exposure or other obligations shall be released promptly following (i) the elimination of the
applicable Fronting Exposure or other obligations giving rise thereto (including by the termination
of Defaulting Lender status of the applicable Lender (or, as appropriate, its assignee following
compliance with Section 10.5(h) or (ii) Administrative Agent’s good faith determination that there
exists excess Cash Collateral; provided, however, (x) that Cash Collateral furnished by or on
behalf of a Restricted Person shall not be released during the continuance of a Default (and
following application as provided in this Section 2.16 may be otherwise applied in accordance
with Section 8.3), and (y) the Person providing Cash Collateral and LC Issuer may agree that
Cash Collateral shall not be released but instead held to support future anticipated Fronting
Exposure or other obligations.
Section 2.17 
    Obligations of Lenders Several. The obligations of Lenders hereunder to make Loans, to fund
participations in Letters of Credit and to make payments pursuant to Section 2.2 are several and
not joint. The failure of any Lender to make any Loan, to fund any such participation or to make
any payment under Section 10.4(c) on any date required hereunder shall not relieve any other
Lender of its corresponding obligation to do so on such date, and no Lender shall be responsible
for the failure of any other Lender to so make its Loan, to purchase its participation or to make its
payment under Section 10.4(c).
Section 2.18 
    Defaulting Lenders.
(a)
    Adjustments. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Agreement, if any
Lender becomes a Defaulting Lender, then, until such time as that Lender is no longer a
Defaulting Lender, to the extent permitted by applicable Law:
(i)    Waivers and Amendments. That Defaulting Lender’s right to approve or disapprove any
amendment, waiver or consent with respect to this Agreement shall be restricted as set forth in
Section 10.1.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
40
(ii)    Reallocation of Payments. Any payment of principal, interest, fees or other amounts
received by Administrative Agent for the account of that Defaulting Lender (whether voluntary or
mandatory, at maturity, pursuant to Article III or VIII or otherwise, and including any amounts
made available to Administrative Agent by that Defaulting Lender pursuant to Section 10.14),
shall be applied at such time or times as may be determined by Administrative Agent as follows:
first, to the payment of any amounts owing by that Defaulting Lender to Administrative Agent
hereunder; second, to the payment on a pro rata basis of any amounts owing by that Defaulting
Lender to LC Issuer hereunder; third, if so determined by Administrative Agent or requested by
LC Issuer to be held as Cash Collateral for future funding obligations of that Defaulting Lender of
any participation in any Letter of Credit; fourth, as Borrower may request (so long as no Default
exists), to the funding of any Loan in respect of which that Defaulting Lender has failed to fund its
portion thereof as required by this Agreement, as determined by Administrative Agent; fifth, if so
determined by Administrative Agent and Borrower, to be held in a non-interest bearing deposit
account and released in order to satisfy obligations of that Defaulting Lender to fund Loans under
this Agreement; sixth, to the payment of any amounts owing to Lenders or LC Issuer as a result of
any judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction obtained by any Lender or LC Issuer against
that Defaulting Lender as a result of that Defaulting Lender’s breach of its obligations under this
Agreement; seventh, so long as no Default or Event of Default exists, to the payment of any
amounts owing to Borrower as a result of any judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction
obtained by Borrower against that Defaulting Lender as a result of that Defaulting Lender’s
breach of its obligations under this Agreement; and eighth, to that Defaulting Lender or as
otherwise directed by a court of competent jurisdiction; provided that if (x) such payment is a
payment of the principal amount of any Loans or Matured LC Obligations in respect of which that
Defaulting Lender has not fully funded its appropriate share and (y) such Loans or Matured LC
Obligations were made at a time when the conditions set forth in Section 4.2 were satisfied or
waived, such payment shall be applied solely to pay the Loans of, and Matured LC Obligations
owed to, all non-Defaulting Lenders on a pro rata basis prior to being applied to the payment of
any Loans of, or Matured LC Obligations owed to, that Defaulting Lender. Any payments,
prepayments or other amounts paid or payable to a Defaulting Lender that are applied (or held) to
pay amounts owed by a Defaulting Lender or to post Cash Collateral pursuant to this Section
2.18(a)(ii) shall be deemed paid to and redirected by that Defaulting Lender, and each Lender
irrevocably consents hereto.
(iii)    Certain Fees. That Defaulting Lender (x) shall not be entitled to receive any commitment fee
pursuant to Section 2.5(c) for any period during which that Lender is a Defaulting Lender (and
Borrower shall not be required to pay any such fee that otherwise would have been required to
have been paid to that Defaulting Lender) and (y) shall be limited in its right to receive Letter of
Credit Fees as provided in Section 2.14.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
41
(iv)    Reallocation of Percentage Share to Reduce Fronting Exposure. During any period in
which there is a Defaulting Lender, for purposes of computing the amount of the obligation of
each non-Defaulting Lender to acquire, refinance or fund participations in Letters of Credit
pursuant to Section 2.13, the “Percentage Share” of each non-Defaulting Lender shall be
computed without giving effect to the maximum aggregate amount of the obligation to make
Loans and participate in Letters of Credit of that Defaulting Lender; provided, that (i) each such
reallocation shall be given effect only if, at the date the applicable Lender becomes a Defaulting
Lender, no Default exists; and (ii) the aggregate obligation of each non-Defaulting Lender to
acquire, refinance or fund participations in Letters of Credit shall not exceed the positive
difference, if any, of (1) the maximum aggregate amount of the Commitment of that non-
Defaulting Lender minus (2) the aggregate outstanding amount of the Loans of that Lender.
(b)
    Defaulting Lender Cure. If Borrower, Administrative Agent and LC Issuer agree in writing in
their discretion that a Defaulting Lender should no longer be deemed to be a Defaulting Lender,
Administrative Agent will so notify the parties hereto, whereupon as of the effective date specified
in such notice and subject to any conditions set forth therein (which conditions may include
arrangements with respect to any Cash Collateral), that Lender will, to the extent applicable,
purchase that portion of outstanding Loans of the other Lenders or take such other actions as
Administrative Agent may determine to be necessary to cause the Loans and funded and
unfunded participations in Letters of Credit to be held on a pro rata basis by the Lenders in
accordance with their Percentage Share (without giving effect to Section 2.18(a)(iv)), whereupon
that Lender will cease to be a Defaulting Lender; provided that no adjustments will be made
retroactively with respect to fees accrued or payments made by or on behalf of Borrower while
that Lender was a Defaulting Lender; and provided, further, that except to the extent otherwise
expressly agreed by the affected parties, no change hereunder from Defaulting Lender to Lender
will constitute a waiver or release of any claim of any party hereunder arising from that Lender’s
having been a Defaulting Lender.
ARTICLE III - 
    Payments to Lenders
Section 3.1 
    General Procedures. Borrower will make each payment which it owes under the Loan
Documents to Administrative Agent for the account of Lender to whom such payment is owed.
Each such payment must be received by Administrative Agent not later than noon, New York
time, on the date such payment becomes due and payable, in lawful money of the United States,
without set‑off, deduction or counterclaim, and in immediately available funds. Any payment
received by Administrative Agent after such time will be deemed to have been made on the next
following Business Day. Should any such payment become due and payable on a day other than
a Business Day, the maturity of such payment shall be extended to the next succeeding
Business Day, and, in the case of a payment of principal or past due interest, interest shall
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
42
accrue and be payable thereon for the period of such extension as provided in the Loan
Document under which such payment is due. Each payment under a Loan Document shall be
due and payable at the place provided therein and, if no specific place of payment is provided,
shall be due and payable as set forth for Administrative Agent on the Lenders Schedule. When
Administrative Agent collects or receives money on account of the Obligations, Administrative
Agent shall promptly distribute all money so collected or received, and each Lender (or Lender
Counterparty, in the case of Lender Hedging Obligations) shall apply all such money so
distributed as follows (except as otherwise provided in Section 8.3):
(a)
    first, for the payment of all Obligations which are then due (and if such money is insufficient to
pay all such Obligations, first to any reimbursements due Administrative Agent or Collateral
Agent under Section 6.9 or 10.4 and then to the partial payment of all other Obligations then due
in proportion to the amounts thereof, or as Lender Parties shall otherwise agree);
(b)
    then for the prepayment of amounts owing under the Loan Documents (other than principal of
the Loans) if so specified by Borrower;
(c)
    then for the prepayment of principal of the Loans, together with accrued and unpaid interest on
the principal so prepaid; and
(d)
    last, for the payment or prepayment of any other Obligations.
All payments applied to principal or interest on any Loan shall be applied first to any interest then
due and payable, then to principal then due and payable, and last to any prepayment of principal
and interest in compliance with Section 2.7. Except as otherwise set forth above, all distributions
of amounts described in any of the subsections above shall be made by Administrative Agent pro
rata to each Lender Party then owed Obligations described in such subsection in proportion to all
amounts owed to all Lender Parties which are described in such subsection; provided that if any
Lender Party then owes payments to LC Issuer for the purchase of a participation under Section
2.13(c) or to Administrative Agent under Section 10.4, any amounts otherwise distributable under
this section to such Lender shall be deemed to belong to LC Issuer or Administrative Agent,
respectively, to the extent of such unpaid payments, and Administrative Agent shall apply such
amounts to make such unpaid payments rather than distribute such amounts to such Lender
Party.
Section 3.2 
    Increased Costs.
(a)
    Increased Costs Generally. If any Change in Law shall:
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
43
(i)
    impose, modify or deem applicable any reserve, special deposit, compulsory loan, insurance
charge or similar requirement against assets of, deposits with or for the account of, or credit
extended or participated in by, any Lender (except any Reserve Requirement reflected in the
Adjusted Eurodollar Rate) or LC Issuer;
(ii)
    subject any Lender or LC Issuer to any tax of any kind whatsoever with respect to this
Agreement, any Letter of Credit, any participation in a Letter of Credit or any Eurodollar Loan
made by it, or change the basis of taxation of payments to such Lender or LC Issuer in respect
thereof (except for Indemnified Taxes or Other Taxes covered by Section 3.5 and the imposition
of, or any change in the rate of, any Excluded Tax payable by such Lender or LC Issuer); or
(iii)
    impose on any Lender or LC Issuer or the London interbank market any other condition, cost or
expense affecting this Agreement or Eurodollar Loans made by such Lender or any Letter of
Credit or participation therein;
and the result of any of the foregoing shall be to increase the cost to such Lender of making or
maintaining any Eurodollar Loan (or of maintaining its obligation to make any such Loan), or to
increase the cost to such Lender or LC Issuer of participating in, issuing or maintaining any Letter
of Credit (or of maintaining its obligation to participate in or to issue any Letter of Credit), or to
reduce the amount of any sum received or receivable by such Lender or LC Issuer hereunder
(whether of principal, interest or any other amount) then, upon request of such Lender or LC
Issuer, Borrower will pay to such Lender or LC Issuer, as the case may be, such additional
amount or amounts as will compensate such Lender or LC Issuer, as the case may be, for such
additional costs incurred or reduction suffered.
(b)
    Capital Requirements. If any Lender or LC Issuer determines that any Change in Law affecting
such Lender or LC Issuer or any lending office of such Lender or such Lender’s or LC Issuer’s
holding company, if any, regarding capital requirements has or would have the effect of reducing
the rate of return on such Lender’s or LC Issuer’s capital or on the capital of such Lender’s or LC
Issuer’s holding company, if any, as a consequence of this Agreement, the Commitments of such
Lender or the Loans made by, or participations in Letters of Credit held by, such Lender, or the
Letters of Credit issued by LC Issuer, to a level below that which such Lender or LC Issuer or
such Lender’s or LC Issuer’s holding company could have achieved but for such Change in Law
(taking into consideration such Lender’s or LC Issuer’s policies and the policies of such Lender’s
or LC Issuer’s holding company with respect to capital adequacy), then from time to time
Borrower will pay to such Lender or LC Issuer, as the case may be, such additional amount or
amounts as will compensate such Lender or LC Issuer or such Lender’s or LC Issuer’s holding
company for any such reduction suffered.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
44
(c)
    Certificates for Reimbursement. A certificate of a Lender or LC Issuer setting forth the amount
or amounts necessary to compensate such Lender or LC Issuer or its holding company, as the
case may be, as specified in subsection (a) or (b) of this Section and delivered to Borrower shall
be conclusive absent manifest error. Borrower shall pay such Lender or LC Issuer, as the case
may be, the amount shown as due on any such certificate within ten (10) days after receipt
thereof.
(d)
    Delay in Requests. Failure or delay on the part of any Lender or LC Issuer to demand
compensation pursuant to this Section shall not constitute a waiver of such Lender’s or LC
Issuer’s right to demand such compensation, provided that Borrower shall not be required to
compensate a Lender or LC Issuer pursuant to this Section for any increased costs incurred or
reductions suffered more than nine months prior to the date that such Lender or LC Issuer, as the
case may be, notifies Borrower of the Change in Law giving rise to such increased costs or
reductions and of such Lender’s or LC Issuer’s intention to claim compensation therefor (except
that, if the Change in Law giving rise to such increased costs or reductions is retroactive, then the
nine-month period referred to above shall be extended to include the period of retroactive effect
thereof).Capital Reimbursement
Section 3.3 
    Illegality. If any Change in Law after the Closing Date shall make it unlawful for any Lender
Party to fund or maintain Eurodollar Loans, then, upon notice by such Lender Party to Borrower
and Administrative Agent, (a) Borrower’s right to elect Eurodollar Loans from such Lender Party
shall be suspended to the extent and for the duration of such illegality, (b) all Eurodollar Loans of
such Lender Party which are then the subject of any Borrowing Notice and which cannot be
lawfully funded shall be funded as Base Rate Loans of such Lender Party, and (c) all Eurodollar
Loans of such Lender Party shall be converted automatically to Base Rate Loans on the
respective last days of the then current Interest Periods with respect to such Loans or within such
earlier period as required by Law. If any such Conversion of a Eurodollar Loan occurs on a day
which is not the last day of the then current Interest Period with respect thereto, Borrower shall
pay to such Lender Party such amounts, if any, as may be required pursuant to Section 3.4.
Section 3.4 
    Funding Losses. In addition to its other obligations hereunder, Borrower will indemnify each
Lender Party against, and reimburse each Lender Party on demand for, any loss or expense
incurred or sustained by such Lender Party (including any loss or expense incurred by reason of
the liquidation or reemployment of deposits or other funds acquired by a Lender Party to fund or
maintain Eurodollar Loans), as a result of (a) any payment or prepayment (whether authorized or
required hereunder or otherwise) of all or a portion of a Eurodollar Loan on a day other than the
day on which the applicable Interest Period ends, (b) any payment or prepayment, whether
required hereunder or otherwise, of a Loan made after the delivery, but before the effective date,
of a Continuation/Conversion Notice requesting the Continuation of outstanding Eurodollar
Loans as, or the Conversion of outstanding Base Rate Loans to, Eurodollar Loans, if such
payment or prepayment prevents such Continuation/ Conversion Notice from becoming fully
effective, (c) the failure of any Loan to be made or of any Continuation/Conversion Notice
requesting the Continuation of outstanding Eurodollar Loans as, or the Conversion of
outstanding Base Rate Loans to, Eurodollar Loans to become effective due to any condition
precedent not being satisfied or due to any other action or inaction of any Restricted Person, (d)
any Conversion (whether authorized or required hereunder or otherwise) of all or any portion of
any Eurodollar Loan into a Base Rate Loan or into a different Eurodollar Loan on a day other
than the
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
45
day on which the applicable Interest Period ends, or (e) any assignment of a Eurodollar Loan on
a day other than the last day of the Interest Period therefor as a result of a request by Borrower
pursuant to Section 3.7(b). Such indemnification shall be on an after-tax basis
Section 3.5 
    Taxes.
(a)
    Payments Free of Taxes. Any and all payments by or on account of any obligation of Borrower
hereunder or under any other Loan Document shall be made free and clear of and without
reduction or withholding for any Indemnified Taxes or Other Taxes, provided that if Borrower
shall be required by applicable Law to deduct any Indemnified Taxes (including any Other
Taxes) from such payments, then (i) the sum payable shall be increased as necessary so that
after making all required deductions (including deductions applicable to additional sums payable
under this Section) Administrative Agent, Lender or LC Issuer, as the case may be, receives an
amount equal to the sum it would have received had no such deductions been made, (ii)
Borrower shall make such deductions and (iii) Borrower shall timely pay the full amount deducted
to the relevant Governmental Authority in accordance with applicable Law.
(b)
    Payment of Other Taxes by Borrower. Without limiting the provisions of subsection (a) above,
Borrower shall timely pay any Other Taxes to the relevant Governmental Authority in accordance
with applicable Law.
(c)
    Indemnification by Borrower. Borrower shall indemnify the Administrative Agent, each Lender
and LC Issuer, within 10 days after demand therefor, for the full amount of any Indemnified Taxes
or Other Taxes (including Indemnified Taxes or Other Taxes imposed or asserted on or
attributable to amounts payable under this Section) paid by Administrative Agent, such Lender or
LC Issuer, as the case may be, and any penalties, interest and reasonable expenses arising
therefrom or with respect thereto, whether or not such Indemnified Taxes or Other Taxes were
correctly or legally imposed or asserted by the relevant Governmental Authority. A certificate as
to the amount of such payment or liability delivered to Borrower by a Lender or LC Issuer (with a
copy to Administrative Agent), or by Administrative Agent on its own behalf or on behalf of a
Lender or LC Issuer, shall be conclusive absent manifest error.
(d)
    Evidence of Payments. As soon as practicable after any payment of Indemnified Taxes or
Other Taxes by Borrower to a Governmental Authority, Borrower shall deliver to Administrative
Agent the original or a certified copy of a receipt issued by such Governmental Authority
evidencing such payment, a copy of the return reporting such payment or other evidence of such
payment reasonably satisfactory to Administrative Agent.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
46
(e)
    Status of Lenders. Any Foreign Lender that is entitled to an exemption from or reduction of
withholding tax under the law of the jurisdiction in which Borrower is resident for tax purposes, or
any treaty to which such jurisdiction is a party, with respect to payments hereunder or under any
other Loan Document shall deliver to Borrower (with a copy to Administrative Agent), at the time
or times prescribed by applicable Law or reasonably requested by Borrower or Administrative
Agent, such properly completed and executed documentation prescribed by applicable Law as
will permit such payments to be made without withholding or at a reduced rate of withholding. In
addition, any Lender, if requested by Borrower or Administrative Agent, shall deliver such other
documentation prescribed by applicable Law or reasonably requested by Borrower or
Administrative Agent as will enable Borrower or Administrative Agent to determine whether or not
such Lender is subject to backup withholding or information reporting requirements.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, in the event that Borrower is resident for tax
purposes in the United States, any Foreign Lender shall deliver to Borrower and Administrative
Agent (in such number of copies as shall be requested by the recipient) on or prior to the date on
which such Foreign Lender becomes a Lender under this Agreement (and from time to time
thereafter upon the request of Borrower or Administrative Agent, but only if such Foreign Lender
is legally entitled to do so), whichever of the following is applicable:
(i)
    duly completed copies of Internal Revenue Service Form W-8BEN claiming eligibility for
benefits of an income tax treaty to which the United States is a party,
(ii)
    duly completed copies of Internal Revenue Service Form W-8ECI,
(iii)
    in the case of a Foreign Lender claiming the benefits of the exemption for portfolio interest
under section 881(c) of the Code, (x) a certificate to the effect that such Foreign Lender is not (A)
a “bank” within the meaning of section 881(c)(3)(A) of the Code, (B) a “10 percent shareholder” of
Borrower within the meaning of section 881(c)(3)(B) of the Code, or (C) a “controlled foreign
corporation” described in section 881(c)(3)(C) of the Code and (y) duly completed copies of
Internal Revenue Service Form W-8BEN, or
(iv)
    any other form prescribed by applicable Law as a basis for claiming exemption from or a
reduction in United States Federal withholding tax duly completed together with such
supplementary documentation as may be prescribed by applicable Law to permit Borrower to
determine the withholding or deduction required to be made.
(f)
    Treatment of Certain Refunds. If Administrative Agent, a Lender or LC Issuer determines, in its
sole discretion, that it has received a refund of any Taxes or Other Taxes as to which it has been
indemnified by Borrower or with respect to which Borrower has paid additional amounts pursuant
to this Section 3.5, it shall pay to Borrower an amount equal to such refund (but only to the extent
of indemnity payments made, or additional amounts paid, by Borrower under
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
47
this Section with respect to the Taxes or Other Taxes giving rise to such refund), net of all out-of-
pocket expenses of Administrative Agent, such Lender or LC Issuer, as the case may be, and
without interest (other than any interest paid by the relevant Governmental Authority with respect
to such refund); provided that Borrower, upon the request of Administrative Agent, such Lender or
LC Issuer, agrees to repay the amount paid over to Borrower (plus any penalties, interest or other
charges imposed by the relevant Governmental Authority) to Administrative Agent, such Lender
or LC Issuer in the event Administrative Agent, such Lender or LC Issuer is required to repay
such refund to such Governmental Authority. This subsection shall not be construed to require
Administrative Agent, any Lender or LC Issuer to make available its tax returns (or any other
information relating to its taxes that it deems confidential) to Borrower or any other Person.
(g)
    FATCA.
(i)    If a payment made to a Lender or the LC Issuer under this Agreement would be subject to
United States federal withholding tax imposed by FATCA if such Lender or the LC Issuer fails to
comply with the applicable reporting requirements of FATCA (including those contained in
Section 1471(b) or 1472(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, as applicable), such Lender or the LC
Issuer shall deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative Agent, at the time or times prescribed
by Law and at such time or times reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative
Agent, such documentation prescribed by applicable Law (including as prescribed by Section
1471(b)(3)(C)(i) of the Internal Revenue Code) and such additional documentation reasonably
requested by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent as may be necessary for the Borrower or
the Administrative Agent to comply with their obligations under FATCA, to determine that such
Lender or the LC Issuer has complied with such Lender’s, or the LC Issuer’s obligations under
FATCA or to determine the amount to deduct and withhold from such payment.
(ii)    Each Lender and the LC Issuer agree that if any documentation, form or certification
previously delivered by it pursuant to the preceding subsection expires or becomes obsolete or
inaccurate in any respect, it shall update such documentation, form or certification or promptly
notify the Administrative Agent and the Borrower in writing of its legal inability to do so.
Section 3.6 
    Alternative Rate of Interest. If prior to the commencement of any Interest Period for a Borrowing
of Eurodollar Loans:
(a)
    Administrative Agent determines that adequate and reasonable means do not exist for
ascertaining the Eurodollar Rate for such Interest Period (any such determination shall be
conclusive absent manifest error); or
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
48
(a)
    Administrative Agent is advised by Required Lenders that the Eurodollar Rate for such Interest
Period will not adequately and fairly reflect the cost to such Lenders of making or maintaining
their Loans included in such Borrowing for such Interest Period;
then Administrative Agent shall give notice thereof to Borrower and Lenders by telephone or
facsimile as promptly as practicable thereafter and, until Administrative Agent notifies Borrower
and Lenders that the circumstances giving rise to such notice no longer exist, (i) any
Continuation/Conversion Notice that requests the Conversion of any Borrowing to, or
Continuation of any Borrowing as, a Borrowing of Eurodollar Loans shall be ineffective and shall
be deemed a request to continue such Borrowing as a Borrowing of Base Rate Loans and (ii) if
any Borrowing Notice requests a Borrowing of Eurodollar Loans, such Borrowing shall be made
as a Borrowing of Base Rate Loans. Upon receipt of such notice, Borrower may revoke any
pending request for a Borrowing of, Conversion to or Continuation of Eurodollar Loans.
Section 3.7 
    Mitigation Obligations; Replacement of Lenders.
(a)
    Designation of a Different Lending Office. If any Lender is a Defaulting Lender, or any Lender
requests compensation under Section 3.2, or requires Borrower to pay any additional amount to
any Lender or any Governmental Authority for the account of any Lender pursuant to Section 3.5,
then such Lender shall use reasonable efforts to designate a different lending office for funding or
booking its Loans hereunder or to assign its rights and obligations hereunder to another of its
offices, branches or affiliates, if, in the judgment of such Lender, such designation or assignment
(i) would eliminate or reduce amounts payable pursuant to Section 3.2 or 3.5, as the case may
be, in the future and (ii) would not subject such Lender to any unreimbursed cost or expense and
would not otherwise be disadvantageous to such Lender. Borrower hereby agrees to pay all
reasonable costs and expenses incurred by any Lender in connection with any such designation
or assignment.
(b)
    Replacement of Lenders. If any Lender is a Defaulting Lender, or if any Lender requests
compensation under Section 3.2, or if Borrower is required to pay any additional amount to any
Lender or any Governmental Authority for the account of any Lender pursuant to Section 3.5, or if
any Lender defaults in its obligation to fund Loans hereunder, or if any Lender fails to consent to
any amendment or waiver request pursuant to Section 10.1, then Borrower may, at its sole
expense and effort, upon notice to such Lender and the Administrative Agent, require such
Lender to assign and delegate, without recourse (in accordance with and subject to the
restrictions contained in, and consents required by, Section 10.5), all of its interests, rights and
obligations under this Agreement and the related Loan Documents to an assignee that shall
assume such obligations (which assignee may be another Lender, if a Lender accepts such
assignment); provided that:
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
49
(i)
    Borrower shall have paid to Administrative Agent the assignment fee specified in Section 10.5;
(ii)
    such Lender shall have received payment of an amount equal to the outstanding principal of its
Loans and participations in Matured LC Obligations, accrued interest thereon, accrued fees and
all other amounts payable to it hereunder and under the other Loan Documents (including any
amounts under Section 3.4 unless such Lender is a Defaulting Lender) from the assignee (to the
extent of such outstanding principal and accrued interest and fees) or Borrower (in the case of all
other amounts);
(iii)
    in the case of any such assignment resulting from a claim for compensation under Section 3.2
or payments required to be made pursuant to Section 3.5, such assignment will result in a
reduction in such compensation or payments thereafter; and
(iv)
    such assignment does not conflict with applicable Law.
A Lender shall not be required to make any such assignment or delegation if, prior thereto, as a
result of a waiver by such Lender or otherwise, the circumstances entitling Borrower to require
such assignment and delegation cease to apply. Solely for purposes of effecting the assignment
required for a Defaulting Lender under this Section 3.7 and to the extent permitted under
applicable Law, each Lender hereby designates and appoints Administrative Agent as its true
and lawful agent and attorney-in-fact, with full power and authority, for and on behalf of and in the
name of such Lender to execute, acknowledge and deliver the Assignment and Acceptance
required hereunder if such Lender is a Defaulting Lender, and such Lender shall be bound
thereby as fully and effectively as if such Lender had personally executed, acknowledged and
delivered the same.
Section 3.8 
    Payments by Borrower; Presumptions by Agent. Unless Administrative Agent shall have
received notice from Borrower prior to the date on which any payment is due to Administrative
Agent for the account of Lenders or LC Issuer hereunder that Borrower will not make such
payment, Administrative Agent may assume that Borrower has made such payment on such date
in accordance herewith and may, in reliance upon such assumption, distribute to Lenders or LC
Issuer, as the case may be, the amount due. In such event, if Borrower has not in fact made such
payment, then each Lender or LC Issuer, as the case may be, severally agrees to repay to
Administrative Agent forthwith on demand the amount so distributed to such Lender or LC Issuer,
with interest thereon, for each day from and including the date such amount is distributed to it to
but excluding the date of payment to Administrative Agent, at the greater of the Federal Funds
Rate and a rate determined by Administrative Agent in accordance with banking industry rules on
interbank compensation
ARTICLE IV - 
    Conditions Precedent
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
50
Section 4.1 
    Conditions Precedent to Closing. The effectiveness of this Agreement is subject to the
satisfaction of the following conditions precedent:
(e)
    Administrative Agent shall have received all of the following, duly executed and delivered and
in form, substance and date satisfactory to Administrative Agent:
(i)
    This Agreement and the other documents Lenders are to execute in connection herewith.
(ii)
    Each Note.
(iii)
    Each Security Document listed in the Security Schedule.
(iv)
    Certain certificates including:
(A)
    An “Omnibus Certificate” of the Secretary of the General Partner, which shall contain an
incumbency certificate with the names and signatures of the officers of the General Partner
authorized to execute Loan Documents on behalf of the General Partner and Restricted Persons
and which shall certify to the truth, correctness and completeness of the following exhibits
attached thereto: (1) a copy of resolutions duly adopted by Board of Managers of the General
Partner, as the general partner of the MLP, and as the sole member of each Restricted Person, in
full force and effect at the time this Agreement is entered into, authorizing the execution of this
Agreement and the other Loan Documents delivered or to be delivered in connection herewith
and the consummation of the transactions contemplated herein and therein, (2) the
Organizational Documents of General Partner and of each Restricted Person and all
amendments thereto, certified by the appropriate official of each such Person’s state of
organization, and (3) copies of the internal governance documents of General Partner and each
Restricted Person.
(B)
    A “Compliance Certificate” of the Chief Financial Officer of the General Partner, in which such
officer certifies (i) the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement have been
consummated in accordance in all material respects with the Merger Agreement and applicable
Law, (ii) to the satisfaction of the conditions set out in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of Section
4.2, (iii) as of the Closing Date, no Default or Event of Default will exist after giving effect to the
initial Borrowing
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
51
under this Agreement, (iv) as of the Closing Date, except for the Obligations, no Restricted
Person will have any outstanding Indebtedness for borrowed money, (iv) that after giving effect to
all Loans and Letters of Credit issued pursuant hereto on the Closing Date, Borrower will have at
least $29,000,000 of Unused Borrowing Base, (iv) that all material governmental and third party
approvals necessary or, in the discretion of the Administrative Agent, advisable in connection
with the financing contemplated hereby and the continuing operations of the Restricted Parties
shall have been obtained and are in full force and effect, and (v) compliance with the financial
covenants set forth in Sections 7.12 and 7.13 on a pro forma rolling four quarter basis for the
period ending September 30, 2011 (or if financial statements are unavailable for that period, for
the period ending June 30, 2011), using a calculation methodology approved by the
Administrative Agent.
(f)
    Administrative Agent shall have received a certificate (or certificates) of the due formation, valid
existence and good standing of General Partner and each Restricted Person in their respective
states of organization, issued by the appropriate authorities of such jurisdiction, and certificates of
Borrower’s and its Subsidiaries’ good standing and due qualification to do business, issued by
appropriate officials in any states in which Borrower or it Subsidiaries owns property subject to
the Security Documents.
(g)
    Administrative Agent shall have received the Initial Engineering Report and the Initial Pro
Forma Financial Statements and be satisfied with the MLP's capital structure.
(h)
    Administrative Agent shall have received originally executed copies of the favorable written
opinion of GableGotwals, counsel for Restricted Persons, opining as to such matters as
Administrative Agent may reasonably request, dated as of the Closing Date and otherwise in
form and substance reasonably satisfactory to Administrative Agent (and each Restricted Person
hereby instructs such counsel to deliver such opinions to Administrative Agent and Lenders).
(i)
    Administrative Agent shall have received title due diligence in form, substance and authorship
satisfactory to Administrative Agent with respect to the Restricted Persons’ oil and gas reserves
representing at least eighty percent (80%) of the aggregate Present Value of the Restricted
Persons’ Proved Reserves.
(j)
    Certificates evidencing Restricted Persons’ insurance in effect on the Closing Date and
showing Administrative Agent as the additional insured and loss payee.
(k)
    Borrower shall have entered into novation agreements, on terms and conditions
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
52
satisfactory to Administrative Agent, with respect to the Existing Hedges for which a Lender or
Lender Counterparty is not a counterparty.
(l)
    Borrower shall have paid all commitment, facility, agency and other fees required to be paid
and then due to Arranger or any Lender pursuant to any Loan Documents or any commitment
agreement heretofore entered into, including, without limitation, a facility fee, in the amount equal
to 0.5% of the initial Borrowing Base and payment of all expenses for which invoices have been
presented prior to the Closing Date.
(m)
    Administrative Agent shall have received Uniform Commercial Code and other lien searches
reflecting the absence of other liens and security interests other than those being released or
Permitted Liens.
(n)
    No event or circumstance shall have occurred or be continuing since December 31, 2010 that
has had, or could be reasonably expected to cause, either individually or in the aggregate, a
Material Adverse Change.
(o)
    All partnership, corporate and other proceedings taken or to be taken in connection with the
Merger Agreement and all documents incidental thereto shall be reasonably satisfactory in form
and substance to Administrative Agent and Administrative Agent shall have received all such
counterpart originals or certified copies of such documents as Administrative Agent may
reasonably request. and
(p)
    The Closing Date shall occur on or before December 31, 2011.
Section 4.2 
    Additional Conditions Precedent. No Lender has any obligation to make any Loan (including
its first) and LC Issuer has no obligation to issue any Letter of Credit (including its first), unless
the following conditions precedent have been satisfied:
(a)All representations and warranties made by any Restricted Person in any Loan Document
(including, without limitation, the representations in Sections 5.6 regarding no Material Adverse
Change and in Section 5.9 regarding Litigation) shall be true on and as of the date of such Loan
or the date of issuance of such Letter of Credit (except to the extent that the facts upon which
such representations are based have been changed by the extension of credit hereunder) as if
such representations and warranties had been made as of the date of such Loan or the date of
issuance of such Letter of Credit (except such representations and warranties that expressly refer
to an earlier date, which shall have been true as of such earlier date).
(b)No Default or Borrowing Base Deficiency shall exist at the date of such Loan or the date of
issuance of such Letter of Credit.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
53
(c)No Material Adverse Change shall have occurred since the date of this Agreement.
(d)Each Restricted Person shall have performed and complied with all agreements and
conditions required in the Loan Documents to be performed or complied with by it on or prior to
the date of such Loan or the date of issuance of such Letter of Credit.
(e)The making of such Loan or the issuance of such Letter of Credit shall not be prohibited by
any Law and shall not subject any Lender or LC Issuer to any penalty or other onerous condition
under or pursuant to any such Law.
(f)When applicable, the Administrative Agent shall have received a certification signed by an
authorized officer of Borrower setting forth the Consolidated Cash Balance (without regarding to
the requested Loan or Letter of Credit) and the pro forma Consolidated Cash Balance (giving
effect to the requested Loan or Letter of Credit).
(g)At the time of and immediately after giving effect to the requested Loan or Letter of Credit (i) the
Credit Parties shall not have any Excess Cash and (ii) as of the end of the Business Day on
which such Loan will be funded or such Letter of Credit will be issued, in each case, the Credit
Parties shall not have any Excess Cash. Each Borrowing Notice and LC Application shall
constitute a representation of compliance with this Section 4.2(g).
ARTICLE V - 
    Representations and Warranties
To confirm each Lender’s understanding concerning Restricted Persons and Restricted Persons’
businesses, properties and obligations and to induce Administrative Agent and each Lender to
enter into this Agreement and to extend credit hereunder, Borrower represents and warrants to
Administrative Agent and each Lender on the Closing Date and on each other date specified in
this Agreement for representations and warranties to be made that:
Section 5.1 
    No Default. No Restricted Person is in default in the performance of any of its covenants and
agreements contained in any Loan Document. No event has occurred and is continuing which
constitutes a Default.
Section 5.2 
    Organization and Good Standing. Each Restricted Person is duly organized, validly existing
and, as applicable, in good standing under the Laws of its jurisdiction of organization, having all
powers required to carry on its business and enter into and carry out the transactions
contemplated hereby and is duly qualified, in good standing, and authorized to do business in all
other jurisdictions within the United States wherein the character of the properties owned or held
by it or the nature of the business transacted by it makes such qualification necessary, except
where failure to have such qualification, standing or authorization could not reasonably be
expected to cause a Material Adverse Change.
Section 5.3 
    Authorization. Each Restricted Person has duly taken all action necessary to authorize the
execution and delivery by it of the Loan Documents to which it is a party and to authorize the
consummation of
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
54
the transactions contemplated thereby and the performance of its obligations thereunder.
Borrower is duly authorized to borrow funds hereunder.
Section 5.4 
    No Conflicts or Consents. The execution and delivery by the various Restricted Persons of the
Loan Documents to which each is a party, the performance by each of its obligations under such
Loan Documents, and the consummation of the transactions contemplated by the various Loan
Documents, do not and will not (i) conflict with any provision of (1) any Law, (2) the
Organizational Documents of any Restricted Person, or (3) any agreement, judgment, license,
order or permit applicable to or binding upon any Restricted Person, (ii) result in the acceleration
of any Indebtedness owed by any Restricted Person, or (iii) result in or require the creation of any
Lien upon any assets or properties of any Restricted Person except as expressly contemplated or
permitted in the Loan Documents. Except as expressly contemplated in the Loan Documents
(including the Disclosure Schedule) no consent, approval, authorization or order of, and no
notice to or filing with, any Governmental Authority or third party is required in connection with the
execution, delivery or performance by any Restricted Person of any Loan Document or to
consummate any transactions contemplated by the Loan Documents.
Section 5.5 
    Enforceable Obligations. This Agreement is, and the other Loan Documents when duly
executed and delivered will be, legal, valid and binding obligations of each Restricted Person to
the extent it is a party hereto or thereto, enforceable in accordance with their terms except as
such enforcement may be limited by bankruptcy, insolvency or similar Laws of general
application relating to the enforcement of creditors’ rights.
Section 5.6 
    Initial Proforma Financial Statements. Restricted Persons have heretofore delivered to each
Lender true, correct and complete copies of the Initial Proforma Financial Statements. The Initial
Proforma Financial Statements were prepared in good faith based upon assumptions specified
therein. Since December 31, 2010, no Material Adverse Change has occurred.
Section 5.7 
    [Reserved].
Section 5.8 
    Full Disclosure. No certificate, statement or other information delivered herewith or heretofore
by any Restricted Person to any Lender in connection with the negotiation of this Agreement or in
connection with any transaction contemplated hereby contains any untrue statement of a material
fact or omits to state any material fact known to any Restricted Person (other than industry‑wide
risks normally associated with the types of businesses conducted by Restricted Persons)
necessary to make the statements contained herein or therein not misleading as of the date
made or deemed made. There is no fact known to any Restricted Person (other than
industry‑wide risks normally associated with the types of businesses conducted by Restricted
Persons) that has not been disclosed to each Lender in writing which would reasonably be
expected to cause a Material Adverse Change. There are no material statements or conclusions
in any Engineering Report which are based upon or include misleading information or fail to take
into account material information regarding the matters reported therein, it being understood that
each Engineering Report and any budgets, business plans and other projected or estimated
information are necessarily based upon professional opinions, assumptions, estimates and
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
55
projections and that Borrower does not warrant that such opinions, assumptions, estimates and
projections will ultimately prove to have been accurate. Borrower has heretofore delivered to
each Lender true, correct and complete copies of the Initial Engineering Report.
Section 5.9 
    Litigation. Except as disclosed in the Disclosure Schedule or in a Disclosure Report: (i) there
are no actions, suits or legal, equitable, arbitrative or administrative proceedings pending, or to
the knowledge of any Restricted Person threatened, against any Restricted Person before any
Governmental Authority which could cause a Material Adverse Change, (ii) no Restricted Person
has any contingent obligations, and (iii) there are no outstanding judgments, injunctions, writs,
rulings or orders by any such Tribunal against any Restricted Person or any Restricted Person’s
stockholders, partners, members, directors or officers which could cause a Material Adverse
Change.
Section 5.10 
    Labor Disputes and Acts of God. Except as disclosed in the Disclosure Schedule or a
Disclosure Report, neither the business nor the properties of any Restricted Person has been
affected by any fire, explosion, accident, strike, lockout or other labor dispute, drought, storm, hail,
earthquake, embargo, act of God or of the public enemy or other casualty (whether or not covered
by insurance), which could cause a Material Adverse Change.
Section 5.11 
    ERISA Plans and Liabilities. All currently existing ERISA Plans are listed in the Disclosure
Schedule or a Disclosure Report. Except as disclosed in the Disclosure Schedule or a
Disclosure Report, no Termination Event has occurred with respect to any ERISA Plan and all
ERISA Affiliates are in compliance with ERISA in all material respects. No ERISA Affiliate is
required to contribute to, or has any other absolute or contingent liability in respect of, any
“multiemployer plan” as defined in Section 4001 of ERISA. Except as set forth in the Disclosure
Schedule or a Disclosure Report: (i) no “accumulated funding deficiency” (as defined in Section
412(a) of the Internal Revenue Code) exists with respect to any ERISA Plan, whether or not
waived by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate, and (ii) the current value of each ERISA
Plan’s benefits does not exceed the current value of such ERISA Plan’s assets available for the
payment of such benefits by more than $1,000,000.
Section 5.12
Environmental and Other Laws. Except as disclosed in the Disclosure Schedule or a
Disclosure Report and except to the extent that any of the following could not reasonably be
expected to result in a Material Adverse Change: (a) Restricted Persons are conducting their
businesses in material compliance with all applicable Laws, including Environmental Laws, and
have and are in compliance with all licenses and permits required under any such Laws; (b)
none of the operations or properties of any Restricted Person is the subject of federal, state or
local investigation evaluating whether any material remedial action is needed to respond to a
release of any Hazardous Materials into the environment or to the improper storage or disposal
(including storage or disposal at offsite locations) of any Hazardous Materials; (c) no Restricted
Person (and to the best knowledge of Borrower, no other Person) has filed any notice under any
Law indicating that any Restricted Person is responsible for the improper release into the
environment, or the improper storage or disposal, of any material amount of any Hazardous
Materials or that any Hazardous Materials have been improperly released, or are improperly
stored or disposed of, upon any property of any Restricted Person; (d) no Restricted Person has
transported or arranged for the transportation of any Hazardous Material to any location which is
(i) listed on the National Priorities List under the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended, listed for possible inclusion on such
National
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
56
Priorities List by the Environmental Protection Agency in its Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Information System List, or listed on any similar state list
or (ii) the subject of federal, state or local enforcement actions or other investigations which may
lead to claims against any Restricted Person for clean-up costs, remedial work, damages to
natural resources or for personal injury claims (whether under Environmental Laws or otherwise);
and (e) no Restricted Person otherwise has any known material contingent liability under any
Environmental Laws or in connection with the release into the environment, or the storage or
disposal, of any Hazardous Materials. Each Restricted Person undertook, at the time of its
acquisition of each of its material properties, all appropriate inquiry into the previous ownership
and uses of the property and any potential environmental liabilities associated therewith.
Section 5.13 
    Names and Places of Business. No Restricted Person has, during the preceding five years,
had, been known by, or used any other trade or fictitious name, except as disclosed in the
Disclosure Schedule. Except as otherwise indicated in the Disclosure Schedule or a Disclosure
Report, the chief executive office and principal place of business of each Restricted Person are
(and for the preceding five years have been) located at the address of Borrower set out on the
signature pages hereto. Except as indicated in the Disclosure Schedule or a Disclosure Report,
no Restricted Person has any other office or place of business.
Section 5.14 
    Borrower’s Subsidiaries. Except as disclosed on the Disclosure Schedule or a Disclosure
Report, Borrower does not have any Subsidiary or own any stock in any other corporation or
association. Neither Borrower nor any Restricted Person is a member of any general or limited
partnership, joint venture or association of any type whatsoever except those listed in the
Disclosure Schedule.
Section 5.15 
    Title to Properties; Licenses. Each Restricted Person has good and defensible title to, or valid
leasehold interests in, all of the Collateral owned or leased by such Restricted Person and all of
its other material properties and assets necessary or used in the ordinary conduct of its business,
free and clear of all Liens, encumbrances, or adverse claims other than Permitted Liens, except
that no representation or warranty is made with respect to any oil, gas or mineral property or
interest to which no proved oil or gas reserves are properly attributed. After giving full effect to all
Permitted Liens, the Restricted Persons own the net interests in production attributable to the
wells and units evaluated in the Initial Engineering Report. Upon delivery of each Engineering
Report furnished to the Lenders pursuant to Sections 6.2(d) and (e), the statements made in the
preceding sentences of this section and in Section 5.20 shall be true with respect to the Oil and
Gas Properties covered by such Engineering Report. After giving full effect to all Permitted Liens,
the ownership of such properties does not in the aggregate in any material respect obligate
Borrower or any other Restricted Person to bear the costs and expenses relating to the
maintenance, development and operations of such properties in an amount materially in excess
of the working interest of Borrower in such properties set forth in the Initial Engineering Report.
Each Restricted Person has paid all royalties payable under the oil and gas leases to which it is
operator, except those contested in accordance with the terms of the applicable joint operating
agreement, otherwise contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings, or otherwise withheld
under circumstances normal in the industry. Upon delivery of each Engineering Report furnished
to Administrative Agent pursuant to Section 6.2, the statements made in the preceding sentences
of this Section 5.15 shall be true with respect to the Oil and Gas Properties covered by such
Engineering Reports as of the date such reports are delivered to Administrative Agent. Each
Restricted Person possesses all material licenses, permits, franchises, patents, copyrights,
trademarks and trade names,
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
57
and other intellectual property (or otherwise possesses the right to use such intellectual property
without violation of the rights of any other Person) which are reasonably necessary to carry out its
business as presently conducted and as presently proposed to be conducted hereafter, and no
Restricted Person is in violation in any material respect of the terms under which it possesses
such intellectual property or the right to use such intellectual property, except for any such
violation that, individually or in the aggregate, could not reasonably be expected to cause a
Material Adverse Change.
Section 5.16 
    Government Regulation. Neither Borrower nor any other Restricted Person owing Obligations
is subject to regulation under the Federal Power Act, or the Investment Company Act of 1940 (as
any of the preceding acts have been amended) or any other Law which regulates the incurring by
such Person of Indebtedness, including Laws relating to common contract carriers or the sale of
electricity, gas, steam, water or other public utility services.
Section 5.17 
    Insider. No Restricted Person, nor any Person having “control” (as that term is defined in 12
U.S.C. § 375b(9) or in regulations promulgated pursuant thereto) of any Restricted Person, is a
“director” or an “executive officer” or “principal shareholder” (as those terms are defined in 12
U.S.C. § 375b(8) or (9) or in regulations promulgated pursuant thereto) of any Lender, of a bank
holding company of which any Lender is a Subsidiary or of any Subsidiary of a bank holding
company of which any Lender is a Subsidiary.
Section 5.18 
    Solvency. Upon giving effect to the making of Loans, the execution of the Loan Documents by
Borrower and the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby, each Restricted
Person will be solvent (as such term is used in applicable bankruptcy, liquidation, receivership,
insolvency or similar Laws).
Section 5.19 
    Leases and Contracts; Performance of Obligations. The leases, contracts, servitudes and other
agreements forming a part of the Oil and Gas Properties of the Restricted Persons covered by the
Initial Engineering Report and each subsequent Engineering Report are in full force and effect.
All rents, royalties and other payments due and payable under such leases, contracts, servitudes
and other agreements, or under any Permitted Liens, or otherwise attendant to the ownership or
operation of such Oil and Gas Properties, have been properly and timely paid except where the
failure to do so would not materially adversely affect any material lease, contract, servitude or
other agreement. No Restricted Person is in default with respect to its obligations (and no
Restricted Person is aware of any default by any third party with respect to such third party’s
obligations) under any such leases, contracts, servitudes and other agreements, or under any
Permitted Liens, or otherwise attendant to the ownership or operation of any part of such Oil and
Gas Properties, where such default would reasonably be expected to materially adversely affect
the ownership or operation of such Oil and Gas Properties. No Restricted Person is currently
accounting for any royalties, or overriding royalties or other payments out of production, on a
basis (other than delivery in kind) less favorable to such Restricted Person than proceeds
received by such Restricted Person (calculated at the well) from sale of production, and no
Restricted Person has to its knowledge any liability (or alleged liability) to account for the same
on any such less favorable basis.
Section 5.20 
    Sale of Production. No Oil and Gas Property is subject to any contractual or other arrangement
(i)
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
58
whereby payment for production is or can be deferred for a substantial period after the month in
which such production is delivered (in the case of oil, not in excess of 60 days, and in the case of
gas, not in excess of 90 days) or (ii) whereby payments are made to a Restricted Person other
than by checks, drafts, wire transfer advises or other similar writings, instruments or
communications for the immediate payment of money. Except for production sales contracts,
processing agreements, transportation agreements and other agreements relating to the
marketing of production that are listed on the Disclosure Schedule in connection with the Oil and
Gas Properties to which such contract or agreement relates: (i) no Oil and Gas Property is subject
to any contractual or other arrangement for the sale, processing or transportation of production (or
otherwise related to the marketing of production) which cannot be canceled on 120 days’ (or
less) notice and (ii) all contractual or other arrangements for the sale, processing or transportation
of production (or otherwise related to the marketing of production) are bona fide arm’s length
transactions made with third parties not affiliated with Restricted Persons. Each Restricted
Person is presently receiving a price for all production from (or attributable to) each Oil and Gas
Property covered by a production sales contract or marketing contract listed on the Disclosure
Schedule that is computed in accordance with the terms of such contract, and no Restricted
Person is having deliveries of production from such Oil and Gas Property curtailed substantially
below such property’s delivery capacity. No Restricted Person, nor any Restricted Person’s
predecessors in title, has received prepayments (including payments for gas not taken pursuant
to “take or pay” or other similar arrangements) for any oil, gas or other hydrocarbons produced or
to be produced from any Oil and Gas Properties after the date hereof. Except as set forth in the
Disclosure Schedule, and to the best knowledge of the Restricted Persons, on a net basis there
are no gas imbalances, take or pay or other prepayments that would require the Restricted
Persons to deliver, in the aggregate, one fourth of one percent (0.25%) or more of their aggregate
Proved Reserves at some future time without then or thereafter receiving full payment therefor.
No Oil and Gas Property is subject at the present time to any regulatory refund obligation and, to
the best of Borrower’s knowledge, no facts exist which might cause the same to be imposed.
Section 5.21 
    Operation of Oil and Gas Properties. The Oil and Gas Properties (and all properties unitized
therewith) are being (and, to the extent the same could adversely affect the ownership or
operation of the Oil and Gas Properties after the date hereof, have in the past been) maintained,
operated and developed in a good and workmanlike manner, in accordance with prudent
industry standards and in conformity with all applicable Laws and in conformity with all oil, gas or
other mineral leases and other contracts and agreements forming a part of the Oil and Gas
Property and in conformity with the Permitted Liens. No Oil and Gas Property is subject to having
allowable production after the date hereof reduced below the full and regular allowable
(including the maximum permissible tolerance) because of any overproduction (whether or not
the same was permissible at the time) prior to the date hereof and (ii) none of the wells located on
the Oil and Gas Properties (or properties unitized therewith) are or will be deviated from the
vertical more than the maximum permitted by applicable Laws, regulations, rules and orders, and
such wells are bottomed under and producing from, with the well bores wholly within, the Oil and
Gas Properties (or, in the case of wells located on properties unitized therewith, such unitized
properties). Except as set forth in the Disclosure Schedule, there are no dry holes, or otherwise
inactive wells, located on the Oil and Gas Properties or on lands pooled or unitized therewith,
except for wells that have been properly plugged and abandoned. Each Restricted Person has
all governmental licenses and permits necessary or appropriate to own and operate its Oil and
Gas Property, and no Restricted Person has received notice of any violations in respect of any
such licenses or permits.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
59
Section 5.22 
    Ad Valorem and Severance Taxes. Each Restricted Person has paid and discharged all ad
valorem taxes assessed against its Oil and Gas Property or any part thereof and all production,
severance and other taxes assessed against, or measured by, the production or the value, or
proceeds, of the production therefrom, in each case to the extent such taxes are due and
payable, except for (i) those being disputed in good faith by appropriate proceedings and for
which appropriate reserves have been established on such Restricted Person’s financial
statements in accordance with GAAP or (ii) to the extent that failure to do so could not reasonably
be expected to result in a Material Adverse Change.
Section 5.23 
    Hedging Contracts. As of the SeventhTenth Amendment Effective Date, Borrower is not a party
to any Hedging Contract, except for those Hedging Contracts of Borrower described in Section
5.23 of the Disclosure Schedule and Schedule 5, each as attached to Amendment No. 7.10.
Such Hedging Contracts are in full force and effect, and no “Event of Default” or “Termination
Event” has occurred that is continuing thereunder.
Section 5.24 
    Anti-Terrorism; Anti-Money Laundering; Etc.. Neither Borrower nor Guarantor nor any of their
Subsidiaries or, to their knowledge, any of their Related Parties (i) is an “enemy” or an “ally of the
enemy” within the meaning of Section 2 of the Trading with the Enemy Act of the United States
(50 U.S.C. App. §§ 1 et seq.), (ii) is in violation of (A) the Trading with the Enemy Act, (B) any of
the foreign assets control regulations of the United States Treasury Department (31 CFR, Subtitle
B, Chapter V) or any enabling legislation or executive order relating thereto or, (C) the PATRIOT
Act (collectively, the “Anti-Terrorism Laws”), or (D) any Anti-Corruption Laws, (iii) is, or is
controlled or owned by Persons that are, the subject of Sanctions or (Ivi) is, or is controlled or
owned by Persons that are, located, organized or resident in a country or territory that is, or
whose government is, the subject of Sanctions. No part of the proceeds of any advance or Letter
of Credit hereunder will be unlawfully used directly or indirectly to fund any operations in, finance
any investments or activities in or make any payments to, a Person that is the subject of
Sanctions or a Sanctioned Country, or in any other manner that will result in any violation by any
Person (including any Lender, the Arranger, the Administrative Agent or the LC Issuer) of any
Anti-Terrorism Laws or any Sanctions.
Section 5.25 
    EEA Financial Institutions. Neither Borrower nor Guarantor is an EEA Financial Institution.
ARTICLE VI - 
    Affirmative Covenants
To conform with the terms and conditions under which each Lender is willing to have credit
outstanding to Borrower, and to induce each Lender to enter into this Agreement and extend
credit hereunder, Borrower warrants, covenants and agrees that until the full and final payment of
the Obligations (other than contingent indemnification obligations) and the termination of the
Commitments under this Agreement, unless Required Lenders agree otherwise:
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
60
Section 6.1
Payment and Performance. Borrower will pay all amounts due under the Loan Documents in
accordance with the terms thereof and will observe, perform and comply with every covenant,
term and condition in the Loan Documents. Borrower will cause each other Restricted Person to
observe, perform and comply with every such term, covenant and condition.
Section 6.2 
    Books, Financial Statements and Reports. Each Restricted Person will at all times maintain full
and accurate books of account and records. Borrower will maintain and cause its Subsidiaries to
maintain a standard system of accounting and will furnish, or cause the MLP to furnish, the
following statements and reports to Administrative Agent at Borrower’s expense:
(a)
    As soon as available but in any event in accordance with then applicable Law and not later
than the first to occur of (i) the 15th day after annual financial statements are required to be
delivered to the SEC and (ii) the 120th day after the end of the MLP’s Fiscal Year, beginning with
the Fiscal Year ended December 31, 2011, the MLP’s audited Consolidated balance sheet and
related statements of operations, partners’ equity and cash flows as of the end of and for such
Fiscal Year, together with the notes thereto, setting forth in each case in comparative form the
figures for the previous Fiscal Year, all reported on by Grant Thornton, L.L.P. or other
independent public accountants of recognized national standing (without a “going concern” or
like qualification or exception and without any qualification or exception as to the scope of such
audit) to the effect that such Consolidated financial statements present fairly in all material
respects the financial condition and results of operations of the MLP and its Consolidated
Subsidiaries (including the Borrower) on a Consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP
consistently applied; provided that the timely filing with the SEC of the MLP’s annual report on
Form 10-K will satisfy the reporting requirements of this Section.
(b)
    For each of the first three Fiscal Quarters of the MLP’s Fiscal Year, as soon as available, but in
any event in accordance with then applicable Law and not later than the first to occur of (i) the
15th day after quarterly financial statements are required to be delivered to the SEC and (ii) the
60th day after the end of the first three Fiscal Quarters of each Fiscal Year of the MLP, the MLP’s
Consolidated balance sheet and related statements of operations, partners’ equity and cash
flows as of the end of and for such Fiscal Quarter and the then elapsed portion of the Fiscal Year,
setting forth in each case in comparative form the figures for the corresponding period or periods
of (or, in the case of the balance sheet, as of the end of) the previous Fiscal Year, all certified by
the chief financial officer of the MLP as presenting fairly in all material respects the financial
condition and results of operations of the MLP and its Consolidated Subsidiaries on a
Consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP consistently applied, subject to normal year-end
audit adjustments and the absence of footnotes; provided that the timely filing with the SEC of the
MLP’s quarterly reports on Form 10-Q will satisfy the reporting requirements of this Section.
(c)
    Borrower will, together with each set of financial statements furnished under subsections (a)
and (b) of this section, furnish a certificate in the form of Exhibit E signed by the chief financial
officer of the General Partner stating that such financial statements are accurate and complete
(subject to normal year-end adjustments in the case of financial statements delivered pursuant to
subsection (b)), stating that he has reviewed the Loan Documents,
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
61
containing calculations showing compliance (or non-compliance) at the end of such Fiscal
Quarter with the requirements of Section 7.3, 7.12, and 7.13 and stating that no Default exists at
the end of such Fiscal Quarter or at the time of such certificate or specifying the nature and period
of existence of any such Default.
(d)
    By March 31 of each year, beginning March 31, 2012, an Engineering Report prepared as of
the preceding December 31 by petroleum engineers who are employees of Borrower or an
Affiliate of Borrower and audited by Cawley Gillespie & Associates, Inc. or any other independent
petroleum engineers chosen by Borrower and reasonably acceptable to Administrative Agent,
concerning all Oil and Gas Properties and interests owned by any Restricted Person which are
located in or offshore of the United States and which have attributable to them proved oil or gas
reserves. This report shall be satisfactory to Administrative Agent, shall take into account any
“over‑produced” status under gas balancing arrangements, and shall contain information and
analysis comparable in scope to that contained in the Initial Engineering Report. This report shall
project monthly production volumes attributable to such Oil and Gas Properties and interests.
(e)
    By September 30 of each year, commencing September 30, 2012, and promptly following
notice of an additional Borrowing Base redetermination under Section 2.9, an Engineering
Report prepared as of the preceding June 30 (or the first day of the preceding calendar month in
the case of an additional redetermination) by petroleum engineers who are employees of
Borrower or an Affiliate of Borrower, together with (i) a reconciliation from the previous
Engineering Report and (ii) any accompanying report on property sales, property purchases and
changes in categories, both in form and scope as the reports required by clause (d) above.
(f)
    Concurrently with any delivery of financial statements under subsections (a) and (b) of this
section, furnish a certificate of the chief financial officer of the General Partner, in form and
substance satisfactory to the Administrative Agent, setting forth as of the last Business Day of
such Fiscal Quarter or Fiscal Year, a true and complete list of all Hedging Contracts of the
Borrower and each of its Subsidiaries, the material terms thereof (including the type, term,
effective date, termination date and notional amounts or volumes), the net mark-to-market value
therefor, any new credit support agreements relating thereto, any margin required or supplied
under any credit support document, and the counterparty to each such agreement.
(g)
    Concurrently with the delivery of any Engineering Report to the Administrative Agent pursuant
to Subsection 6.2(d) or (e), a report setting forth, for each calendar month during the then current
fiscal year to date, on a field by field, or unit by unit, summary basis and an aggregate summary
basis (i) the volume of production and sales attributable to production (and the prices at which
such sales were made and the revenues derived from such sales) for each such calendar month
from the Oil and Gas Properties, and (ii) the related ad valorem, severance and production taxes
and lease operating expenses attributable thereto and incurred for each such calendar month.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
62
(h)
    Within fifteen (15) days after any material changes in insurance coverage by the Restricted
Persons, a report describing such changes, and, within thirty (30) days after the end of each
Fiscal Year, a report describing the insurance coverage of the Restricted Persons and certifying
compliance with Section 6.8. In addition, the Restricted Persons will, together with each report
describing any material changes in insurance coverage by the Restricted Persons, provide a
new insurance certificate, naming Administrative Agent as an additional insured or loss payee,
as appropriate.
(i)
    Promptly after the same become publicly available, copies of all periodic and other reports, any
proxy statements and other materials filed by the MLP or any other Restricted Person with the
SEC, or with any national or foreign securities exchange, or distributed by the MLP or any
Restricted Person to its Equity holders generally, as the case may be; provided that the timely
filing with the SEC of any such materials or the posting of such documents (or providing a link
thereto) on the MLP’s or such other Restricted Person’s website on the Internet at the MLP’s or
such other Restricted Person’s website address will satisfy the reporting requirements of this
section.
(j)
    Contemporaneously with the delivery of financial statements for the first Fiscal Quarter of each
Fiscal Year under Section 6.2(b), an annual budget of the Restricted Persons in form and detail
reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent.
(k)
    WithinUnless the Sweep Termination Date shall have occurred, within twenty-five (25) days
after the end of each calendar month, an Excess Cash Flow Report.
(l)
    Upon the request of the Administrative Agent, and on the last Business Day of any week (or, if
a Default, Event of Default or Borrowing Base Deficiency has occurred and is continuing, on any
Business Day) on which the Borrower or the Guarantor have Excess Cash, the Credit Parties
shall provide to the Administrative Agent, within one (1) Business Day of any such request or
such day, as applicable, summary and balance statements, in a form reasonable acceptable to
the Administrative Agent, for each deposit account, securities account or other account in which
any Consolidated Cash Balance is held or to which any Consolidated Cash Balance is credited,
together with a written statement setting forth a reasonably detailed calculation of amounts
excluded from the definition of Excess Cash pursuant to the parenthetical set forth in the
definition thereof.
Section 6.3 
    Other Information and Inspections. Each Restricted Person will furnish to Administrative Agent
any information which Administrative Agent may from time to time reasonably request concerning
any covenant, provision or condition of the Loan Documents, any Collateral, or any matter in
connection with Restricted Persons’ businesses, properties, prospects, financial condition and
operations. Each Restricted Person will permit representatives appointed by Administrative
Agent (including independent accountants, auditors, agents, attorneys, appraisers and any other
Persons) to visit and inspect upon reasonable prior notice and during normal business hours any
of such Restricted Person’s property, including its books of account, other books and records,
and any facilities or other business
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
63
assets, and, subject to any confidentiality requirements that any of the applicable Restricted
Persons may be bound by, to make extra copies therefrom and photocopies and photographs
thereof, and to write down and record any information such representatives obtain, and each
Restricted Person shall permit Administrative Agent or its representatives to investigate and
verify the accuracy of the information furnished to Administrative Agent or any Lender in
connection with the Loan Documents and to discuss all such matters with its officers, employees
and representatives.
Section 6.4 
    Notice of Material Events and Change of Address. Borrower will promptly notify Administrative
Agent in writing, stating that such notice is being given pursuant to this Agreement, of:
(a)
    the occurrence of any Material Adverse Change,
(b)
     the occurrence of any Default,
(c)
    the acceleration of the maturity of any Indebtedness owed by any Restricted Person or of any
default by any Restricted Person under any indenture, mortgage, agreement, contract or other
instrument to which any of them is a party or by which any of them or any of their properties is
bound, if such acceleration or default could cause a Material Adverse Change,
(d)
    the occurrence of any Termination Event,
(e)
    any claim of $2,000,000 or more, any notice of potential liability under any Environmental Laws
which might exceed such amount, or any other material adverse claim asserted against any
Restricted Person or with respect to any Restricted Person’s properties,
(f)
    the filing of any suit or proceeding against any Restricted Person in which an adverse decision
could cause a Material Adverse Change, and
(g)
    the acquisition or creation of any Subsidiary of Borrower.
Upon the occurrence of any of the foregoing, Restricted Persons will take all necessary or
appropriate steps to remedy promptly any such Material Adverse Change, Default, acceleration,
default or Termination Event, to protect against any such adverse claim, to defend any such suit
or proceeding, and to resolve all controversies on account of any of the foregoing. Borrower will
also notify Administrative Agent and Administrative Agent’s counsel in writing at least twenty
Business Days prior to the date that any Restricted Person changes its name or the location of its
chief executive office or principal place of business or the place where it keeps its books and
records concerning the Collateral, furnishing with such notice any necessary financing statement
amendments or requesting Administrative Agent and its counsel to prepare the same.
Section 6.5 
    Maintenance of Properties. Each Restricted Person will maintain, preserve, protect, and keep,
or
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
64
will cause to be maintained, preserved, protected and kept, all Collateral and all other property
used or useful in the conduct of its business in good condition and in compliance with all
applicable Laws (except to the extent any such applicable Laws are being contested in good
faith and by appropriate proceedings and the failure to so comply could not reasonably be
expected to cause a Material Adverse Change), and will from time to time make, or cause to be
made, all repairs, renewals and replacements needed to enable the business and operations
carried on in connection therewith to be promptly and advantageously conducted at all times.
Without limiting the foregoing, each Restricted Person will maintain the Hedging Contracts
specified in Section 5.23.
Section 6.6 
    Maintenance of Existence and Qualifications. Subject to Sections 7.4 and 7.5, each Restricted
Person will maintain and preserve its existence and its rights and franchises in full force and
effect and will qualify to do business in all states or jurisdictions where required by applicable
Law, except where the failure so to qualify will not cause a Material Adverse Change.
Section 6.7 
    Payment of Trade Liabilities, Taxes, etc. Each Restricted Person will (a) timely file all required
tax returns; (b) timely pay all taxes, assessments, and other governmental charges or levies
imposed upon it or upon its income, profits or property; (c) pay within ninety (90) days past the
original invoice billing date therefor all Liabilities owed by it on ordinary trade terms to vendors,
suppliers and other Persons providing goods and services used by it in the ordinary course of its
business; (d) pay and discharge when due all other Liabilities now or hereafter owed by it; and
(e) maintain appropriate accruals and reserves for all of the foregoing in accordance with GAAP.
Each Restricted Person may, however, delay paying or discharging any of the foregoing so long
as it is in good faith contesting the validity or amount thereof by appropriate proceedings and has
set aside on its books adequate reserves therefor.
Section 6.8 
    Insurance.
(e)
    Each Restricted Person shall at all times maintain or cause to be maintained (at its own
expense) insurance with respect to its properties and business against loss or damage of the
kinds customarily insured against by Persons engaged in the same or similar business, of such
types and in such amounts as are customarily carried under similar circumstances by such other
Persons (but of at least the types and in such amounts as are specified in the Insurance
Schedule). The loss payable clauses or provisions in said insurance policy or policies insuring
any of the Collateral shall be endorsed in favor of and made payable to the Administrative Agent
as its interests may appear and such policies shall name the Administrative Agent, as agent for
the Lenders, as an “additional insured” and provide that the insurer will endeavor to give at least
thirty (30) days prior notice of any cancellation to the Administrative Agent.
(f)
    Each Restricted Person will, if so requested by Administrative Agent, deliver to Administrative
Agent original or duplicate policies of such insurance.
(g)
Reimbursement under any liability insurance maintained by Restricted Persons
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
65
pursuant to this section may be paid directly to the Person who has incurred the liability covered
by such insurance. With respect to any loss involving damage to Collateral as to which
subsection (d) of this section is not applicable, each Restricted Person will make or cause to be
made the necessary repairs to or replacements of such Collateral, and any proceeds of
insurance maintained by each Restricted Person pursuant to this section shall be paid to such
Restricted Person by Administrative Agent as reimbursement for the costs of such repairs or
replacements as such repairs or replacements are made or acquired.
(h)
    Upon the occurrence and during the continuance of an Event of Default, all insurance
payments in respect of such Collateral shall be paid to Administrative Agent and applied as
specified herein.
Section 6.9 
    Performance on Borrower’s Behalf. If any Restricted Person fails to pay any taxes, insurance
premiums, expenses, attorneys’ fees or other amounts it is required to pay under any Loan
Document, Administrative Agent may pay the same. Borrower shall immediately reimburse
Administrative Agent for any such payments and each amount paid by Administrative Agent shall
constitute an Obligation owed hereunder which is due and payable on the date paid by
Administrative Agent.
Section 6.10 
    Interest. Borrower hereby promises to each Lender Party to pay interest at the Default Rate
applicable to Base Rate Loans on all Obligations (including Obligations to pay fees or to
reimburse or indemnify any Lender but excluding principal of, and interest on, any Loan, and any
Matured LC Obligation, interest on which is covered by Section 2.5 and 2.13(a)) which Borrower
has in this Agreement promised to pay to such Lender Party and which are not paid when due.
Such interest shall accrue from the date such Obligations become due until they are paid.
Section 6.11 
    Compliance with Agreements and Law. Each Restricted Person will perform all material
obligations it is required to perform under the terms of each material indenture, mortgage, deed of
trust, security agreement, lease, franchise, agreement, contract or other material instrument or
obligation to which it is a party or by which it or any of its properties is bound. Each Restricted
Person will conduct its business and affairs in compliance with all Laws applicable thereto,
including ERISA Laws, all Anti-Corruption Laws and applicable Sanctions (except to the extent
any such applicable Laws are being contested in good faith and by appropriate proceedings and
the failure to so comply could not reasonably be expected to cause a Material Adverse Change).
Each Restricted Person will cause all licenses and permits reasonably necessary or appropriate
for the conduct of its business and the ownership and operation of its property used and useful in
the conduct of its business to be at all times maintained in good standing and in full force and
effect.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
66
Section 6.12 
    Environmental Matters; Environmental Reviews.
(e)
    Each Restricted Person will (i) comply in all material respects with all Environmental Laws
now or hereafter applicable to such Restricted Person and all contractual obligations and
agreements with respect to environmental remediation or other environmental matters where the
failure to comply could be reasonably expected to cause a Material Adverse Change, (ii) obtain,
at or prior to the time required by applicable Environmental Laws, all environmental, health and
safety permits, licenses and other authorizations necessary for its operations and maintain such
authorizations in full force and effect except where the failure to obtain or maintain any such
permit, license or other authorization could be reasonably expected to cause a Material Adverse
Change. No Restricted Person will do anything or permit anything to be done which will subject
any of its properties to any remedial obligations under, or result in noncompliance with applicable
permits and licenses issued under, any applicable Environmental Laws, assuming disclosure to
the applicable Governmental Authorities of all relevant facts, conditions and circumstances.
Upon Administrative Agent’s reasonable request, at any time and from time to time, Borrower will
provide at its own expense an environmental inspection of any of the Restricted Persons’
material real properties and audit of their environmental compliance procedures and practices, in
each case from an engineering or consulting firm approved by Administrative Agent.
(f)
    Borrower will promptly furnish to Administrative Agent all written notices of violation, orders,
claims, citations, complaints, penalty assessments, suits or other proceedings received by
Borrower, or of which it has notice, pending or threatened against Borrower, by any
Governmental Authority with respect to any alleged violation of or non-compliance with any
Environmental Laws or any permits, licenses or authorizations in connection with its ownership
or use of its properties or the operation of its business if the Borrower reasonably anticipates that
such action will result in liability in excess of $2,000,000, not fully covered by insurance or other
means of recovery or reimbursement acceptable to the Administrative Agent, subject to normal
deductibles.
(g)
    Borrower will promptly furnish to Administrative Agent all requests for information, notices of
claim, demand letters, and other notifications, received by Borrower in connection with its
ownership or use of its properties or the conduct of its business, relating to potential responsibility
with respect to any investigation or clean-up of Hazardous Material at any location.
Section 6.13 
    Evidence of Compliance. Each Restricted Person will furnish to each Lender at such
Restricted Person’s or Borrower’s expense all evidence which Administrative Agent from time to
time reasonably requests in writing as to the accuracy and validity of or compliance with all
representations, warranties and covenants made by any Restricted Person in the Loan
Documents, the satisfaction of all conditions contained therein, and all other matters pertaining
thereto.
Section 6.14
Agreement to Deliver Security Documents. Borrower agrees to deliver and to cause each
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
67
Restricted Person to deliver, to further secure the Obligations whenever requested by
Administrative Agent in its sole and absolute discretion, deeds of trust, mortgages, chattel
mortgages, security agreements, financing statements and other Security Documents satisfactory
to Administrative Agent for the purpose of granting, confirming, and perfecting first and prior liens
or security interests in any personal property and with respect to at least ninety percent (90%)
(ninety five percent (95%) not later than 45 days after the Ninth Amendment Effective Date) of the
Proved Reserves now owned or hereafter acquired by any Restricted Person. Borrower agrees
to deliver and to cause each other Restricted Person to deliver, whenever requested by
Administrative Agent, in its sole and absolute discretion, transfer orders or letters in lieu thereof
with respect to the production and proceeds of production from the Collateral, in form and
substance satisfactory to Administrative Agent. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the Tenth
Amendment Effective Date, Borrower will subject to mortgage one hundred percent (100%) of the
Proved Reserves acquired in the PES Acquisition.
Section 6.15 
    Additional Collateral. In connection with each redetermination of the Borrowing Base,
Borrower shall review the applicable Engineering Report and the list of Oil and Gas Properties
encumbered by the Security Documents in place at such time to ascertain whether ninety percent
(90%) (ninety five percent (95%) not later than 45 days after the Ninth Amendment Effective Date)
of the Proved Reserves owned by each Restricted Person described in such Engineering Report
are then encumbered by such Security Documents, after giving effect to exploration and
production activities, acquisitions, dispositions and production. If such Oil and Gas Properties do
not represent at least ninety percent (90%) (ninety five percent (95%) not later than 45 days after
the Ninth Amendment Effective Date) of the Proved Reserves owned by any such Restricted
Person, then within forty-five (45) days after such Determination Date, the Borrower shall, and
cause the Restricted Persons to, deliver deeds of trust, mortgages, chattel mortgages, security
agreements, financing statements and other Security Documents satisfactory to Administrative
Agent for the purpose of granting, confirming, and perfecting first and prior liens or security
interests (subject only to Permitted Liens) in and to additional Oil and Gas Properties not already
encumbered by a Security Document such that after giving effect thereto, the Proved Reserves
so encumbered will equal at least ninety percent (90%) (ninety five percent (95%) not later than
45 days after the Ninth Amendment Effective Date) of such total value. Prior to the granting of
such Liens, Borrower will furnish to Administrative Agent title opinions or other title evidence, in
form, substance and authorship satisfactory to Administrative Agent, concerning such properties
as may be requested by Administrative Agent and will furnish all other documents and
information relating to such properties as Administrative Agent may reasonably request.
Borrower acknowledges that Administrative Agent has requested that it provide within thirty (30)
days of the Tenth Amendment Effective Date title evidence on at least ninety percent (90%) of the
Proved Reserves acquired in the PES Acquisition and that it will timely so provide such
evidence.
Section 6.16
Perfection and Protection of Security Interests and Liens. Borrower will from time to time
deliver, and will cause each other Restricted Person from time to time to deliver, to Administrative
Agent any financing statements, continuation statements, extension agreements and other
documents, properly completed and executed (and acknowledged when required) by Restricted
Persons in form and substance satisfactory to Administrative Agent, which Administrative Agent
requests for the purpose of perfecting, confirming, or protecting any Liens or other rights in
Collateral securing any Obligations.
Section 6.17 
    Bank Accounts; Offset. To secure the repayment of the Obligations Borrower hereby grants to
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
68
each Lender, LC Issuer, and each of their respective Affiliates, a security interest, a lien, and a
right of offset, each of which shall be in addition to all other interests, Liens, and rights of any
Lender, LC Issuer or any of their respective Affiliates, at common Law, under the Loan
Documents, or otherwise, and each of which shall be upon and against (a) any and all moneys,
securities or other property (and the proceeds therefrom) of Borrower now or hereafter held or
received by or in transit to any Lender, LC Issuer, or any of their respective Affiliates, from or for
the account of Borrower, whether for safekeeping, custody, pledge, transmission, collection or
otherwise, (b) any and all deposits (general or special, time or demand, provisional or final) of
Borrower with any Lender, LC Issuer, or any of their respective Affiliates, and (c) any other credits
and claims of Borrower at any time existing against any Lender, including claims under
certificates of deposit. Additionally, within thirty (30) days after the Seventh Amendment Effective
Date, Borrower will cause each bank or other financial institution (other than a Lender) holding
any deposits (general or special, time or demand, provisional or final) of Borrower or any of its
Subsidiaries to enter into a control agreement in favor of the Administrative Agent, in form and
substance acceptable to the Administrative Agent. If any such bank refuses or declines to enter
into a control agreement satisfactory in form and substance to the Administrative Agent, the
Administrative Agent shall so notify the Borrower whereupon the Borrower will promptly cease
banking with such bank or other financial institution and move its deposit accounts to a bank or
financial institution that will enter into a control agreement satisfactory in form and substance to
the Administrative Agent. The Borrower will hold the proceeds of all Loans in a deposit account
and/or securities account maintained with the Administrative Agent or that is subject to a control
agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the Administrative Agent establishing the
Administrative Agent’s Control (as defined in the UCC) over such account until such proceeds
are transferred to a third‑party pursuant to a transaction not prohibited under the terms of the
Loan Documents. At any time and from time to time after the occurrence of any Event of Default,
each Lender, LC Issuer, and each of their respective Affiliates, is hereby authorized to foreclose
upon, or to offset against the Obligations then due and payable (in either case without notice to
Borrower), any and all items hereinabove referred to; irrespective of whether or not such Lender
or LC Issuer shall have made any demand under this Agreement or any other Loan Document
and although such obligations of the Borrower may be contingent or unmatured or are owed to a
branch or office of such Lender or LC Issuer different from the branch or office holding such items.
The remedies of foreclosure and offset are separate and cumulative, and either may be exercised
independently of the other without regard to procedures or restrictions applicable to the other.
Section 6.18 
    Production Proceeds. Notwithstanding that, by the terms of the various Security Documents,
Restricted Persons are and will be assigning to Administrative Agent and Lenders all of the
“Production Proceeds” (as defined therein) accruing to the property covered thereby, so long as
no Event of Default has occurred, Restricted Persons may continue to receive from the
purchasers of production all such Production Proceeds, subject, however, to the Liens created
under the Security Documents, which Liens are hereby affirmed and ratified. Upon the
occurrence of an Event of Default, Administrative Agent and Lenders may exercise all rights and
remedies granted under the Security Documents, including the right to obtain possession of all
Production Proceeds then held by Restricted Persons or to receive directly from the purchasers
of production all other Production Proceeds. In no case shall any failure, whether intentional or
inadvertent, by Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent or Lenders to collect directly any such
Production Proceeds constitute in any way a waiver, remission or release of any of their rights
under the Security Documents, nor shall any release of any Production Proceeds by
Administrative Agent or Lenders to Restricted Persons constitute a waiver, remission, or release
of any other Production Proceeds or of any rights of Administrative Agent or Lenders to collect
other Production Proceeds thereafter.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
69
Section 6.19 
    Mortgaged Property Covenants. As used in this section, the terms “Mortgaged Property”,
“Permitted Liens”, “Production” and “Property” mean, respectively, all “Mortgaged Property”,
“Permitted Liens”, “Production” and “Property” as defined in any Mortgage, and the term
“Mortgagor” means each “Mortgagor” as defined in any Mortgage. Each Restricted Person will
maintain in full force and effect all oil, gas or mineral leases, contracts, servitudes and other
agreements forming a part of any Oil and Gas Property, to the extent the same cover or otherwise
relate to such Oil and Gas Property, and each Restricted Person will timely perform all of its
obligations thereunder. Each Restricted Person will properly and timely pay all rents, royalties
and other payments due and payable under any such leases, contracts, servitudes and other
agreements, or under the Permitted Liens, or otherwise attendant to its ownership or operation of
any Oil and Gas Property. Each Restricted Person will promptly notify Administrative Agent of
any claim (or any conclusion by such Restricted Person) that such Restricted Person is obligated
to account for any royalties, or overriding royalties or other payments out of production, on a basis
(other than delivery in kind) less favorable to such Restricted Person than proceeds received by
such Restricted Person (calculated at the well) from sale of production. The remedies of
foreclosure and offset are separate and cumulative, and either may be exercised independently
of the other without regard to procedures or restrictions applicable to the other.
Section 6.20 
    Leases and Contracts; Performance of Obligations.. Each Restricted Person will maintain in
full force and effect all oil, gas or mineral leases, contracts, servitudes and other agreements
forming a part of any Oil and Gas Property covered by the Initial Engineering Report and each
subsequent Engineering Report, to the extent the same cover or otherwise relate to such Oil and
Gas Property, and each Restricted Person will timely perform all of its material obligations
thereunder. Each Restricted Person will properly and timely pay all rents, royalties and other
payments due and payable under any such leases, contracts, servitudes and other agreements,
or under the Permitted Liens, or otherwise attendant to its ownership or operation of any such Oil
and Gas Property. Each Restricted Person will promptly notify Administrative Agent of any claim
(or any conclusion by such Restricted Person) that such Restricted Person is obligated to
account for any royalties, or overriding royalties or other payments out of production, on a basis
(other than delivery in kind) less favorable to such Restricted Person than proceeds received by
such Restricted Person (calculated at the well) from sale of production, if such claim or
conclusion, if resolved adversely to such Restricted Person, could reasonably be expected to
cause a Material Adverse Change.
Section 6.21 
    Representation to Continue to be True. Each Restricted Person will carry out its sales of
production, will operate (or use its best efforts to cause to be operated) the Oil and Gas
Properties, and will otherwise deal with the Oil and Gas Properties and the production, in such a
way that the representations and warranties in Sections 5.20 through 5.23 remain true and
correct at, and as of, all times that this Agreement is in effect (and not just at, and as of, the times
such representations and warranties are made), except to the extent that such representations
and warranties specifically refer to an earlier date, in which case they shall be true and correct as
of such earlier date.
Section 6.22 
    Guaranties of Borrower’s Subsidiaries.
(a)
    Borrower shall immediately notify Administrative Agent in writing of the existence, creation, or
acquisition of any Subsidiary of Borrower and shall furnish Administrative Agent with
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
70
all relevant information with respect to each such Subsidiary. Each Subsidiary of Borrower now
existing or created, acquired or coming into existence after the Closing Date shall, promptly upon
request by Administrative Agent, execute and deliver to Administrative Agent an absolute and
unconditional guaranty of the timely repayment of the Obligations and the due and punctual
performance of the obligations of Borrower hereunder, which guaranty shall be reasonably
satisfactory to Administrative Agent in form and substance. Borrower will cause each of its
Subsidiaries to deliver to Administrative Agent, simultaneously with its delivery of such a
guaranty, written evidence reasonably satisfactory to Administrative Agent and its counsel that
such Subsidiary has taken all company action necessary to duly approve and authorize its
execution, delivery and performance of such guaranty and any other documents which it is
required to execute and such Subsidiary will comply with Section 6.14.
(b)
    To the extent any mortgaged property of a Subsidiary comprises a “building” or a “mobile
home” (each as defined in Regulation H promulgated under the Flood Insurance Laws), the
Borrower shall provide to the Administrative Agent concurrently with the delivery of any mortgage
in favor of the Administrative Agent (i) a standard flood hazard determination form for the
applicable mortgaged property and (ii) if any such applicable mortgaged property is located in an
area designated as a “special flood hazard area” by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (or any successor agency), evidence of flood insurance in such reasonable total amount
as the Administrative Agent may from time to time reasonably require, and otherwise to ensure
compliance with the Flood Insurance Laws (if applicable).
Section 6.23 
    Hedging Contracts.
(a)
    Hedging Contracts. Within 10 daysfive (5) Business Days following the NinthTenth
Amendment Effective Date, Borrower shall have entered into Hedging Contracts (which for
purposes of this Section 6.23 include Existing Hedging Contracts, other than the Hedge
Close‑outs), on terms and with a counterparty satisfactory to Administrative Agent, with the
purpose and effect of fixing prices for Proved Developed Producing Reserves expected to be
produced by Restricted Persons so that the monthly production covered by such contracts
(determined, in the case of contracts that are not settled on a monthly basis, by a monthly
proration acceptable to Administrative Agent for any single month (i) during the calendar year
2016 is not less than 80% of the projected production of oil and gas from Restricted Persons’
Proved Developed Producing Reserves (as reflected in the most recently delivered Engineering
Report acceptable to the Administrative Agent) and (ii) (x) during the calendar year 2017 is not
less than 75% and (y) during the calendar year 2018 is not less than 50% of the projected
production of oil and gas from Restricted Persons’ Proved Developed Producing Reserves (as
reflected in the most recently delivered Engineering Report acceptable to the Administrative
Agent).
(b)
    Maintenance of Hedging Contracts. Each Restricted Person shall maintain in effect for their full
term and will not permit the Liquidation of any Hedging Contracts that are used by Lenders in
determining the Borrowing Base from time to time, including all Hedging Contracts
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
71
entered into pursuant to Section 6.23(a); provided, however, Restricted Persons may terminate
Hedging Contracts in connection with a Disposition permitted pursuant to Section 7.5(gf) and
redetermination of the Borrowing Base pursuant to Section 2.9.
ARTICLE VII - 
    Negative Covenants
To conform with the terms and conditions under which each Lender is willing to have credit
outstanding to Borrower, and to induce each Lender to enter into this Agreement and make the
Loans, Borrower warrants, covenants and agrees that until the full and final payment of the
Obligations (other than contingent indemnification obligations) and the termination of the
Commitments under this Agreement, unless Required Lenders agree otherwise:
Section 7.1 
    Indebtedness. No Restricted Person will in any manner owe or be liable for Indebtedness
except:
(h)
the Obligations.
(i)
    Indebtedness in respect of Hedging Contracts permitted under Section 7.3.
(j)
    Indebtedness listed on Schedule 7.1; provided, that, the amount of such Indebtedness may not
be increased.
(k)
    Indebtedness in the form of obligations for the deferred purchase price of property or services
incurred in the ordinary course of business which are not yet due and payable or are being
contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and for which adequate reserves in
accordance with GAAP have been established.
(l)
    Indebtedness secured by the Liens permitted under paragraph (h) of Section 7.2 in an
aggregate amount not to exceed $2,000,000 as to all Restricted Persons at any time.
(m)
    Indebtedness consisting of sureties or bonds provided to any Governmental Authority or other
Person and assuring payment of contingent liabilities of Borrower in connection with the
operation of the Oil and Gas Properties, including with respect to plugging, facility removal and
abandonment of its Oil and Gas Properties.
(n)
    Indebtedness not otherwise permitted under this Section 7.1 in an aggregate amount not to
exceed $2,000,000 as to all Restricted Persons at any time.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
72
Section 7.2 
    Limitation on Liens. No Restricted Person will create, assume or permit to exist any Lien upon
any of the properties or assets which it now owns or hereafter acquires, except, to the extent not
otherwise forbidden by the Security Documents, the following (“Permitted Liens”):
(b)
    statutory Liens for taxes, assessments or other governmental charges or levies which are not
yet delinquent or which are being contested in good faith by appropriate action and for which
adequate reserves have been maintained in accordance with GAAP.
(c)
    landlords’, operators’, carriers’, warehousemen’s, repairmen’s, mechanics’, materialmen’s, or
other like Liens which do not secure Indebtedness, in each case only to the extent arising in the
ordinary course of business and only to the extent securing obligations which are not delinquent
or which are being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and for which adequate
reserves have been maintained in accordance with GAAP.
(d)
    minor defects and irregularities in title to any property, so long as such defects and
irregularities neither secure Indebtedness nor materially impair the value of such property or the
use of such property for the purposes for which such property is held.
(e)
deposits of cash or securities to secure the performance of bids, trade contracts, leases,
statutory obligations and other obligations of a like nature (excluding appeal bonds) incurred in
the ordinary course of business.
(f)
    Liens under the Security Documents.
(g)
    Liens which are (i) expressly subordinate and inferior to the Liens under the Security
Documents pursuant to subordination provisions acceptable to Administrative Agent, and (ii)
expressly consented to in writing by Borrower, the Administrative Agent, and the Required
Lenders.
(h)
    with respect only to property subject to any particular Security Document, Liens burdening
such property which are expressly allowed by such Security Document.
(i)
    purchase money Liens or purchase money security interests upon or in any equipment
acquired or held by a Restricted Person in the ordinary course of business prior to or at the time
of such Restricted Person’s acquisition of such equipment; provided, that, the Indebtedness
secured by such Liens (i) was incurred solely for the purpose of financing the acquisition of such
equipment, and does not exceed the aggregate purchase price of such equipment, (ii) is secured
only by such equipment and not by any other assets of any Restricted Person, and (iii) is not
increased in amount.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
73
(j)
    Liens to operators and non-operators under joint operating agreements arising in the ordinary
course of the business of the relevant Restricted Person to secure amounts owing, which
amounts are not yet due or are being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings, if such
reserves as may be required by GAAP shall have been made therefor;
(k)
    royalties, overriding royalties, net profits interests, production payments, reversionary interests,
calls on production, preferential purchase rights and other burdens on or deductions from the
proceeds of production, that do not secure Indebtedness for borrowed money and that are taken
into account in computing the net revenue interests and working interests of any Restricted
Person warranted in the Security Documents.
(l)
    Liens arising in the ordinary course of business out of pledges or deposits under workers’
compensation laws, unemployment insurance, old age pensions or other social security or
retirement benefits, or similar legislation or to secure public or statutory obligations of any
Restricted Person.
(m)
    Liens arising under operating agreements, unitization and pooling agreements and orders,
farmout agreements, gas balancing agreements and other agreements, in each case that are
customary in the oil, gas and mineral production business and that are entered into in the
ordinary course of business that are taken into account in computing the net revenue interests
and working interests of any Restricted Person warranted in the Security Documents, to the
extent that any such Lien referred to in this clause does not materially impair the use of the
property covered by such Lien for the purposes for which such property is held by any Restricted
Person or materially impair the value of such property subject thereto.
(n)
    easements, rights-of-way, and other similar encumbrances, and minor defects in the chain of
title that are customarily accepted in the oil and gas financing industry, none of which interfere
with the ordinary conduct of the business of any Restricted Person or materially detract from the
value or use of the property to which they apply.
(o)
    Liens described in Schedule 7.2.
Section 7.3 
    Hedging Contracts.
(c)
    No Restricted Person will be a party to or in any manner be liable on any Hedging Contract
entered into for speculative purposes.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
74
(d)
    No Restricted Person will be a party to or in any manner be liable on any Hedging Contract
entered into with the purpose and effect of fixing prices on oil or gas expected to be produced by
Restricted Persons, except (A) the Existing Hedging Contracts and (B) contracts entered into with
the purpose and effect of fixing prices on oil or gas expected to be produced by Restricted
Persons, provided that at all times the aggregate monthly production covered by such contracts
(determined, in the case of contracts that are not settled on a monthly basis, by a monthly
proration acceptable to Administrative Agent and excluding for purposes hereof any floor or put
contracts that do not require any Restricted Person to deliver oil or gas) for any single month
does not in the aggregate exceed 85% of the projected production of oil and gas from Restricted
Persons’ (x) Proved Reserves (during the first 36 months after the Tenth Amendment Effective
Date and (y) PDP during the following months 37 through 60, in each case as reflected in the
most recently delivered Engineering Report acceptable to the Administrative Agent); provided
Proved Developed Nonproducing Reserves and Proved Undeveloped Reserves collectively
shall at no time account for more than 25% of the calculated Proved Reserves and with all such
amounts computed on a semi-annual basis and calculated separately for oil and gas as such
Proved Reserves are projected in the most recent report delivered pursuant to Section 6.2(d) or
(e), after deducting projected production from any properties or interests sold or under contract for
sale that had been included in such report and after adding projected production from any
properties or interests that had not been reflected in such report but that are reflected in a
separate or supplemental reports satisfactory to Administrative Agent; provided further that (1) the
aggregate amount of all such Hedging Contracts shall not exceed ninety percent (90%) of actual
oil or gas production, calculated separately by product, for the last month for which information
relating to actual oil and gas production is available (or if as a result of a force majeure event the
foregoing limitations are breached, then in any given three consecutive month period), (2) each
such Hedging Contract shall be five years or less in duration, and (3) each such contract is with a
Lender Counterparty, provided that a floor or put may be entered into by a Restricted Person with
a counterparty that is not a Lender Counterparty if such floor or put is with an Approved
Counterparty, provided further, that if an Approved Counterparty that is not a Lender Counterparty
has been downgraded so that it no longer has senior unsecured long-term debt obligations rated
A- or A3 or better, respectively, by either Rating Agency, then the value of such floor or put will be
excluded in determining the Borrowing Base.
(e)
    In addition to Hedging Contracts entered into by a Restricted Person for the purpose and effect
of fixing prices on oil or gas expected to be produced by Restricted Persons provided for in
subsection (b) above, in connection with a pending acquisition by a Restricted Person of Oil and
Gas Properties (a “Pending Acquisition”), such Restricted Person may enter into Hedging
Contracts for Oil and Gas Properties reasonably believed to be acquired by such Restricted
Person in connection with such Pending Acquisition provided (i) the Hedging Contracts complies
with the requirements of subsection (b) above after giving pro forma effect to the acquisition
contemplated thereby, (ii) such Restricted Person has entered into a signed purchase and sale or
comparable agreement with the prospective seller of the Oil and Gas Properties to be covered by
such Hedging Contract (the “Subject PSA”), (iii) Facility Usage at the time such Hedging Contract
is entered into (and after giving pro forma effect to any anticipated Loans or Letters of Credit to be
issued in
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
75
connection with such Restricted Person's acquisition of such Oil and Gas Properties in
connection with such Pending Acquisition) does not and will not exceed 90%, and (iv) any
Hedging Contracts entered into in connection with a Pending Acquisition in excess of those
allowed pursuant to subsection (b) above are terminated if the Pending Acquisition is not
consummated within 5 Business Days of the earlier to occur of (1) the 90th day after the effective
date of the Subject PSA and (2) the date any Restricted Person believes in good faith with
reasonable certainty that the Pending Acquisition will not be consummated.
(f)
    No Restricted Person will be a party to or in any manner be liable on any Hedging Contract
that is entered into with the purpose and effect of hedging interest rates except (A) with respect to
Hedging Contracts converting interest rates from a fixed rate to a floating rate, the notional
amount of such Hedging Contract (when aggregated with all other Hedging Contracts of such
Restricted Person then in effect effectively converting interest rates from a fixed rate to a floating
rate) may not exceed 75% of the then anticipated outstanding principal balance of such
Restricted Person’s Indebtedness for borrowed money which bears interest at a fixed rate,
provided the fixed rate index of each such Hedging Contract generally matches the index used to
determine the fixed rates of interest on the corresponding Indebtedness to be hedged by such
Hedging Contract and (B) with respect to Hedging Contracts converting interest rates from a
floating rate to a fixed rate, the notional amount of such Hedging Contract (when aggregated with
all other Hedging Contracts of such Restricted Person then in effect effectively converting interest
rates from a floating rate to a fixed rate) may not exceed 75% of the then outstanding principal
amount of such Restricted Person’s Indebtedness for borrowed money which bears interest at a
floating rate, provided the floating rate index of each such Hedging Contract generally matches
the index used to determine the floating rates of interest on the corresponding Indebtedness to be
hedged by such Hedging Contract, provided further that in connection with Hedging Contracts
described in clauses (A) and (B) of this subsection, each such contract is with a counterparty or
has a guarantor of the obligation of the counterparty who is reasonably acceptable to the
Administrative Agent.
Section 7.4 
    Limitation on Mergers, Issuances of Securities. No Restricted Person will merge or consolidate
with or into any other Person, except that any Subsidiary of Borrower may be merged into or
consolidated with (a) another Subsidiary of Borrower, so long as a Guarantor is the surviving
business entity, or (b) Borrower, so long as Borrower is the surviving business entity. No
Restricted Person other than the MLP will issue any additional Equity except to Borrower or
another wholly-owned Subsidiary of Borrower; provided, however that Borrower may issue
additional membership interests, or options or warrants to acquire such interests. No Subsidiary
of Borrower will allow any diminution of Borrower’s interest (direct or indirect) therein.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
76
Section 7.5 
    Limitation on Sales of Property. No Restricted Person will sell, transfer, lease, exchange,
alienate, or dispose of any of its material assets or properties or any material interest therein, or
discount, sell or assign any notes payable to it, accounts receivable or future income, except, to
the extent not otherwise forbidden under the Security Documents:
(a)
    equipment which is worthless or obsolete or which is replaced by equipment of equal
suitability and value;
(b)
    inventory (including oil and gas sold as produced and seismic data) which is sold in the
ordinary course of business on ordinary trade terms;
(c)
    farmouts of undeveloped acreage and assignments in connection with such farmouts, in each
case, in the ordinary course of business;
(d)
    sales of Proved Reserves between Determination Dates and included on the most recently
delivered Engineering Report for fair consideration to a Person who is not an Affiliate not in the
aggregate in excess of five percent (5.0%) of the Borrowing Base then in effect, the sale of which
will not materially impair or diminish the value of the Collateral or Borrower’s Consolidated
financial condition, business or operations;
(e)
    any Oil and Gas Property to which no Proved Reserves are attributed or which is not included
in the most recently delivered Engineering Report, provided that no Default or Borrowing Base
Deficiency exists or would result therefrom; and
(f)
    so long as no Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, or would exist after giving effect
thereto, sales and other dispositions of property not permitted by Sections 7.5(a) through (e)
above having a fair market value not to exceed $5,000,000.00 in the aggregate in any 12-month
period.
No Restricted Person will abandon or consent to the abandonment of, any oil or gas well
constituting Collateral so long as such well is capable (or is subject to being made capable
through drilling, reworking or other operations which would be commercially feasible to conduct)
of producing oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons or other minerals in paying quantities (without regard
to the burden of the Security Documents) and a reasonable and prudent operator (acting without
regard to the burden of the Security Documents) would undertake repair operations to restore the
productivity of such well. No Restricted Person will elect not to participate in a proposed
operation on any Oil and Gas Property constituting Collateral where the effect of such election
would be the forfeiture either temporarily (e.g., until a certain sum of money is received out of the
forfeited interest) or permanently of any interest in the Collateral.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
77
Section 7.6 
    Limitation on Restricted Payments. The Borrower will not, and will not permit any other
Restricted Person to, declare or make, or agree to pay or make, directly or indirectly, any
Restricted Payment, return any capital to its Equity holders or make any distribution of its property
to its Equity holders, except (i) the MLP may declare and pay Restricted Payments with respect to
its Equity interests payable solely in additional units of its Equity interests, (ii) Borrower and
Borrower’s Subsidiaries may declare and pay Restricted Payments ratably with respect to their
Equity interests, (iii) Restricted Persons may make Restricted Payments pursuant to and in
accordance with stock and unit option plans or other benefit plans for management, directors or
employees of the MLP and its Subsidiaries, (iv)    (iv) so long as no Borrowing Base Deficiency or
Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, or would exist after giving effect to any proposed
Restricted Payment, the MLP may make Restricted Payments to the holders of its 2016 Preferred
Units in an amount equal to the lesser of (i) $2,000,000 in any fiscal year and (ii) Available Cash,
(v) if consented to in writing by Required Lenders, the MLP may make Restricted Payments of
Available Cash to holders of its Equity interests in compliance with the terms of its Organizational
Documents.
Section 7.7 
    Limitation on Investments; Nature of Business. (a) Except for Investments set forth on the
Disclosure Schedule and the PES Acquisition, the Restricted Persons will not make or permit to
remain outstanding any Investments in or to any Person, except that the foregoing restriction
shall not apply to:
(i)
    accounts receivable arising in the ordinary course of business;
(ii)
    direct obligations of the United States or any agency thereof, or obligations guaranteed by the
United States or any agency thereof, in each case maturing within one year from the date of
creation thereof;
(iii)
    commercial paper maturing within one year from the date of creation thereof rated in the
highest grade by a Rating Agency;
(iv)
    deposits maturing within one year from the date of creation thereof, including certificates of
deposit issued by, any Lender or any office located in the United States of any other bank or trust
company which is organized under the laws of the United States or any state thereof, has capital,
surplus and undivided profits aggregating at least $100,000,000 (as of the date of such bank or
trust company’s most recent financial reports) and has a short term deposit rating of no lower than
A2 or P2, as such rating is set forth from time to time, by either Ratings Agency, respectively;
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
78
(v)
    deposits in money market funds investing primarily in Investments described in Section 7.7(a)
(ii), (iii) or (iv);
(vi)
    repurchase agreements of a commercial bank in the United States if the commercial paper of
such bank or of the bank holding company of which such bank is a wholly owned subsidiary is
rated in the highest rating categories of a Rating Agency, or any other rating agency satisfactory
to the Required Lenders, that are fully secured by securities described in Section 7.7(a)(ii);
(vii)
    Investments made by the MLP in or to Borrower or made by the Borrower in or to any of its
Subsidiaries or made by any Subsidiary of the Borrower in or to the Borrower or any other
Subsidiary of Borrower, including, in each case any Person which will, substantially
contemporaneously with such Investment, become a Subsidiary of Borrower;
(viii)
    Investments received in settlement of debts owing to any Restricted Person as a result of a
bankruptcy or other insolvency proceeding of the obligor in respect of such debts or upon the
enforcement of any claim or Lien in favor of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries;
(ix)
    subject to the limits in Section 7.7(b), Investments related to farm-out, farm-in, joint operating,
joint venture or area of mutual interest agreements, gathering systems, pipelines or other similar
arrangements which are usual and customary in the oil and gas exploration and production
business located within the geographic boundaries of the United States;
(x)
    subject to the limits in Section 7.7(b), Investments (including, without limitation, capital
contributions), in general or limited partnerships or other types of entities or joint ventures (each a
“Venture”) entered into by one or more Restricted Persons with others for the purpose of
constructing and operating gathering and pipeline systems, treatment facilities, compression
facilities and other related facilities for the treatment, transportation or storage of hydrocarbons on
any of the Restricted Persons’ Oil and Gas Properties; provided that such Venture interests
acquired and capital contributions made (valued as of the date such interest was acquired or the
contribution made) do not exceed, in the aggregate at the time of making thereof (net of any
subsequent dispositions), an amount equal to $2,000,000;
(xi)
    loans or advances to employees, officers or directors in the ordinary course
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
79
of business of the Borrower or any of the Restricted Persons, in each case only as permitted by
applicable Law, but in any event not to exceed $1,000,000 in the aggregate at any time;
(xii)
    Investments arising from the endorsement of financial instruments in the ordinary course of
business;
(xiii)
    indemnities and other contingent obligations in respect of liabilities (other than Indebtedness)
of another Person under capital markets underwriting, engagement and commitment agreements,
under purchase and/or sale agreements or under agreements that are customary in the oil and
gas business; and
(xiv)
    other Investments not to exceed $2,000,000 in the aggregate at any time.
(i)
    The Restricted Persons shall not allow any material change to be made in the character of
their business as an independent oil and gas exploration and production company. The Borrower
will not, and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, acquire or make any other expenditure
(whether such expenditure is capital, operating or otherwise) in or related to, any Oil and Gas
Properties not located within the geographical boundaries of the United States.
Section 7.8 
    Limitation on Credit Extensions. Except for Cash Equivalents, no Restricted Person will extend
credit, make advances or make loans other than (i) normal and prudent extensions of credit to
customers buying goods and services in the ordinary course of business, which extensions shall
not be for longer periods than those extended by similar businesses operated in a normal and
prudent manner, and (ii) loans to, and Investments in, Restricted Persons.
Section 7.9 
    Transactions with Affiliates. No Restricted Person will engage in any material transaction with
any of its Affiliates other than on fair and reasonable terms substantially as favorable to the
applicable Restricted Person as would be obtainable by such Restricted Person at the time in a
comparable arm’s length transaction with a Person other than an Affiliate, provided that such
restriction shall not apply to transactions among Borrower and its wholly-owned Subsidiaries.
Section 7.10 
    Prohibited Contracts; Multiemployer ERISA Plans. Except as expressly provided for in the
Loan Documents, no Restricted Person will, directly or indirectly, enter into, create, or otherwise
allow to exist any contract or other consensual restriction on the ability of any Restricted Person
to: (i) make Restricted Payments to Borrower, (ii) to redeem equity interests held in it by
Borrower, (iii) to repay loans and other Indebtedness owing by it to Borrower, or (iv) to transfer
any of its assets to Borrower. No Restricted Person will enter into any “take-or-pay” contract or
other contract or arrangement for the purchase of goods or services which obligates it to pay for
such goods or service regardless of whether they are delivered or furnished to it. No Restricted
Person will amend or permit any amendment to any contract or lease which releases, qualifies,
limits, makes contingent or otherwise detrimentally affects the rights and benefits of
Administrative Agent or any Lender under or acquired pursuant to any
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
80
Security Documents. Borrower will not amend or modify any contract for gas gathering or
processing services, other than administrative changes that do not change the material value or
term of such contract. No ERISA Affiliate will incur any obligation to contribute to any
“multiemployer plan” as defined in Section 4001 of ERISA.
Section 7.11 
    Subsidiaries. Borrower shall not create, acquire, or own any Subsidiary unless (i) Borrower
shall have notified Administrative Agent in writing of such fact no later than ten (10) Business
Days prior to the date of creation or acquisition of such Subsidiary, and (ii) within 30 days after
the creation or acquisition of such Subsidiary, such Subsidiary shall have guaranteed the
Obligations pursuant to a guaranty agreement, in form and substance acceptable to
Administrative Agent, and such Subsidiary shall have complied with Section 6.14.
Section 7.12 
    Current Ratio. The ratio of the MLP’s Consolidated current assets to Consolidated current
liabilities shall not be less than 1.0 to 1.0, as of the end of any Fiscal Quarter, commencing with
the Fiscal Quarter ending December 31, 2011. For purposes of this section, (a) all LC Obligations
shall be included as current liabilities, regardless of whether or not contingent or current, (b) any
non-cash gains or losses resulting from the requirements of ASC Topic 815, formerly SFAS 133,
or ASC Topic 410, formerly SFAS 143, shall be excluded, (c) the Unused Borrowing Base shall
be included as a current asset, and (d) the current portion of the Loans shall be excluded from
current liabilities.
Section 7.13 
    Leverage Ratio. At the end of each Fiscal Quarter, commencing with the Fiscal Quarter ending
December 31, 2011, the ratio of the MLP’s Consolidated Funded Indebtedness to the MLP’s
Consolidated EBITDAX will not exceed 4.0 to 1.0.
For the purposes of calculating Consolidated EBITDAX for any period of four consecutive Fiscal
Quarters (each, a “Reference Period”) pursuant to any determination of the financial ratio
contained in this section:
(a)
     all calculations of Consolidated EBITDAX shall be in all respects acceptable to and approved
by the Administrative Agent and, if during such Reference Period, the MLP or any Consolidated
Subsidiary shall have made a Material Disposition (excluding the Hedge Monetization
Transaction) or Material Acquisition, the Consolidated EBITDAX for such Reference Period shall
be calculated after giving pro forma effect thereto as if such Material Disposition or Material
Acquisition, as applicable, occurred on the first day of such Reference Period. “Material
Acquisition” means any acquisition of Oil and Gas Property or series of related acquisitions of Oil
and Gas Properties that involves the payment of consideration by the MLP and the Consolidated
Subsidiaries in excess of (i) $5,000,000 in the aggregate during a Fiscal Quarter or (ii)
$3,000,000 for any single acquisition or series of related acquisitions of Oil and Gas Properties;
and “Material Disposition” means any disposition of Oil and Gas Property or series of related
dispositions of Oil and Gas Properties that yields gross proceeds to the MLP or any of the
Consolidated Subsidiaries in excess of (A) $5,000,000 in the aggregate during a Fiscal Quarter
or (B) $3,000,000 for any single disposition or series of related dispositions of Oil and Gas
Properties; and
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
81
(b)
    notwithstanding Section 1.5 hereof or any GAAP treatment to the contrary, the $13,882,000
gain on the Hedge Monetization Transaction occurring in the first Fiscal Quarter of 2015 shall not
be treated as “recognized” or “realized” earnings in such quarter for purposes of calculating
Consolidated EBITDAX but shall be excluded from earnings in such Fiscal Quarter and such
gain shall be treated as earnings “recognized” or “realized” in the amounts and for the future
Fiscal Quarters specified below; provided however such amounts shall only be treated as
earnings “recognized” or “realized” in such future Fiscal Quarters to the extent such amounts
have not previously been reflected on the Borrower’s cash flow statement and were not
previously included in Borrower’s Consolidated EBITDA:
Fiscal Quarter EndingAmount of Gain Recognized/Realized
$5,005,000
December 31 2015
$3,297,000
March 31, 2016
June 30, 2016
$2,474,000
September 30, 2016 $3,106,000
TOTAL:
$13,882,000
Section 7.14 
    Amendments to Organizational Documents.
(a)
    The Borrower shall not, and shall not permit any other Restricted Person to, amend,
supplement or otherwise modify (or permit to be amended, supplemented or modified) its
Organizational Documents in any manner that would be adverse to the Lenders in any material
respect.
(b)
    The Borrower shall not, and shall not permit any other Restricted Person to, change the last
day of its Fiscal Year from December 31 of each year, or the last days of the first three Fiscal
Quarters in each of its Fiscal Years from March 31, June 30 and September 30 of each year,
respectively.
ARTICLE VIII - Events of Default and Remedies
ARTICLE I - 
    Section 8.1 Events of Default and Remedies
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
82
Section 1.1 
    Events of Default. Each of the following events constitutes an Event of Default under this
Agreement:
(a)
    Any Restricted Person fails to pay any principal component of any Obligation when due and
payable (including any payment in connection with reducing a Borrowing Base Deficiency),
whether at a date for the payment of a fixed installment or as a contingent or other payment
becomes due and payable or as a result of acceleration or otherwise;
(b)
    Any Restricted Person fails to pay any Obligation (other than the Obligations in subsection (a)
above) when due and payable, whether at a date for the payment of a fixed installment or as a
contingent or other payment becomes due and payable or as a result of acceleration or
otherwise, within five (5) Business Days after the same becomes due;
(c)
    Any “default” or “event of default” occurs under any Loan Document which defines either such
term, and the same is not remedied within the applicable period of grace (if any) provided in such
Loan Document;
(d)
    Any Restricted Person fails to duly observe, perform or comply with any covenant, agreement
or provision of Article VII;
(e)
    Any Restricted Person fails (other than as referred to in subsections (a), (b), (c) or (d) above) to
duly observe, perform or comply with any covenant, agreement, condition or provision of any
Loan Document to which it is a party, and such failure remains unremedied for a period of thirty
(30) days after notice of such failure is given by Administrative Agent to Borrower;
(f)
    Any representation or warranty previously, presently or hereafter made in writing by or on
behalf of any Restricted Person in connection with any Loan Document shall prove to have been
false or incorrect in any material respect on any date on or as of which made, or any Loan
Document at any time ceases to be valid, binding and enforceable as warranted in Section 5.5
for any reason other than its release or subordination by Administrative Agent;
(g)
    Any Restricted Person fails to duly observe, perform or comply with any agreement with any
Person or any term or condition of any instrument, if such agreement or instrument is materially
significant to Borrower on a Consolidated basis, and such failure is not remedied within the
applicable period of grace (if any) provided in such agreement or instrument;
(h)
    Any Restricted Person (i) fails to pay any portion, when such portion is due, of any
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
83
of its Indebtedness in excess of $2,000,000, or (ii) breaches or defaults in the performance of any
agreement or instrument by which any such Indebtedness is issued, evidenced, governed, or
secured, and any such failure, breach or default continues beyond any applicable period of grace
provided therefor;
(i)
    Either (i) any “accumulated funding deficiency” (as defined in Section 412(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code) in excess of $1,000,000 exists with respect to any ERISA Plan, whether or not
waived by the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate, or (ii) any Termination Event occurs with
respect to any ERISA Plan and the then current value of such ERISA Plan’s benefit liabilities
exceeds the then current value of such ERISA Plan’s assets available for the payment of such
benefit liabilities by more than $1,000,000 (or in the case of a Termination Event involving the
withdrawal of a substantial employer, the withdrawing employer’s proportionate share of such
excess exceeds such amount);
(j)
    Any Restricted Person:
(i)
    suffers the entry against it of a judgment, decree or order for relief by a Tribunal of competent
jurisdiction in an involuntary proceeding commenced under any Debtor Relief Laws of any
jurisdiction now or hereafter in effect, or has any proceeding under any Debtor Relief Law
commenced against it that remains undismissed for a period of sixty days; or
(ii)
    commences a voluntary case under any applicable Debtor Relief Laws now or hereafter in
effect; or applies for or consents to the entry of an order for relief in an involuntary case under any
such Debtor Relief Law; or makes a general assignment for the benefit of creditors; or is
generally not paying (or admits in writing its inability to pay) its debts as such debts become due;
or takes corporate or other action authorizing any of the foregoing; or
(iii)
    suffers the appointment of or taking possession by a receiver, liquidator, assignee, custodian,
trustee, sequestrator or similar official of all or a substantial part of its assets or of any part of the
Collateral in a proceeding brought against or initiated by it, and such appointment or taking
possession is neither made ineffective nor discharged within thirty days after the making thereof,
or such appointment or taking possession is at any time consented to, requested by, or
acquiesced to by it; or
(iv)
    suffers the entry against it of a final judgment for the payment of money in excess of $2,000,000
(which is not covered by insurance reasonably satisfactory to Administrative Agent), unless the
same is discharged within sixty days after the date
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
84
of entry thereof or an appeal or appropriate proceeding for review thereof is taken within such
period and a stay of execution pending such appeal is obtained;
(k)
    Any Change of Control occurs; and
(l)
    Any Material Adverse Change occurs.
Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default described in subsection (j)(i), (j)(ii) or (j)(iii) of this
section with respect to any Restricted Person, all of the Obligations shall thereupon be
immediately due and payable, without demand, presentment, notice of demand or of dishonor
and nonpayment, protest, notice of protest, notice of intention to accelerate, declaration or notice
of acceleration, or any other notice or declaration of any kind, all of which are hereby expressly
waived by Borrower and each Restricted Person who at any time ratifies or approves this
Agreement. Upon any such acceleration, any obligation of any Lender to make any further Loans
and any obligation of LC Issuer to issue Letters of Credit hereunder shall be permanently
terminated. During the continuance of any other Event of Default, Administrative Agent at any
time and from time to time may (and upon written instructions from Required Lenders,
Administrative Agent shall), without notice to Borrower or any other Restricted Person, do either
or both of the following: (1) terminate any obligation of Lenders to make Loans hereunder, and
any obligation of LC Issuer to issue Letters of Credit hereunder, and (2) declare any or all of the
Obligations (other than Lender Hedging Obligations) immediately due and payable, and all such
Obligations shall thereupon be immediately due and payable, without demand, presentment,
notice of demand or of dishonor and nonpayment, protest, notice of protest, notice of intention to
accelerate, declaration or notice of acceleration, or any other notice or declaration of any kind, all
of which are hereby expressly waived by Borrower and each Restricted Person who at any time
ratifies or approves this Agreement.
Section 1.2 
    Remedies. If any Default shall occur and be continuing, each Lender may protect and enforce
its rights under the Loan Documents by any appropriate proceedings, including proceedings for
specific performance of any covenant or agreement contained in any Loan Document, and each
Lender may enforce the payment of any Obligations due it or enforce any other legal or equitable
right which it may have. All rights, remedies and powers conferred upon Administrative Agent
and/or Lenders under the Loan Documents shall be deemed cumulative and not exclusive of any
other rights, remedies or powers available under the Loan Documents or at Law or in equity.
Section 1.3 
    Application of Proceeds after Acceleration. After the exercise of remedies provided for in
Section 8.2 (or after the Loans have automatically become immediately due and payable and the
LC Obligations have automatically been required to be Cash Collateralized as set forth in
Section 2.16), any amounts received on account of the Obligations shall be applied by
Administrative Agent in the following order:
(e)
    first, to payment of that portion of the Obligations constituting fees, indemnities, expenses and
other amounts (including fees, charges and disbursements of counsel to Administrative Agent
and Collateral Agent (including fees and time charges for attorneys who may be employees
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
85
of Administrative Agent) and amounts payable under Article III) payable to Administrative Agent
in its capacity as such;
(f)
    second, to payment of that portion of the Obligations constituting fees, indemnities and other
amounts (other than principal, interest and Letter of Credit fees) payable to Lenders, LC Issuer
and Lender Counterparties (including fees, charges and disbursements of counsel to the
respective Lenders and LC Issuer and amounts payable under Article III), ratably among them in
proportion to the respective amounts described in this clause second payable to them;
(g)
    third, to payment of that portion of the Obligations constituting accrued and unpaid Letter of
Credit fees and interest on the Loans, Matured LC Obligations and Lender Hedging Obligations,
ratably among Lenders, LC Issuer and the Lender Counterparties, in proportion to the respective
amounts described in this clause third payable to them;
(h)
    fourth, to payment of that portion of the Obligations constituting unpaid principal of the Loans
and Matured LC Obligations, obligations to Cash Collateralize LC Obligations pursuant to
Section 2.16 and settlements under Hedging Contracts, ratably among Lenders, LC Issuer and
the Lender Counterparties in proportion to the respective amounts described in this clause fourth
held by them; and
(i)
    fifth, the balance, if any, after all of the Obligations have been indefeasibly paid in full, to
Borrower or as otherwise required by Law.
Subject to Section 2.16, amounts used to Cash Collateralize the aggregate undrawn amount of
Letters of Credit pursuant to clause fourth above shall be applied to satisfy drawings under such
Letters of Credit as they occur. If any amount remains on deposit as Cash Collateral after all
Letters of Credit have either been fully drawn or expired, such remaining amount shall be applied
to the other Obligations, if any, in the order set forth above.
Administrative Agent shall have no responsibility to determine the existence or amount of Lender
Hedging Obligations and may reserve from the application of amounts under this Section
amounts distributable in respect of Lender Hedging Obligations until it has received evidence
satisfactory to it of the existence and amount of such Lender Hedging Obligations. Any Lender or
Affiliate of a Lender owed obligations under Hedging Contracts will, at any time and from time to
time upon Administrative Agent’s request, provide evidence satisfactory to Administrative Agent
of the existence and amount of such Lender Hedging Obligations.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
86
ARTICLE II - 
    Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent
Section 2.1 
    Appointment and Authority. Each Lender and LC Issuer hereby irrevocably appoints
Administrative Agent to act on its behalf as Administrative Agent hereunder and under the other
Loan Documents and authorizes Administrative Agent to take such actions on its behalf and to
exercise such powers as are delegated to Administrative Agent by the terms hereof or thereof,
together with such actions and powers as are reasonably incidental thereto. Administrative Agent
hereby appoints Collateral Agent to act on its behalf as Collateral Agent under the Security
Documents and each Lender and LC Issuer consents to and affirms such appointment and
authorizes Collateral Agent to take such actions on its behalf and to exercise such powers as are
delegated to Collateral Agent by the terms hereof or thereof, together with such actions and
powers as are reasonably incidental thereto. The provisions of this Article are solely for the
benefit of Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent, Lenders and LC Issuer, and neither Borrower
nor any other Restricted Person shall have rights as a third party beneficiary of any of such
provisions.
Administrative Agent agrees to deliver, at Borrower’s expense, to each Lender a copy of each
material Security Document. Administrative Agent agrees that it will from time to time deliver to
each Lender all information regarding the Obligations that is in the possession of Administrative
Agent and typically provided by an administrative agent to the lenders in a syndicated credit
facility.
Collateral Agent agrees if after exercise of rights under Security Documents it obtains payment of
all or a portion of the aggregate Obligations owed to the Lenders, LC Issuer or a Lender
Counterparty, it shall promptly turn over to Administrative Agent any monies or other property
received by it as Collateral Agent.
Section 2.2 
    Exculpation, Administrative Agent’s and Collateral Agent’s Reliance, Etc. Administrative Agent
shall not have any duties or obligations except those expressly set forth herein and in the other
Loan Documents. Collateral Agent shall not have any duties or obligations except those
expressly set forth herein and in the Security Documents. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent:
(j)
    shall not be subject to any fiduciary or other implied duties, regardless of whether a Default has
occurred and is continuing;
(k)
    shall not have any duty to take any discretionary action or exercise any discretionary powers,
except discretionary rights and powers expressly contemplated hereby or by the other Loan
Documents that Administrative Agent or Collateral Agent is required to exercise as directed in
writing by the Required Lenders (or such other number or percentage of Lenders as shall be
expressly provided for herein or in the other Loan Documents), provided that neither
Administrative Agent nor Collateral Agent shall not be required to take any action that, in its
opinion or the opinion of its counsel, may expose Administrative Agent or Collateral Agent to
liability or that is contrary to any Loan Document or applicable Law; and
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
87
(l)
    shall not, except as expressly set forth herein and in the other Loan Documents, have any duty
to disclose, and shall not be liable for the failure to disclose, any information relating to Borrower
or any of its Affiliates that is communicated to or obtained by the Person serving as
Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent or any of their Affiliates in any capacity.
Neither Administrative Agent nor Collateral Agent shall be liable for any action taken or not taken
by it (i) with the consent or at the request of Required Lenders (or such other number or
percentage of Lenders as shall be necessary, or as Administrative Agent or Collateral Agent
shall believe in good faith shall be necessary, under the circumstances as provided in Sections
10.1 and 8.2) or (ii) in the absence of its own gross negligence or willful misconduct.
Administrative Agent shall be deemed not to have knowledge of any Default unless and until
notice describing such Default is given to Administrative Agent by Borrower, a Lender or LC
Issuer.
Neither Administrative Agent nor Collateral Agent shall be responsible for or have any duty to
ascertain or inquire into (i) any statement, warranty or representation made in or in connection
with this Agreement or any other Loan Document, (ii) the contents of any certificate, report or
other document delivered hereunder or thereunder or in connection herewith or therewith, (iii) the
performance or observance of any of the covenants, agreements or other terms or conditions set
forth herein or therein or the occurrence of any Default, (iv) the validity, enforceability,
effectiveness or genuineness of this Agreement, any other Loan Document or any other
agreement, instrument or document or (v) the satisfaction of any condition set forth in Article IV or
elsewhere herein, other than, in the case of Administrative Agent, to confirm receipt of items
expressly required to be delivered to Administrative Agent.
Section 2.3 
    Reliance by Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent. Administrative Agent and Collateral
Agent shall be entitled to rely upon, and shall not incur any liability for relying upon, any notice,
request, certificate, consent, statement, instrument, document or other writing (including any
electronic message, Internet or intranet website posting or other distribution) believed by it to be
genuine and to have been signed, sent or otherwise authenticated by the proper Person.
Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent also may rely upon any statement made to it orally or
by telephone and believed by it to have been made by the proper Person, and shall not incur any
liability for relying thereon. In determining compliance with any condition hereunder to the
making of a Loan, or the issuance of a Letter of Credit, that by its terms must be fulfilled to the
satisfaction of a Lender or LC Issuer, Administrative Agent may presume that such condition is
satisfactory to such Lender or LC Issuer unless Administrative Agent shall have received notice
to the contrary from such Lender or LC Issuer prior to the making of such Loan or the issuance of
such Letter of Credit. Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent may consult with legal counsel
(who may be counsel for Borrower), independent accountants and other experts selected by it,
and shall not be liable for any action taken or not taken by it in accordance with the advice of any
such counsel, accountants or experts.
Section 2.4 
    Non-Reliance on Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent and Other Lenders. Each Lender
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
88
and LC Issuer acknowledges that it has, independently and without reliance upon Administrative
Agent, Collateral Agent or any other Lender or any of their Related Parties and based on such
documents and information as it has deemed appropriate, made its own credit analysis and
decision to enter into this Agreement. Each Lender and LC Issuer also acknowledges that it will,
independently and without reliance upon Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent or any other
Lender or any of their Related Parties and based on such documents and information as it shall
from time to time deem appropriate, continue to make its own decisions in taking or not taking
action under or based upon this Agreement, any other Loan Document or any related agreement
or any document furnished hereunder or thereunder. In this regard, each Lender acknowledges
that Thompson & Knight LLP is acting in this transaction as special counsel to the Administrative
Agent only, and is not counsel for any of the other Lenders.
Section 2.5 
    Rights as a Lender. Each Person serving as Administrative Agent hereunder shall have the
same rights and powers in its capacity as a Lender as any other Lender and may exercise the
same as though it were not Administrative Agent and the term “Lender” or “Lenders” shall, unless
otherwise expressly indicated or unless the context otherwise requires, include the Person
serving as Administrative Agent hereunder in its individual capacity. Such Person and its
Affiliates may accept deposits from, lend money to, act as the financial advisor or in any other
advisory capacity for and generally engage in any kind of business with the General Partner,
MLP, Borrower or any Subsidiary or other Affiliate thereof as if such Person were not
Administrative Agent hereunder and without any duty to account therefor to Lenders.
Section 2.6 
    Sharing of Set-Offs and Other Payments. Each Lender Party agrees that if it shall, whether
through the exercise of rights under Security Documents or rights of banker’s lien, set off, or
counterclaim against Borrower or otherwise, obtain payment of a portion of the aggregate
Obligations owed to it , taking into account all distributions made by Administrative Agent under
Section 3.1, and such payment causes such Lender Party to have received more than it would
have received had such payment been received by Administrative Agent and distributed
pursuant to Section 3.1, then (a) it shall be deemed to have simultaneously purchased and shall
be obligated to purchase interests in the Obligations (excluding Lender Hedging Obligations) as
necessary to cause all Lender Parties to share all payments as provided for in Section 3.1, and
(b) such other adjustments shall be made from time to time as shall be equitable to ensure that
Administrative Agent and all Lender Parties share all payments of Obligations (excluding Lender
Hedging Obligations) as provided in Section 3.1; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall in any way affect the right of any Lender Party to obtain payment (whether by
exercise of rights of banker’s lien, set-off or counterclaim or otherwise) of indebtedness other than
the Obligations. Borrower expressly consents to the foregoing arrangements and agrees that any
holder of any such interest or other participation in the Obligations (excluding Lender Hedging
Obligations), whether or not acquired pursuant to the foregoing arrangements, may
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
89
to the fullest extent permitted by Law exercise any and all rights of banker’s lien, set-off, or
counterclaim as fully as if such holder were a holder of the Obligations (excluding Lender
Hedging Obligations) in the amount of such interest or other participation. If all or any part of any
funds transferred pursuant to this section is thereafter recovered from the seller under this section
which received the same, the purchase provided for in this section shall be deemed to have been
rescinded to the extent of such recovery, together with interest, if any, if interest is required
pursuant to Tribunal order to be paid on account of the possession of such funds prior to such
recovery.
Section 2.7 
    Investments. Whenever Administrative Agent in good faith determines that it is uncertain about
how to distribute to Lender Parties any funds which it has received, or whenever Administrative
Agent in good faith determines that there is any dispute among Lender Parties about how such
funds should be distributed, Administrative Agent may choose to defer distribution of the funds
which are the subject of such uncertainty or dispute. If Administrative Agent in good faith believes
that the uncertainty or dispute will not be promptly resolved, or if Administrative Agent is
otherwise required to invest funds pending distribution to Lender Parties, Administrative Agent
shall invest such funds pending distribution; all interest on any such Investment shall be
distributed upon the distribution of such Investment and in the same proportion and to the same
Persons as such Investment. All moneys received by Administrative Agent for distribution to
Lender Parties (other than to the Person who is Administrative Agent in its separate capacity as a
Lender Party) shall be held by Administrative Agent pending such distribution solely as
Administrative Agent for such Lender Parties, and Administrative Agent shall have no equitable
title to any portion thereof.
Section 2.8 
    Resignation of Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent.
(g)
    Administrative Agent may at any time give notice of its resignation to Lenders, LC Issuer and
Borrower. Upon receipt of any such notice of resignation, Required Lenders shall have the right,
in consultation with Borrower, to appoint a successor, which shall be a bank with an office in the
United States, or an Affiliate of any such bank with an office in the United States. If no such
successor shall have been so appointed by Required Lenders and shall have accepted such
appointment within 30 days after the retiring Administrative Agent gives notice of its resignation,
then the retiring Administrative Agent may on behalf of Lenders and LC Issuer, appoint a
successor Administrative Agent meeting the qualifications set forth above provided that if
Administrative Agent shall notify Borrower and Lenders that no qualifying Person has accepted
such appointment, then such resignation shall nonetheless become effective in accordance with
such notice and (a) the retiring Administrative Agent shall be discharged from its duties and
obligations hereunder and under the other Loan Documents (except that in the case of any
Collateral held by Administrative Agent on behalf of Lenders or LC Issuer under any of the Loan
Documents, the retiring
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
90
Administrative Agent shall continue to hold such Collateral until such time as a successor
Administrative Agent is appointed) and (b) all payments, communications and determinations
provided to be made by, to or through Administrative Agent shall instead be made by or to each
Lender and LC Issuer directly, until such time as Required Lenders appoint a successor
Administrative Agent as provided for above in this Section. Upon the acceptance of a
successor’s appointment as Administrative Agent hereunder, such successor shall succeed to
and become vested with all of the rights, powers, privileges and duties of the retiring (or retired)
Administrative Agent, and the retiring Administrative Agent shall be discharged from all of its
duties and obligations hereunder or under the other Loan Documents (if not already discharged
therefrom as provided above in this Section). The fees payable by Borrower to a successor
Administrative Agent shall be the same as those payable to its predecessor unless otherwise
agreed between Borrower and such successor. After the retiring Administrative Agent’s
resignation hereunder and under the other Loan Documents, the provisions of this Article and
Section 10.4 shall continue in effect for the benefit of such retiring Administrative Agent, its sub-
agents and their respective Related Parties in respect of any actions taken or omitted to be taken
by any of them while the retiring Administrative Agent was acting as Administrative Agent.
(h)
    The Collateral Agent may resign as Collateral Agent upon 30 days’ notice to the Administrative
Agent with a copy of such notice to the Lenders, LC Issuer and Borrower. If the Collateral Agent
resigns under this Agreement, the Administrative Agent may but need not designate a successor
Collateral Agent (and if no Collateral Agent is designated, Administrative Agent shall assume the
role of Collateral Agent). Upon the acceptance of a successor’s appointment as Collateral Agent
hereunder, such successor shall succeed to and become vested with all of the rights, powers,
privileges and duties of the retiring (or retired) Collateral Agent, and the retiring Collateral Agent
shall be discharged from all of its duties and obligations hereunder or under the Security
Documents (if not already discharged therefrom as provided above in this Section). After the
retiring Collateral Agent’s resignation hereunder and under the Security Documents, the
provisions of this Article and Section 10.4 shall continue in effect for the benefit of such retiring
Collateral Agent in respect of any actions taken or omitted to be taken by it while the it was acting
as Collateral Agent.
Section 2.9 
    Delegation of Duties. Administrative Agent may perform any and all of its duties and exercise
its rights and powers hereunder or under any other Loan Document by or through any one or
more sub-agents (including Collateral Agent) appointed by Administrative Agent. Administrative
Agent and any such sub-agent may perform any and all of its duties and exercise its rights and
powers by or through their respective Related Parties. The exculpatory provisions of this Article
shall apply to any such sub-agent and to the Related Parties of Administrative Agent and any
such sub-agent, and shall apply to their respective activities in connection with the syndication of
the credit facilities provided for herein as well as activities as Administrative Agent.
Section 2.10 
    No Other Duties. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, none of the Lender
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
91
Parties having the title of syndication agent, document agent, lead arranger, bookrunner or any
other type of agency listed on the cover page hereof shall have any powers, duties or
responsibilities under this Agreement or any of the other Loan Documents, except in its capacity,
as applicable, as Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent, a Lender or LC Issuer hereunder.
Section 2.11 
    Administrative Agent May File Proofs of Claim. In case of the pendency of any receivership,
insolvency, liquidation, bankruptcy, reorganization, arrangement, adjustment, composition or
other judicial proceeding relative to any Restricted Person, Administrative Agent (irrespective of
whether the principal of any Loan or LC Obligation shall then be due and payable as herein
expressed or by declaration or otherwise and irrespective of whether Administrative Agent shall
have made any demand on Borrower) shall be entitled and empowered, by intervention in such
proceeding or otherwise
(a)    to file and prove a claim for the whole amount of the principal and interest owing and unpaid
in respect of the Loans, LC Obligations and all other Obligations (excluding Lender Hedging
Obligations) that are owing and unpaid and to file such other documents as may be necessary or
advisable in order to have the claims of Lenders, LC Issuer and Administrative Agent (including
any claim for the reasonable compensation, expenses, disbursements and advances of Lenders,
LC Issuer and Administrative Agent and their respective agents and counsel and all other
amounts due Lenders, LC Issuer and Administrative Agent under Section 2.5 and 10.04) allowed
in such judicial proceeding; and
(b)    to collect and receive any monies or other property payable or deliverable on any such
claims and to distribute the same;
and any custodian, receiver, assignee, trustee, liquidator, sequestrator or other similar official in
any such judicial proceeding is hereby authorized by each Lender and LC Issuer to make such
payments to Administrative Agent and, in the event that Administrative Agent shall consent to the
making of such payments directly to Lenders and LC Issuer, to pay to Administrative Agent any
amount due for the reasonable compensation, expenses, disbursements and advances of
Administrative Agent and its agents (including Collateral Agent) and counsel, and any other
amounts due Administrative Agent under Sections 2.5 and 10.4. Nothing contained herein shall
be deemed to authorize Administrative Agent to authorize or consent to or accept or adopt on
behalf of any Lender or LC Issuer any plan of reorganization, arrangement, adjustment or
composition affecting the Obligations or the rights of any Lender or to authorize Administrative
Agent to vote in respect of the claim of any Lender in any such proceeding.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
92
Section 2.12 
    Guaranty Matters. Each Lender and LC Issuer hereby irrevocably authorizes Administrative
Agent, at its option and in its discretion, to release any Guarantor from its obligations under the
Guaranty (i) if such Person ceases to be a Subsidiary as a result of a transaction permitted
hereunder and (ii) upon termination of each Lender’s Commitment and payment in full of all
Obligations (other than contingent indemnification obligations) and the expiration or termination
of all Letters of Credit. Upon request by Administrative Agent at any time, each Lender and LC
Issuer will confirm in writing Administrative Agent’s authority to release any Guarantor from its
obligations under the Subsidiary Guaranty pursuant to this Section 9.12.
Section 2.13 
    Collateral Matters.
(a)    Each Lender and LC Issuer hereby irrevocably authorizes and directs Administrative Agent
and/or Collateral Agent to enter into the Security Documents for the benefit of such Lender and
LC Issuer. Each Lender and LC Issuer hereby agrees, and each holder of any Note by the
acceptance thereof will be deemed to agree, that, except as otherwise set forth in Section 10.1,
any action taken by the Required Lenders, in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement
or the Security Documents, and the exercise by the Required Lenders of the powers set forth
herein or therein, together with such other powers as are reasonably incidental thereto, shall be
authorized and binding upon all of Lenders and LC Issuer. Administrative Agent and Collateral
Agent are hereby authorized (but not obligated) on behalf of all Lenders and LC Issuer, without
the necessity of any notice to or further consent from any Lender or LC Issuer from time to time
prior to, an Event of Default, to take any action with respect to any Collateral or Security
Documents which may be necessary to perfect and maintain perfected the Liens upon the
Collateral granted pursuant to the Security Documents.
(b)    Each Lender and LC Issuer hereby irrevocably authorize Administrative Agent and/or
Collateral Agent, at its option and in its discretion,
(i)    to release any Lien on any property granted to or held by Administrative Agent (or Collateral
Agent) under any Loan Document (A) upon termination of each Lender’s Commitment and
payment in full of all Obligations (other than contingent indemnification obligations) and the
expiration or termination of all Letters of Credit, (B) that is sold or to be sold as part of or in
connection with any sale permitted hereunder or under any other Loan Document, (C) subject to
Section 10.1, if approved, authorized or ratified in writing by the Required Lenders, or (D) in
connection with any foreclosure sale or other disposition of Collateral after the occurrence of an
Event of Default; and
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
93
(ii)    to subordinate any Lien on any property granted to or held by Administrative Agent or
Collateral Agent under any Loan Document to the holder of any Lien on such property that is
permitted by this Agreement or any other Loan Document.
Upon request by Administrative Agent or Collateral Agent at any time, each Lender and LC
Issuer will confirm in writing Administrative Agent’s and Collateral Agent’s authority to release or
subordinate its interest in particular types or items of Collateral pursuant to this Section 9.13.
(c)    Subject to subsection (b) above, Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent shall, and are
hereby irrevocably authorized by each Lender and LC Issuer to, execute such documents as may
be necessary to evidence the release or subordination of the Liens granted to Administrative
Agent and/or Collateral Agent for the benefit of Administrative Agent, Lenders and LC Issuer
herein or pursuant hereto upon the applicable Collateral; provided that (i) neither Administrative
Agent nor Collateral Agent shall be required to execute any such document on terms which, in
their opinion, would expose them to or create any liability or entail any consequence other than
the release or subordination of such Liens without recourse or warranty and (ii) such release or
subordination shall not in any manner discharge, affect or impair the Obligations or any Liens
upon (or obligations of Borrower or any other Restricted Person in respect of) all interests
retained by Borrower or any other Restricted Person, including the proceeds of the sale, all of
which shall continue to constitute part of the Collateral. In the event of any sale or transfer of
Collateral, or any foreclosure with respect to any of the Collateral, Administrative Agent and
Collateral Agent shall be authorized to deduct all expenses reasonably incurred by
Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent from the proceeds of any such sale, transfer or
foreclosure.
(d)    Neither Administrative Agent nor Collateral Agent shall have any obligation whatsoever to
any Lender, LC Issuer or any other Person to assure that the Collateral exists or is owned by
Borrower or any other Restricted Person or is cared for, protected or insured or that the Liens
granted to Administrative Agent or Collateral Agent herein or in any of the Security Documents or
pursuant hereto or thereto have been properly or sufficiently or lawfully created, perfected,
protected or enforced or are entitled to any particular priority, or to exercise or to continue
exercising at all or in any manner or under any duty of care, disclosure or fidelity any of the rights,
authorities and powers granted or available to Administrative Agent or Collateral Agent in this
Section 9.13 or in any of the Security Documents, it being understood and agreed that in respect
of the Collateral, or any act, omission or event related thereto, Administrative Agent may act in
any manner it may deem appropriate, in its sole discretion, given Administrative Agent’s own
interest in the Collateral as one of Lenders and that Administrative Agent shall have no duty or
liability whatsoever to Lenders or LC Issuer.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
94
(e)    Each Lender and LC Issuer hereby appoints each other Lender as agent for the purpose of
perfecting Lenders’ and LC Issuer’s security interest in assets which, in accordance with Article 9
of the UCC can be perfected only by possession. Should any Lender or LC Issuer (other than
Administrative Agent) obtain possession of any such Collateral, such Lender or LC Issuer shall
notify Administrative Agent thereof, and, promptly upon Administrative Agent’s request therefor
shall deliver such Collateral to Administrative Agent or in accordance with Administrative Agent’s
instructions.
Section 2.14 
    Lender Hedging Obligations. To the extent any Affiliate of a Lender is a party to a Hedging
Contract with a Borrower or any Guarantor and thereby becomes a beneficiary of the Liens
pursuant to the Security Documents, such Affiliate of a Lender shall be deemed to appoint the
Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent its nominee and agent to act for and on behalf of such
Affiliate in connection with the Security Documents and to be bound by the terms of this Article
and Section 10.4.
ARTICLE III - 
    Miscellaneous
Section 3.1 
    Waivers and Amendments; Acknowledgements.
(m)
    Waivers and Amendments. No failure or delay (whether by course of conduct or otherwise) by
any Lender Party in exercising any right, power or remedy which such Lender Party may have
under any of the Loan Documents shall operate as a waiver thereof or of any other right, power or
remedy, nor shall any single or partial exercise by any Lender Party of any such right, power or
remedy preclude any other or further exercise thereof or of any other right, power or remedy. No
waiver of any provision of any Loan Document and no consent to any departure therefrom shall
ever be effective unless it is in writing and signed as provided below in this section, and then
such waiver or consent shall be effective only in the specific instances and for the purposes for
which given and to the extent specified in such writing. No notice to or demand on any Restricted
Person shall in any case of itself entitle any Restricted Person to any other or further notice or
demand in similar or other circumstances. This Agreement and the other Loan Documents set
forth the entire understanding between the parties hereto with respect to the transactions
contemplated herein and therein and supersede all prior discussions and understandings with
respect to the subject matter hereof and thereof, and no waiver, consent, release, modification or
amendment of or supplement to this Agreement or the other Loan Documents shall be valid or
effective against any party hereto unless the same is in writing and signed by (i) if such party is
Borrower, by Borrower, (ii) if such party is Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent or LC Issuer, by
such party and (iii) if
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
95
such party is a Lender, by such Lender or by Administrative Agent (or Collateral Agent) on behalf
of Lenders with the written consent of Required Lenders (which consent has already been given
as to the termination of the Loan Documents as provided in Section 10.9). Notwithstanding the
foregoing or anything to the contrary herein, Administrative Agent shall not, without the prior
consent of each individual Lender, execute and deliver on behalf of such Lender any waiver or
amendment which would: (1) waive any of the conditions specified in Article IV, (2) increase the
maximum amount which such Lender is committed hereunder to lend, (3) reduce or forgive any
fees payable to such Lender hereunder, or the principal of, or interest on, such Lender’s Loans or
Notes, (4) postpone or extend any date fixed for any payment of any such fees, regularly
scheduled payments of principal or interest or the date for the elimination in whole or part of any
Borrowing Base Deficiency, (5) increase the Borrowing Base (provided only the consent of
Required Lenders is required for reaffirmations or decreases in the Borrowing Base), (6) amend
the definition herein of “Required Lenders” or otherwise change the aggregate amount of
Percentage Shares which is required for Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent, Lenders or any
of them to take any particular action under the Loan Documents, (7) release Borrower from its
obligation to pay Obligations to such Lender, (8) release any Guarantor from its guaranty of the
Obligations, except for such releases permitted by the Loan Documents, (9) change Section 3.1
in a manner that would alter the pro rata sharing of payments required thereby or change Section
7.6(iv) in any manner, (10) change the Percentage Share of any Lender (other than as a result of
the incurrence of any reallocation pursuant to Section 2.18(a)(iv) as a result of a Lender
becoming or ceasing to be a Defaulting Lender), (11) release any material portion of the
Collateral, except for such releases relating to dispositions of property permitted by the Loan
Documents, or (12) amend this Section 10.1(a). Notwithstanding the foregoing (i) no Defaulting
Lender’s Commitment shall be included for purposes of ascertaining Required Lender or
unanimous Lender approvals and (ii) no Defaulting Lender shall have the right to vote to approve
or disapprove or consent or withhold consent to any amendment, waiver or consent of any
provision of any Loan Document, release any Collateral or to direct the actions of Administrative
Agent or Collateral Agent.
(n)
    Acknowledgements and Admissions. Borrower hereby represents, warrants, acknowledges
and admits that (i) it has been advised by counsel in the negotiation, execution and delivery of
the Loan Documents to which it is a party, (ii) it has made an independent decision to enter into
this Agreement and the other Loan Documents to which it is a party, without reliance on any
representation, warranty, covenant or undertaking by Administrative Agent or any Lender Party,
whether written, oral or implicit, other than as expressly set out in this Agreement or in another
Loan Document delivered on or after the Closing Date, (iii) there are no representations,
warranties, covenants, undertakings or agreements by any Lender Party as to the Loan
Documents except as expressly set out in this Agreement or in another Loan Document delivered
on or after the Closing Date, (iv) no Lender Party has any fiduciary obligation toward Borrower
with respect to any Loan Document or the transactions contemplated thereby, (v) the relationship
pursuant to the Loan Documents between Borrower and the other Restricted Persons, on one
hand, and each Lender Party, on the other hand, is and shall be solely that of debtor and creditor,
respectively, (vi) no partnership or joint venture exists with respect to the Loan Documents
between any Restricted Person and any Lender Party, (vii) Administrative Agent is not
Borrower’s Administrative Agent, but Administrative Agent for Lender Parties provided that,
solely for purposes of Section 10.5(c)
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
96
Administrative Agent shall act as agent of Borrower in maintaining the Register as set forth
therein, (viii) should an Event of Default or Default occur or exist, each Lender Party will
determine in its sole discretion and for its own reasons what remedies and actions it will or will
not exercise or take at that time, (ix) without limiting any of the foregoing, Borrower is not relying
upon any representation or covenant by any Lender Party, or any representative thereof, and no
such representation or covenant has been made, that any Lender Party will, at the time of an
Event of Default or Default, or at any other time, waive, negotiate, discuss, or take or refrain from
taking any action permitted under the Loan Documents with respect to any such Event of Default
or Default or any other provision of the Loan Documents, and (x) all Lender Parties have relied
upon the truthfulness of the acknowledgements in this section in deciding to execute and deliver
this Agreement and to become obligated hereunder.
(o)
    Representation by Lenders. Each Lender hereby represents that it will acquire its Note for its
own account in the ordinary course of its commercial lending business; however, the disposition
of such Lender’s property shall at all times be and remain within its control and, in particular and
without limitation, such Lender may sell or otherwise transfer its Note, any participation interest or
other interest in its Note, or any of its other rights and obligations under the Loan Documents.
(p)
    Joint Acknowledgment. THIS WRITTEN AGREEMENT AND THE OTHER LOAN
DOCUMENTS REPRESENT THE FINAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES AND MAY
NOT BE CONTRADICTED BY EVIDENCE OF PRIOR, CONTEMPORANEOUS, OR
SUBSEQUENT ORAL AGREEMENTS OF THE PARTIES.
THERE ARE NO UNWRITTEN ORAL AGREEMENTS BETWEEN THE PARTIES.
Section 3.2 
    Survival of Agreements; Cumulative Nature. All of Restricted Persons’ various representations,
warranties, covenants and agreements in the Loan Documents shall survive the execution and
delivery of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents and the performance hereof and
thereof, including the making or granting of the Loans and the delivery of the Notes and the other
Loan Documents, and shall further survive until all of the Obligations are paid in full to each
Lender Party and all of Lender Parties’ obligations to Borrower are terminated. Notwithstanding
the foregoing or anything herein to the contrary, any waivers made by any Restricted Person in
any Loan Document, all obligations of Borrower provided for in Section 3.2, 3.4, 3.5(c) or 10.4
and all obligations with any Person may have to indemnify or compensate Lender Party shall
survive any termination of this Agreement or any other Loan Document. In addition, Articles VIII
and IX shall survive until all of the Security Documents have been terminated. All statements and
agreements contained in any certificate or other instrument delivered by any Restricted Person to
any Lender Party under any Loan Document shall be deemed representations and warranties by
Borrower or agreements and covenants of Borrower under this Agreement. The representations,
warranties, indemnities, and covenants made by Restricted Persons in the Loan Documents, and
the rights, powers, and privileges granted to Lender Parties in the Loan Documents, are
cumulative, and, except for expressly specified waivers and consents, no Loan Document shall
be construed in the context of another to diminish, nullify, or otherwise reduce the benefit to any
Lender Party of any such representation, warranty, indemnity, covenant, right, power or
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
97
privilege. In particular and without limitation, no exception set out in this Agreement to any
representation, warranty, indemnity, or covenant herein contained shall apply to any similar
representation, warranty, indemnity, or covenant contained in any other Loan Document, and
each such similar representation, warranty, indemnity, or covenant shall be subject only to those
exceptions which are expressly made applicable to it by the terms of the various Loan
Documents.
Section 3.3 
    Notices; Effectiveness; Electronic Communication.
(a)
    Notices Generally. Except in the case of notices and other communications expressly
permitted to be given by telephone (and except as provided in subsection (b) below), all notices
and other communications provided for herein shall be in writing and shall be delivered by hand
or overnight courier service, mailed by certified or registered mail or sent by facsimile as follows
and all notices and other communications expressly permitted hereunder to be given by
telephone shall be made to the applicable telephone number as follows:
(i)
    if to Borrower or any other Restricted Person, Administrative Agent or LC Issuer; to the
address, facsimile number, electronic mail address or telephone number specified for such
person on the signature pages hereto;
(ii)
    if to any other Lender Party, to it at its address, facsimile number, electronic mail address or
telephone number as specified on the Lenders Schedule.
Notices sent by hand or overnight courier service, or mailed by certified or registered mail, shall
be deemed to have been given when received; notices sent by facsimile shall be deemed to
have been given when sent (except that, if not given during normal business hours for the
recipient, shall be deemed to have been given at the opening of business on the next Business
Day for the recipient). Notices delivered through electronic communications to the extent
provided in subsection (b) below, shall be effective as provided in said subsection (b).
(b)
    Electronic Communications. Notices and other communications to Lenders and LC Issuer
hereunder may be delivered or furnished by electronic communication (including e-mail and
Internet or intranet websites) pursuant to procedures approved by Administrative Agent, provided
that the foregoing shall not apply to notices to any Lender or LC Issuer pursuant to Article II if
such Lender or LC Issuer, as applicable, has notified Administrative Agent that it is incapable of
receiving notices under such Article by electronic communication. Administrative Agent or
Borrower or any other Restricted Person may, in its discretion, agree to accept notices and other
communications to it hereunder by electronic communications pursuant to procedures approved
by it, provided that approval of such procedures may be limited to particular notices or
communications.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
98
Unless Administrative Agent otherwise prescribes, (i) notices and other communications sent to
an e-mail address shall be deemed received upon the sender’s receipt of an acknowledgement
from the intended recipient (such as by the “return receipt requested” function, as available, return
e-mail or other written acknowledgement), provided that if such notice or other communication is
not sent during the normal business hours of the recipient, such notice or communication shall be
deemed to have been sent at the opening of business on the next Business Day for the recipient,
and (ii) notices or communications posted to an Internet or intranet website shall be deemed
received upon the deemed receipt by the intended recipient at its e-mail address as described in
the foregoing clause (i) of notification that such notice or communication is available and
identifying the website address therefor.
(c)
    Change of Address, Etc. Each of Borrower, any other Restricted Person, Administrative Agent
and LC Issuer may change its address, facsimile or telephone number for notices and other
communications hereunder by notice to the other parties hereto. Each other Lender Party may
change its address, facsimile or telephone number for notices and other communications
hereunder by notice to Borrower, Administrative Agent and LC Issuer.
Section 3.4 
    Expenses; Indemnity; Damage Waiver.
(a)
    Costs and Expenses. Borrower shall pay (i) all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by
Administrative Agent and its Affiliates (including the reasonable fees, charges and
disbursements of counsel for Administrative Agent (including local counsel) and other advisors
and professionals engaged by the Administrative Agent), in connection with the syndication of
the credit facilities provided for herein, the investigation, preparation, negotiation, documentation,
execution, delivery and administration of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents and any
amendments, modifications or waivers of the provisions hereof or thereof (whether or not the
transactions contemplated hereby or thereby shall be consummated), (ii) all reasonable out-of-
pocket expenses incurred by LC Issuer in connection with the issuance, amendment, renewal or
extension of any Letter of Credit or any demand for payment thereunder and (iii) all reasonable
out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent, any Lender or LC
Issuer (including the reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of any counsel for
Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent, any Lender or LC Issuer, in connection with the
enforcement or protection of its rights (A) in connection with this Agreement and the other Loan
Documents, including its rights under this Section, or (B) in connection with the Loans made or
Letters of Credit issued hereunder, including all such out-of-pocket expenses incurred during any
workout, restructuring or negotiations in respect of such Loans or Letters of Credit.
(b)
    Indemnification by Borrower. Borrower shall indemnify Administrative Agent (and any sub-
agent thereof, including Collateral Agent), each Lender and LC Issuer, and each Related Party of
any of the foregoing Persons (each such Person being called an “Indemnitee”) against, and hold
each Indemnitee harmless from, any and all losses, claims, damages, liabilities and related
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
99
expenses (including the reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of any counsel for any
Indemnitee and any settlement costs), incurred by any Indemnitee or asserted against any
Indemnitee by any third party or by Borrower or any other Restricted Person arising out of, in
connection with, or as a result of (i) the execution or delivery of this Agreement, any other Loan
Document or any agreement or instrument contemplated hereby or thereby, the performance by
the parties hereto of their respective obligations hereunder or thereunder or the consummation of
the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby, (ii) any Loan or Letter of Credit or the use or
proposed use of the proceeds therefrom (including any refusal by LC Issuer to honor a demand
for payment under a Letter of Credit if the documents presented in connection with such demand
do not strictly comply with the terms of such Letter of Credit), (iii) any actual or alleged presence
or release of Hazardous Materials on or from any property owned or operated by Borrower or any
of its Subsidiaries, or any environmental liability related in any way to Borrower or any of its
Subsidiaries, (iv) any enforcement or collection actions under any Loan Document or (v) any
actual or prospective claim, litigation, investigation or proceeding relating to any of the foregoing,
whether based on contract, tort or any other theory, whether brought by a third party or by
Borrower or any other Restricted Person, and regardless of whether any Indemnitee is a party
thereto. THE FOREGOING INDEMNIFICATION WILL APPLY WHETHER OR NOT SUCH
LOSSES, CLAIMS, DAMAGES, LIABILITIES AND RELATED EXPENSES ARE IN ANY WAY
OR TO ANY EXTENT OWED, IN WHOLE OR IN PART, UNDER ANY CLAIM OR THEORY OF
STRICT LIABILITY OR CAUSED, IN WHOLE OR IN PART BY ANY NEGLIGENT ACT OR
OMISSION OF ANY KIND BY ANY INDEMNITEE, provided that such indemnity shall not, as to
any Indemnitee, be available to the extent that such losses, claims, damages, liabilities or related
expenses are determined by a court of competent jurisdiction by final and nonappealable
judgment to have resulted from the gross negligence or willful misconduct of such Indemnitee.
(c)
    Reimbursement by Lenders. To the extent that Borrower for any reason fails to indefeasibly
pay any amount required under subsection (a) or (b) of this Section to be paid by it to
Administrative Agent (or any sub-agent thereof), LC Issuer or any Related Party of any of the
foregoing, each Lender severally agrees to pay to Administrative Agent (or any such sub-agent),
LC Issuer or such Related Party, as the case may be, such Lender’s Percentage Share
(determined as of the time that the applicable unreimbursed expense or indemnity payment is
sought) of such unpaid amount, provided that the unreimbursed expense or indemnified loss,
claim, damage, liability or related expense, as the case may be, was incurred by or asserted
against Administrative Agent (or any such sub-agent) or LC Issuer in its capacity as such, or
against any Related Party of any of the foregoing acting for Administrative Agent (or any such
sub-agent) or LC Issuer in connection with such capacity. The obligations of Lenders under this
subsection (c) are subject to the provisions of Section 2.17.
(d)
    Waiver of Consequential Damages, Etc. To the fullest extent permitted by applicable Law, (i)
Borrower shall not assert, and hereby waive, any claim against any Indemnitee, and (ii) each
Indemnitee agrees not to assert, and hereby waives, any claim against Borrower, on any theory
of liability, for special, indirect, consequential or punitive damages (as opposed to direct or actual
damages) arising out of, in connection with, or as a result of, this Agreement, any other Loan
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
100
Document or any agreement or instrument contemplated hereby, the transactions contemplated
hereby or thereby, any Loan or Letter of Credit or the use of the proceeds thereof. No Indemnitee
shall be liable for any damages arising from the use by unintended recipients of any information
or other materials distributed by it through telecommunications, electronic or other information
transmission systems in connection with this Agreement or the other Loan Documents or the
transactions contemplated hereby or thereby.
(e)
    Payments. All amounts due under this Section shall be payable not later than ten (10)
Business Days after demand therefor.
Section 3.5 
    Successors and Assigns; Joint and Several Liability.
(o)
    Successors and Assigns Generally. The provisions of this Agreement shall be binding upon
and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their respective successors and assigns
permitted hereby, except that neither Borrower nor any other Restricted Person may assign or
otherwise transfer any of its rights or obligations under any Loan Document without the prior
written consent of Administrative Agent and each Lender (other than a Defaulting Lender) and no
Lender may assign or otherwise transfer any of its rights or obligations hereunder except (i) to an
Eligible Assignee in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this Section, (ii) by way
of participation in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this Section or (iii) by way of
pledge or assignment of a security interest subject to the restrictions of subsection (f) of this
Section (and any other attempted assignment or transfer by any party hereto shall be null and
void). Nothing in this Agreement, expressed or implied, shall be construed to confer upon any
Person (other than the parties hereto, their respective successors and assigns permitted hereby,
Participants to the extent provided in subsection (d) of this Section and, to the extent expressly
contemplated hereby, the Related Parties of each of Administrative Agent and the Lenders) any
legal or equitable right, remedy or claim under or by reason of this Agreement.
(p)
    Assignments by Lenders. Any Lender may at any time assign to one or more Eligible
Assignees all or a portion of its rights and obligations under this Agreement and the other Loan
Documents (including all or a portion of its Commitment and the Loans at the time owing to it);
provided that
(i)
    except in the case of an assignment of the entire remaining amount of the assigning Lender’s
Commitment and the Loans at the time owing to it or in the case of an assignment to a Lender or
an Affiliate of a Lender or an Approved Fund with respect to a Lender, the aggregate amount of
the Commitment (which for this purpose includes Loans outstanding thereunder) or, if the
applicable Commitment is not then in effect, the principal outstanding balance of the Loans of the
assigning Lender
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
101
subject to each such assignment (determined as of the date the Assignment and Assumption
with respect to such assignment is delivered to Administrative Agent or, if “Trade Date” is
specified in the Assignment and Assumption, as of the Trade Date) shall not be less than
$5,000,000 (which minimum may be acquired by the assignee from two or more assigning
Lenders), unless each of Administrative Agent and, so long as no Default has occurred and is
continuing, Borrower otherwise consents (each such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or
delayed);
(ii)
    each partial assignment shall be made as an assignment of a proportionate part of all the
assigning Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement with respect to the Loan or the
Commitment assigned;
(iii)
    any assignment of a Commitment must be approved by LC Issuer (such consent not to be
unreasonably withheld or delayed) unless the Person that is the proposed assignee is itself a
Lender with a Commitment (whether or not the proposed assignee would otherwise qualify as an
Eligible Assignee); and
(iv)
    the parties to each assignment shall execute and deliver to Administrative Agent an
Assignment and Assumption, together with the Note subject to such assignment and a
processing and recordation fee of $3,500, and the Eligible Assignee, if it shall not be a Lender,
shall deliver to Administrative Agent an Administrative Details Form in form satisfactory to
Administrative Agent.
Subject to acceptance and recording thereof by Administrative Agent pursuant to subsection (c)
of this Section, from and after the effective date specified in each Assignment and Assumption,
the assignee thereunder shall be a party to this Agreement and, to the extent of the interest
assigned by such Assignment and Assumption, have the rights and obligations of a Lender
under this Agreement, and the assigning Lender thereunder shall, to the extent of the interest
assigned by such Assignment and Assumption, be released from its obligations under this
Agreement (and, in the case of an Assignment and Assumption covering all of the assigning
Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement, such Lender shall cease to be a party
hereto) but shall continue to be entitled to the benefits, and subject to the requirements of, of
Sections 3.2, 3.4, 3.5 and 10.4 with respect to facts and circumstances occurring prior to the
effective date of such assignment. Any assignment or transfer by a Lender of rights or obligations
under this Agreement that does not comply with this subsection shall be treated for purposes of
this Agreement as a sale by such Lender of a participation in such rights and obligations in
accordance with subsection (d) of this Section.
(q)
    Register. Administrative Agent, acting solely for this purpose as an agent of the Borrower, shall
maintain a copy of each Assignment and Assumption Agreement and a register for the
recordation of the names and addresses of Lenders and the Percentage Shares of, and principal
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
102
amount of the Loans owing to, each Lender from time to time (in this section called the
“Register”). The entries in the Register shall be conclusive, in the absence of manifest error, and
Borrower and each Lender Party may treat each Person whose name is recorded in the Register
as a Lender hereunder for all purposes notwithstanding notice to the contrary. The Register shall
be available for inspection by Borrower or any Lender Party at any reasonable time and from time
to time upon reasonable prior notice.
(r)
    Participations. Any Lender may at any time, without the consent of, or notice to, Borrower or
Administrative Agent, sell participations to any Person (other than a natural person or Borrower
or any of Borrower’s Affiliates or Subsidiaries) (each, a “Participant”) in all or a portion of such
Lender’s rights and/or obligations under this Agreement (including all or a portion of its
Commitment and/or the Loans owing to it); provided that (i) such Lender’s obligations under this
Agreement shall remain unchanged, (ii) such Lender shall remain solely responsible to the other
parties hereto for the performance of such obligations and (iii) Borrower, Administrative Agent,
Lenders and LC Issuer shall continue to deal solely and directly with such Lender in connection
with such Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement.
Any agreement or instrument pursuant to which a Lender sells such a participation shall provide
that such Lender shall retain the sole right to enforce this Agreement and to approve any
amendment, modification or waiver of any provision of this Agreement; provided that such
agreement or instrument may provide that such Lender will not, without the consent of the
Participant, agree to any amendment, modification or waiver which would: (1) increase the
maximum amount which such Lender is committed hereunder to lend, (2) reduce or forgive any
fees payable to such Lender hereunder, or the principal of, or interest on, such Lender’s Loans or
Notes, (3) postpone or extend any date fixed for any payment of any such fees, regularly
scheduled payments of principal or interest, (4) release Borrower from its obligation to pay
Obligations to such Lender, (5) release any Guarantor from its guaranty of the Obligations, except
for such releases permitted by the Loan Documents, or (6) release any material portion of the
Collateral, except for such releases relating to dispositions of property permitted by the Loan
Documents. Subject to subsection (e) of this Section, Borrower agrees that each Participant shall
be entitled to the benefits of, and subject to the requirements of, Sections 3.2, 3.4 and 3.5 to the
same extent as if it were a Lender and had acquired its interest by assignment pursuant to
subsection (b) of this Section. To the extent permitted by law, each Participant also shall be
entitled to the benefits of Section 6.14 as though it were a Lender, provided such Participant
agrees to be subject to Section 9.6 as though it were a Lender.
(s)
    Limitations upon Participant Rights. A Participant shall not be entitled to receive any greater
payment under Sections 3.2 and 3.5 than the applicable Lender would have been entitled to
receive with respect to the participation sold to such Participant, unless the sale of the
participation to such Participant is made with Borrower’s prior written consent. A Participant that
would be a Foreign Lender if it were a Lender shall not be entitled to the benefits of Section 3.5
unless Borrower is notified of the participation sold to such Participant and such Participant
agrees, for the benefit of Borrower, to comply with Section 3.5(e) as though it were a Lender.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
103
(t)
    Certain Pledges. Any Lender may at any time pledge or assign a security interest in all or any
portion of its rights under this Agreement to secure obligations of such Lender, including any
pledge or assignment to secure obligations to a Federal Reserve Bank; provided that no such
pledge or assignment shall release such Lender from any of its obligations hereunder or
substitute any such pledgee or assignee for such Lender as a party hereto.
(u)
    Joint and Several Liability. All Obligations which are incurred by two or more Restricted
Persons shall be their joint and several obligations and liabilities.
(v)
    Certain Additional Payments. In connection with any assignment of rights and obligations of
any Defaulting Lender hereunder, no such assignment shall be effective unless and until, in
addition to the other conditions thereto set forth herein, the parties to the assignment shall make
such additional payments to Administrative Agent in an aggregate amount sufficient, upon
distribution thereof as appropriate (which may be outright payment, purchases by the assignee of
participations or subparticipations, or other compensating actions, including funding, with the
consent of Borrower and Administrative Agent, the applicable pro rata share of Loans previously
requested but not funded by the Defaulting Lender, to each of which the applicable assignee and
assignor hereby irrevocably consent), to (x) pay and satisfy in full all payment liabilities then
owed by such Defaulting Lender to Administrative Agent or any Lender hereunder (and interest
accrued thereon) and (y) acquire (and fund as appropriate) its full pro rata share of all Loans and
participations in Letters of Credit in accordance with its Percentage Share. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in the event that any assignment of rights and obligations of any Defaulting Lender
hereunder shall become effective under applicable Law without compliance with the provisions
of this subsection, then the assignee of such interest shall be deemed to be a Defaulting Lender
for all purposes of this Agreement until such compliance occurs.
Section 3.6 
    Confidentiality. Each of Administrative Agent, the Lenders and LC Issuer agrees to maintain
the confidentiality of the Information (as defined below), except that Information may be disclosed
(a) to its Affiliates and to its and its Affiliates’ respective partners, directors, officers, employees,
agents, advisors and other representatives (it being understood that the Persons to whom such
disclosure is made will be informed of the confidential nature of such Information and instructed
to keep such Information confidential), (b) to the extent requested by any regulatory authority
purporting to have jurisdiction over it (including any self-regulatory authority, such as the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners), (c) to the extent required by applicable Laws or
regulations or by any subpoena or similar legal process, (d) to any other party hereto, (e) in
connection with the exercise of any remedies hereunder or under any other Loan Document or
any action or proceeding relating to this Agreement or any other Loan Document or the
enforcement of rights hereunder or thereunder, (f) subject to an agreement containing provisions
substantially the same as those of this Section, to (i) any assignee of or Participant in, or any
prospective assignee of or Participant in, any of its rights or obligations under this Agreement or
(ii) any actual or prospective counterparty (or its
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
104
advisors) to any swap or derivative transaction relating to Borrower and its obligations, (g) with
the consent of Borrower or (h) to the extent such Information (x) becomes publicly available other
than as a result of a breach of this Section or (y) becomes available to Administrative Agent, any
Lender, LC Issuer or any of their respective Affiliates on a nonconfidential basis from a source
other than a Restricted Person.
For purposes of this Section, “Information” means all information received from any Restricted
Person or any of their respective Subsidiaries relating to a Restricted Person or any of their
respective Subsidiaries or any of their respective businesses, other than any such information
that is available to Administrative Agent, any Lender or LC Issuer on a nonconfidential basis prior
to disclosure by such Restricted Person or any of their respective Subsidiaries, provided that, in
the case of information received from a Restricted Person or any of their respective Subsidiaries
after the Closing Date, such information is clearly identified at the time of delivery as confidential.
Any Person required to maintain the confidentiality of Information as provided in this Section
shall be considered to have complied with its obligation to do so if such Person has exercised
the same degree of care to maintain the confidentiality of such Information as such Person would
accord to its own confidential information.
Section 3.7 
    Governing Law; Submission to Process.
(i)
    EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT THAT THE LAW OF ANOTHER JURISDICTION IS
EXPRESSLY ELECTED IN A LOAN DOCUMENT, THE LOAN DOCUMENTS SHALL BE
DEEMED CONTRACTS AND INSTRUMENTS MADE UNDER THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF
NEW YORK AND SHALL BE CONSTRUED AND ENFORCED IN ACCORDANCE WITH AND
GOVERNED BY THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK AND THE LAWS OF THE
UNITED STATES, WITHOUT REGARD TO PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICTS OF LAW.
(j)
    BORROWER HEREBY IRREVOCABLY SUBMITS ITSELF AND EACH OTHER
RESTRICTED PERSON TO THE JURISDICTION OF THE STATE AND FEDERAL COURTS
SITTING IN THE STATE OF NEW YORK AND AGREES AND CONSENTS THAT SERVICE
OF PROCESS MAY BE MADE UPON IT OR ANY RESTRICTED PERSON IN ANY LEGAL
PROCEEDING RELATING TO THE LOAN DOCUMENTS OR THE OBLIGATIONS BY ANY
MEANS ALLOWED UNDER NEW YORK OR FEDERAL LAW. ANY LEGAL PROCEEDING
ARISING OUT OF OR IN ANY WAY RELATED TO ANY OF THE LOAN DOCUMENTS MAY
BE BROUGHT AND LITIGATED IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK, TO THE EXTENT IT HAS SUBJECT MATTER
JURISDICTION, AND OTHERWISE IN THE NEW YORK DISTRICT COURTS SITTING IN
NEW YORK COUNTY, NEW YORK.
(k)
    THE PARTIES HERETO HEREBY WAIVE AND AGREE NOT TO ASSERT, BY WAY OF
MOTION, AS A DEFENSE OR OTHERWISE, THAT ANY SUCH PROCEEDING IS
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
105
BROUGHT IN AN INCONVENIENT FORUM OR THAT THE VENUE THEREOF IS
IMPROPER, AND FURTHER AGREE TO A TRANSFER OF ANY SUCH PROCEEDING TO A
FEDERAL COURT SITTING IN THE STATE OF NEW YORK TO THE EXTENT THAT IT HAS
SUBJECT MATTER JURISDICTION, AND OTHERWISE TO A STATE COURT IN NEW YORK,
NEW YORK. IN FURTHERANCE THEREOF, BORROWER AND LENDERS EACH HEREBY
ACKNOWLEDGE AND AGREE THAT IT WAS NOT INCONVENIENT FOR THEM TO
NEGOTIATE AND RECEIVE FUNDING OF THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED BY
THIS AGREEMENT IN SUCH COUNTY AND THAT IT WILL BE NEITHER INCONVENIENT
NOR UNFAIR TO LITIGATE OR OTHERWISE RESOLVE ANY DISPUTES OR CLAIMS IN A
COURT SITTING IN SUCH COUNTY.
(l)
    COPIES OF ANY SUCH PROCESS SO SERVED SHALL ALSO, IF PERMITTED BY LAW,
BE SENT BY REGISTERED MAIL TO BORROWER AT ITS ADDRESS SET FORTH ON THE
SIGNATURE PAGE BELOW, BUT THE FAILURE OF BORROWER TO RECEIVE SUCH
COPIES SHALL NOT AFFECT IN ANY WAY THE SERVICE OF SUCH PROCESS AS
AFORESAID. BORROWER SHALL FURNISH TO LENDERS A CONSENT OF CT
CORPORATION SYSTEM AGREEING TO ACT HEREUNDER PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE
DATE OF THIS AGREEMENT. NOTHING HEREIN SHALL AFFECT THE RIGHT OF
LENDERS TO SERVE PROCESS IN ANY OTHER MANNER PERMITTED BY LAW OR
SHALL LIMIT THE RIGHT OF LENDERS TO BRING PROCEEDINGS AGAINST BORROWER
IN THE COURTS OF ANY OTHER JURISDICTION. IF FOR ANY REASON CT
CORPORATION SYSTEM SHALL RESIGN OR OTHERWISE CEASE TO ACT AS
BORROWER’S AGENT, BORROWER HEREBY IRREVOCABLY AGREES TO (A)
IMMEDIATELY DESIGNATE AND APPOINT A NEW AGENT ACCEPTABLE TO
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT TO SERVE IN SUCH CAPACITY AND, IN SUCH EVENT, SUCH
NEW AGENT SHALL BE DEEMED TO BE SUBSTITUTED FOR CT CORPORATION SYSTEM
FOR ALL PURPOSES HEREOF AND (B) PROMPTLY DELIVER TO LENDERS THE
WRITTEN CONSENT (IN FORM AND SUBSTANCE SATISFACTORY TO ADMINISTRATIVE
AGENT) OF SUCH NEW AGENT AGREEING TO SERVE IN SUCH CAPACITY.
Section 3.8 
    Limitation on Interest. Lender Parties, Restricted Persons and any other parties to the Loan
Documents intend to contract in strict compliance with applicable usury Law from time to time in
effect. In furtherance thereof such Persons stipulate and agree that none of the terms and
provisions contained in the Loan Documents shall ever be construed to create a contract to pay,
for the use, forbearance or detention of money, interest in excess of the maximum amount of
interest permitted to be charged by applicable Law from time to time in effect. Neither any
Restricted Person nor any present or future guarantors, endorsers, or other Persons hereafter
becoming liable for payment of any Obligation shall ever be liable for unearned interest thereon
or shall ever be required to pay interest thereon in excess of the maximum amount that may be
lawfully contracted for, charged or received under applicable Law from time to time in effect, and
the provisions of this section shall control over all other provisions of the Loan Documents which
may be in conflict or apparent conflict herewith. Lender Parties expressly disavow any intention
to contract for, charge, or collect excessive unearned interest or finance charges in the event the
maturity of any Obligation is accelerated. If (a) the maturity of any Obligation is
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
106
accelerated for any reason, (b) any Obligation is prepaid and as a result any amounts held to
constitute interest are determined to be in excess of the legal maximum, or (c) any Lender or any
other holder of any or all of the Obligations shall otherwise collect moneys which are determined
to constitute interest which would otherwise increase the interest on any or all of the Obligations
to an amount in excess of that permitted to be charged by applicable Law then in effect, then all
sums determined to constitute interest in excess of such legal limit shall, without penalty, be
promptly applied to reduce the then outstanding principal of the related Obligations or, at such
Lender’s or holder’s option, promptly returned to Borrower or the other payor thereof upon such
determination. In determining whether or not the interest paid or payable, under any specific
circumstance, exceeds the maximum amount permitted under applicable Law, Lender Parties
and Restricted Persons (and any other payors thereof) shall to the greatest extent permitted
under applicable Law, (i) characterize any non‑principal payment as an expense, fee or premium
rather than as interest, (ii) exclude voluntary prepayments and the effects thereof, and (iii)
amortize, prorate, allocate, and spread the total amount of interest throughout the entire
contemplated term of the instruments evidencing the Obligations in accordance with the amounts
outstanding from time to time thereunder and the maximum legal rate of interest from time to time
in effect under applicable Law in order to lawfully contract for, charge or receive the maximum
amount of interest permitted under applicable Law.
Section 3.9 
    Termination; Limited Survival. In its sole and absolute discretion Borrower may at any time that
no Obligations are owing (other than indemnity obligations and similar obligations that survive
the termination of this Agreement for which no notice of a claim has been received by Borrower)
elect in a written notice delivered to Administrative Agent to terminate this Agreement. Upon
receipt by Administrative Agent of such a notice, if no Obligations are then owing this Agreement
and all other Loan Documents shall thereupon be terminated and the parties thereto released
from all prospective obligations thereunder. Notwithstanding the foregoing or anything herein to
the contrary, any waivers made by any Restricted Person in any Loan Document, all obligations
of Borrower provided for in Section 3.2, 3.4, 3.5(c) or 10.4 and all obligations which any Person
may have to indemnify or compensate any Lender Party shall survive any termination of this
Agreement or any other Loan Document. At the request and expense of Borrower, Administrative
Agent shall prepare and execute all necessary instruments to reflect and effect such termination
of the Loan Documents. Administrative Agent is hereby authorized to execute all such
instruments on behalf of all Lenders, without the joinder of or further action by any Lender.
Section 3.10 
    Severability. If any term or provision of any Loan Document shall be determined to be illegal or
unenforceable all other terms and provisions of the Loan Documents shall nevertheless remain
effective and shall be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by applicable Law.
Section 3.11 
    Counterparts. This Agreement may be separately executed in any number of counterparts and
by different parties hereto in separate counterparts, each of which when so executed shall be
deemed to constitute one and the same Agreement. This Agreement and the other Loan
Documents, and any separate letter agreements with respect to fees payable to Administrative
Agent, constitute the entire contract among the parties relating to the subject matter hereof and
supersede any and all previous agreements and understandings, oral or written, relating to the
subject matter hereof. Except as provided in Section 4.1, this Agreement shall become effective
when it shall have been executed by Administrative Agent and when Administrative Agent shall
have received counterparts hereof that, when taken together, bear the signatures of each of the
other parties hereto. Loan Documents may be transmitted and/or
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
107
signed by facsimile, telecopy or electronic mail. The effectiveness of any such documents and
signatures shall, subject to applicable Law, have the same force and effect as manually‑signed
originals and shall be binding on all Restricted Persons and Lender Parties. The Administrative
Agent may also require that any such documents and signatures be confirmed by a
manually‑signed original thereof; provided, however, that the failure to request or deliver the
same shall not limit the effectiveness of any facsimile document or signature.
Section 3.12 
    Waiver of Jury Trial, Punitive Damages, etc. EACH RESTRICTED PERSON AND EACH
LENDER PARTY HEREBY KNOWINGLY, VOLUNTARILY, INTENTIONALLY, AND
IRREVOCABLY (A) WAIVES, TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT NOT PROHIBITED BY LAW, ANY
RIGHT IT MAY HAVE TO A TRIAL BY JURY IN RESPECT OF ANY LITIGATION BASED
HEREON, OR DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY AT ANY TIME ARISING OUT OF, UNDER OR IN
CONNECTION WITH THE LOAN DOCUMENTS OR ANY TRANSACTION CONTEMPLATED
THEREBY OR ASSOCIATED THEREWITH, BEFORE OR AFTER MATURITY; (B) WAIVES,
TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT NOT PROHIBITED BY LAW, ANY RIGHT IT MAY HAVE TO
CLAIM OR RECOVER IN ANY SUCH LITIGATION ANY “SPECIAL DAMAGES”, AS DEFINED
BELOW, (C) CERTIFIES THAT NO PARTY HERETO NOR ANY REPRESENTATIVE OR
AGENT OR COUNSEL FOR ANY PARTY HERETO HAS REPRESENTED, EXPRESSLY OR
OTHERWISE, OR IMPLIED THAT SUCH PARTY WOULD NOT, IN THE EVENT OF
LITIGATION, SEEK TO ENFORCE THE FOREGOING WAIVERS, AND (D) ACKNOWLEDGES
THAT IT HAS BEEN INDUCED TO ENTER INTO THIS AGREEMENT, THE OTHER LOAN
DOCUMENTS AND THE TRANSACTIONS CONTEMPLATED HEREBY AND THEREBY BY,
AMONG OTHER THINGS, THE MUTUAL WAIVERS AND CERTIFICATIONS CONTAINED IN
THIS SECTION. AS USED IN THIS SECTION, “SPECIAL DAMAGES” INCLUDES ALL
SPECIAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR PUNITIVE DAMAGES (REGARDLESS OF
HOW NAMED), BUT DOES NOT INCLUDE ANY PAYMENTS OR FUNDS WHICH ANY
PARTY HERETO HAS EXPRESSLY PROMISED TO PAY OR DELIVER TO ANY OTHER
PARTY HERETO.
Section 3.13 
    USA PATRIOT Act Notice. Each Lender that is subject to the Act (as hereinafter defined) and
Administrative Agent (for itself and not on behalf of any Lender) hereby notifies Borrower that
pursuant to the requirements of the USA PATRIOT Act (Title III of Pub. L. 107-56) (signed into
law October 26, 2001) (the “Act”), it is required to obtain, verify and record information that
identifies Borrower, which information includes the name and address of Borrower and other
information that will allow such Lender or Administrative Agent, as applicable, to identify
Borrower in accordance with the Act.
Section 3.14
Right of Set-Off. If an Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing, each Lender, LC
Issuer and each of their respective Affiliates is hereby authorized at any time and from time to
time, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable Law, to set off and apply any and all deposits
(general or special, time or demand, provisional or final, in whatever currency) at any time held
and other obligations (in whatever currency) at any time owing by such Lender, LC Issuer or any
such Affiliate to or for the credit or the account of Borrower or any other Restricted Person against
any and all of the obligations of Borrower or such Restricted Person now or hereafter existing
under this Agreement or any other Loan Document to such Lender or LC Issuer, irrespective of
whether or not such Lender or LC Issuer shall have made any demand under this Agreement or
any other Loan Document and although such obligations of Borrower or such Restricted Person
may be contingent or unmatured or are owed to a
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
108
branch or office of such Lender or LC Issuer different from the branch or office holding such
deposit or obligated on such indebtedness; provided, that in the event that any Defaulting Lender
shall exercise any such right of setoff, (x) all amounts so set off shall be paid over immediately to
Administrative Agent for further application in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.18
and, pending such payment, shall be segregated by such Defaulting Lender from its other funds
and deemed held in trust for the benefit of Administrative Agent and the Lenders, and (y) the
Defaulting Lender shall provide promptly to Administrative Agent a statement describing in
reasonable detail the Obligations owing to such Defaulting Lender as to which it exercised such
right of setoff. The rights of each Lender, LC Issuer and their respective Affiliates under this
section are in addition to other rights and remedies (including other rights of setoff) that such
Lender, LC Issuer or their respective Affiliates may have. Each Lender and LC Issuer agrees to
notify Borrower and Administrative Agent promptly after any such setoff and application, provided
that the failure to give such notice shall not affect the validity of such setoff and application.
Section 3.15 
    Acknowledgement and Consent to Bail-In of EEA Financial Institutions. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in any Loan Document or in any other agreement, arrangement or
understanding among any such parties, each party hereto acknowledges that any liability of any
EEA Financial Institution arising under any Loan Document, to the extent such liability is
unsecured, may be subject to the write-down and conversion powers of an EEA Resolution
Authority and agrees and consents to, and acknowledges and agrees to be bound by:
(a)the application of any Write-Down and Conversion Powers by an EEA Resolution Authority to
any such liabilities arising hereunder which may be payable to it by any party hereto that is an
EEA Financial Institution; and
(b)the effects of any Bail-In Action on any such liability, including if applicable:
1)a reduction in full or in part or cancellation of any such liability;
2)
a conversion of all, or a portion of, such liability into shares or other instruments of ownership in
such EEA Financial Institution, its parent undertaking, or a bridge institution that may be issued
to it or otherwise conferred on it, and that such shares or other instruments of ownership will be
accepted by it in lieu of any rights with respect to any such liability under this Agreement or any
other Loan Document; or
3)the variation of the terms of such liability in connection with the exercise of the write-down and
conversion powers of any EEA Resolution Authority.
[Remainder of this page intentionally left blank.]
[Signature pages follow.]
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Agreement is executed as of the date first written above.
MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company
By:    Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a
Delaware limited partnership, its
Sole Member
By:    Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company,
Its General Partner
By: ________________________
Jeffrey R. Olmstead
President and Chief Financial Officer
Address:
2431 E. 61st Street, Suite 850
Tulsa, Oklahoma 74136 
Attn:     Jeffrey R. Olmstead
President & Chief Financial Officer
Telephone: (918) 743-7575
Telecopy: (918) 743-8859
ADMINISTRATIVE
AGENT
WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, as Administrative
Agent and Collateral Agent
By:     
Name:
Title:
Address:
Administrative Agent's Office:
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
1445 Ross Ave., Suite 4500
Dallas, Texas 75202
Attention: Muhammad Dhamani
Facsimile: 214-721-8215
Percentage
Share
WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, as a Lender and LC
Issuer
19.764254%    
By:     
Name:
Title:
Address:
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association's Lending Office:
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
1445 Ross Ave., Suite 4500
Dallas, Texas 75202
Attention: Muhammad Dhamani
Telephone: 214-721-6430
Facsimile: 214-721-8215
For matters related to letters of credit:
Muhammad Dhamani
Telephone: 214-721-6430
Facsimile: 214-721-8215
Percentage Share    BOKF, NA, dba The Bank of Texas
15.625000%    Lender
By:     
Matt Chase
Vice President
Address:
BOKF's Lending Office:
Bank of Texas
5956 Sherry Lane, Suite 1100
Dallas, Texas 75225
Attention: Matt Chase
Telephone: (214) 346-3935
Facsimile: (214) 987-8866
Percentage Share    ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, as
5.263158%    a Lender
By:     
Don J. McKinnerney
Authorized Signatory
Address:
Royal Bank of Canada
2800 Post Oak Boulevard
3900 Williams Tower
Houston, Texas 77056
Attention: Don J. McKinnerney
Telephone: (713) 403-5607
Facsimile: (713) 403-5624
Electronic Mail: don.mckinnerney@rbccm.com
Percentage Share    COMERICA BANK
15.625000%    Lender
By:     
Brandon M. White
Corporate Banking Officer
Address:
Comerica Bank’s Lending Office:
Comerica Bank
1717 Main Street – 4th Floor
Dallas, Texas 75201
Attention: Brandon M. White
Telephone: (214) 462- 4418
Facsimile: (214) 462-4240
Percentage Share    THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA
15.625000%    Lender
By:     
Brandon M. White
Corporate Banking Officer
Address:
Comerica Bank’s Lending Office:
Comerica Bank
1717 Main Street – 4th Floor
Dallas, Texas 75201
Attention: Brandon M. White
Telephone: (214) 462- 4418
Facsimile: (214) 462-4240
Percentage Share    MUFG UNION BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
8.3333333%    Lender
By:     
Randall Osterbert
Managing Director
Address:
MUFG Union Bank National Association’s Lending Office:
MUFG Union Bank, National Association
445 S. Figueroa Street
Los Angeles, CA 90071
Attention: Randall Osterbert
Telephone: (214) 922-4205
Facsimile: (214) 922-4209
Percentage Share    FROST BANK
19.764254%    Lender
By:     
Alex Zemkoski
Senior Vice President
Address:
Frost Bank’s Lending Office:
Frost Bank
100 West Houston Street
San Antonio, TX 78296
Attention: Alex Zemkoski
Telephone: (817) 420-5090
Facsimile: (817) 420-5250
SCHEDULE 1
UPDATED LENDERS SCHEDULE
Maximum Credit
Amount
$13,157,894.75
Commitment
$8,578,947.387,368,421.06
Percentage
Share
5.263158%
Lender
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA
Domestic Lending and
Eurodollar
Lending Office Address:
Royal Bank of Canada
New York Branch
One Liberty Plaza, 3rd Floor
New York, New York 10006-
1404
Attention: Manager, Loans
Administration
Telephone: (212) 428-6332
Facsimile: (212) 428-2372
For matters related to letters of
credit:
Attention: Manager, Trade
Products
Telephone: (212) 428-6235
Facsimile: (212) 428-3015
BOKF, NA, d/b/a The Bank of
Texas
Domestic Lending Office and
Eurodollar
Lending Office Address:
Bank of Texas
5956 Sherry Lane, Suite 1100
Dallas, Texas 75225
Attention: Matt Chase
Telephone: (214) 346-3935
Facsimile: (214) 987-8866
WELLS FARGO BANK,
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
Domestic Lending Office and
Eurodollar
Lending Office Address:
$39,062,500.00
$25,468,750.0021,875,000.00
15.625000%
$49,410,636.00
$32,215,734.6727,669,956.16
19.764254%
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
1445 Ross Avenue, Suite 4500
Dallas, Texas 75202
Attention: Jason M. Hicks
Telephone: (214) 721-8214
Facsimile: (214) 721-8215
COMERICA BANK
$39,062,500.00
$25,468,750.0021,875,000.00
15.625000%
Domestic Lending Office and
Eurodollar
Lending Office Address:
Comerica Bank
1717 Main Street – 4th Floor
Dallas, Texas 75201
Attention: Brandon M. White
Telephone: (214) 462-4418
Facsimile: (214) 462-4240
THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA $39,062,500.00
$25,468,750.0021,875,000.00
15.625000%
Domestic Lending Office and
Eurodollar
Lending Office Address:
711 Louisiana Street, Suite 1400
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: Jay Salitza
Telephone: (713) 759-3461
Facsimile: (713) 752-2425
MUFG UNION BANK, N.A.
Domestic Lending Office and
Eurodollar
Lending Office Address:
445 S. Figueroa Street
Los Angeles, CA 90071
Attention: Randall Osterbert
Managing Director
Telephone: (214) 922-4205
Facsimile: (214) 922-4209
FROST BANK
Domestic Lending Office and
Eurodollar
Lending Office Address:
100 West Houston Street
San Antonio, TX 78296
Attention: Alex Zemkoski
Telephone: (817) 420-5090
Facsimile: (817) 420-5250
TOTAL:
$20,833,333.33
$13,583,333.2811,666,666.62
8.3333333%
$49,410,636.00
$32,215,734.6727,669,956.16
19.764254%
$250,000,000.00 $163,000,000.00140,000,000.00100%
SCHEDULE 2
DISCLOSURE SCHEDULE
To supplement the following sections of the Agreement of which this Schedule is a part,
Borrower hereby makes the following disclosures:
Section 5.4.        Required Consents:
None.
Section 5.8.        Litigation:
None.
Section 5.9.        Labor Disputes and Acts of God:
None.
Section 5.10.        ERISA Plans and Liabilities:
None.
Section 5.11.        Environmental and Other Laws:
None.
Section 5.12.        Names and Places of Business:
None.
Section 5.13.        Borrower’s Subsidiaries:
None.        
Section 5.14.        Title to Properties and Liens
None.
Section 5.19        Certain Contracts for Sale, Processing or Transportation of Production
None.
Gas Imbalances, Take or Pay or Other Prepayments.
None.
Section 5.20.        Dry Holes or Inactive Wells Not Properly Plugged and Abandoned.
None.
Section 5.23.        Existing Hedges.
Section 7.7.        Investments.
None.
Mid-Con Energy Properties, LLC
Compiled Credit Agreement
109
SCHEDULE 3
SECURITY SCHEDULE
1)
2)
3)
Mortgage, Assignment, Security Agreement, Fixture Filing and Financing Statement (the
“Mortgage”) given by Borrower for the benefit of Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent and
Lenders.
Pledge and Security Agreement given by each Restricted Person for the benefit of the
Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent and Lenders.
Guaranty given by MLP for the benefit of the Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent and
Lenders.    
Financing Statement naming Borrower as debtor and Administrative Agent as secured party
covering collateral in the Deed of Trust to be filed with the appropriate recording authority in the
State of Delaware.
Deposit Account Control Agreement with First Bank and Trust Company in favor of
Administrative Agent.
Additional Mortgage, Assignment, Security Agreement, Fixture Filing and Financing Statement
(the “Mortgage”) given by Borrower for the benefit of Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent and
Lenders relating to the additional Oil and Gas Properties being acquired in or about the
effective date of Amendment No. 10.
4)
5)
6)
SCHEDULE 3 – PAGE 1    
MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES
COMPILED CREDIT AGREEMENT
SCHEDULE 4
INSURANCE SCHEDULE
INSURANCE SCHEDULE
1.Commercial General Liability Insurance, written to include the following limits:
Each Occurrence        $1,000,000
Damage to Rented Premises (Ea occurrence)        $100,000
Med Exp (Any one person)        $5,000
Personal & Adv Injury        $1,000,000
General Aggregate        $2,000,000
Products – Comp/Op Agg        $2,000,000
2.Automobile Liability Insurance, written to include the following limits:
Combined Single Limit (Ea accident)        $1,000,000
3.    Excess/Umbrella Liability Insurance, written to include the following limits:
Each Occurrence                    $5,000,000
Aggregate                        $5,000,000
4.    D&O Liability Insurance, written to include the following limits:
Liability                        $20,000,000
SCHEDULE 5
EXISTING HEDGING CONTRACTS
SCHEDULE 7.1
ADDITIONAL PERMITTED INDEBTEDNESS
NONE.
SCHEDULE 7.2
ADDITIONAL PERMITTED LIENS
NONE.
EXHIBIT A
PROMISSORY NOTE
$__________                New York, New York            __________, 2011
FOR VALUE RECEIVED, the undersigned, MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company (herein called “Borrower”), hereby promises to pay to the
order of ____________________, a ____________________ (herein called “Lender”), the
principal sum of ____________________ DOLLARS ($__________), or, if greater or less, the
aggregate unpaid principal amount of the Loan made under this Note by Lender to Borrower
pursuant to the terms of the Credit Agreement (as hereinafter defined), together with interest on
the unpaid principal balance thereof as hereinafter set forth, both principal and interest payable
as herein provided in lawful money of the United States of America at the offices of the
Administrative Agent under the Credit Agreement or at such other place as from time to time may
be designated by the holder of this Note.
This Note (a) is issued and delivered under that certain Credit Agreement dated as of December
20, 2011 among Borrower, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Administrative Agent,
and the Lenders (including Lender) referred to therein (herein, as from time to time
supplemented, amended or restated, called the “Credit Agreement”), and is a “Note” as defined
therein, (b) is subject to the terms and provisions of the Credit Agreement, which contains
provisions for payments and prepayments hereunder and acceleration of the maturity hereof
upon the happening of certain stated events, and (c) is secured by and entitled to the benefits of
certain Security Documents (as identified and defined in the Credit Agreement). Payments on
this Note shall be made and applied as provided herein and in the Credit Agreement. Reference
is hereby made to the Credit Agreement for a description of certain rights, limitations of rights,
obligations and duties of the parties hereto and for the meanings assigned to terms used and not
defined herein and to the Security Documents for a description of the nature and extent of the
security thereby provided and the rights of the parties thereto.
In no event shall the interest payable hereon, whether before or after maturity, exceed the
maximum amount of interest which, under applicable Law, may be contracted for, charged, or
received on this Note, and this Note is expressly made subject to the provisions of the Credit
Agreement which more fully set out the limitations on how interest accrues hereon.
If this Note is placed in the hands of an attorney for collection after default, or if all or any part of
the indebtedness represented hereby is proved, established or collected in any court or in any
bankruptcy, receivership, debtor relief, probate or other court proceedings, Borrower and all
endorsers, sureties and guarantors of this Note jointly and severally agree to pay reasonable
attorneys’ fees and collection costs to the holder hereof in addition to the principal and interest
payable hereunder.
Borrower and all endorsers, sureties and guarantors of this Note hereby severally waive demand,
presentment, notice of demand and of dishonor and nonpayment of this Note, protest, notice of
protest, notice of intention to accelerate the maturity of this Note, declaration or notice of
acceleration of the maturity of this Note, diligence in collecting, the bringing of any suit against
any party and any notice of or defense on account of any extensions, renewals, partial payments
or changes in any manner of or in this Note or in any of its terms, provisions and covenants, or
any releases or substitutions of any security, or any delay, indulgence or other act of any trustee
or any holder hereof, whether before or after maturity.
THIS NOTE AND THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE PARTIES HERETO SHALL BE
GOVERNED BY THE LAWS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK (WITHOUT REGARD TO
PRINCIPLES OF CONFLICTS OF LAW), EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT THE SAME ARE
GOVERNED BY APPLICABLE FEDERAL LAW.
MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company
By:    Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a
Delaware limited partnership, its
Sole Member
By:    Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company,
Its General Partner
By: ________________________
Jeffrey R. Olmstead
President and Chief Financial Officer
SCHEDULE 4 – PAGE 1    MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES
COMPILED CREDIT AGREEMENT
EXHIBIT B
BORROWING NOTICE
Reference is made to that certain Credit Agreement dated as of December 20, 2011 (as from time
to time amended, the “Agreement”), by and among MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC
(“Borrower”), Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Administrative Agent, and certain
financial institutions (“Lenders”). Terms which are defined in the Agreement are used herein with
the meanings given them in the Agreement. Pursuant to the terms of the Agreement, Borrower
hereby requests a Borrowing of new Loans to be advanced pursuant to Section 2.1 of the
Agreement as follows:
Aggregate amount of Borrowing:     $__________________
Type of Loans in Borrowing:__________________
Date on which Loans are to be advanced:     __________________
Length of Interest Period for Eurodollar Loans (1, 2, 3, or 6 months):     __________ Months
If combined with existing Loans, see attached Continuation/Conversion Notice.
To induce Lenders to make such Loans, the undersigned, a Responsible Officer of the Borrower
hereby represents, warrants, acknowledges, and agrees to and with Administrative Agent and
each Lender that:
(a) The officer signing this instrument is the duly elected, qualified and acting officer of Borrower
as indicated below such officer’s signature hereto having all necessary authority to act on behalf
of Borrower in making the request herein contained.
(b) The representations and warranties of Restricted Persons set forth in the Agreement and the
other Loan Documents are true and correct on and as of the date hereof (except (i) to the extent
that the facts on which such representations and warranties are based have been changed by
the extension of credit under the Agreement or (ii) such representations and warranties that
expressly refer to an earlier date, which shall have been true as of such earlier date), with the
same effect as though such representations and warranties had been made on and as of the date
hereof.
(c) There does not exist on the date hereof any condition or event which constitutes a Default
which has not been waived in writing as provided in Section 10.1(a) of the Agreement; nor will
any such Default exist upon Borrower’s receipt and application of the Borrowing requested
hereby. Borrower will use the Loans hereby requested in compliance with Section 2.4 of the
Agreement.
(d) Except to the extent waived in writing as provided in Section 10.1(a) of the Agreement, each
Restricted Person has performed and complied with all agreements and conditions in the
Agreement required to be performed or complied with by such Restricted Person on or prior to
the date hereof, and each of the conditions precedent to Loans contained in the Agreement
remains satisfied.
(e) Facility Usage, after the making of the Loans requested hereby, will not be in excess of the
Borrowing Base on the date requested for the making of such Loans.
(f) The Loan Documents have not been modified, amended or supplemented by any unwritten
representations or promises, by any course of dealing, or by any other means not provided for in
Section 10.1(a) of the Agreement. The Agreement and the other Loan Documents are hereby
ratified, approved, and confirmed in all respects.
The Responsible Officer signing this instrument hereby certifies that, to the best of his knowledge
after due inquiry, the above representations, warranties, acknowledgements and agreements of
Borrower are true, correct and complete.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this instrument is executed as of ____________, 20__.
MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company
By:    Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a
Delaware limited partnership, its
Sole Member
By:    Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company,
Its General Partner
By: ________________________
Jeffrey R. Olmstead
President and Chief Financial Officer:
EXHIBIT C
CONTINUATION/CONVERSION NOTICE
Reference is made to that certain Credit Agreement dated as of December 20, 2011 (as from time
to time amended, the “Agreement”), by and among MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC
(“Borrower”), Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Administrative Agent, and certain
financial institutions (“Lenders”). Terms which are defined in the Agreement are used herein with
the meanings given them in the Agreement.
Borrower hereby requests a Conversion or Continuation of existing Loans into a new Borrowing
pursuant to Section 2.3 of the Agreement as follows:
Existing Borrowing(s) to be continued or converted:
$____________ of Eurodollar Loans with Interest Period ending ______________
$____________ of Base Rate Loans
If being combined with new Loans, $____________ of new Loans to be advanced on
____________.
Aggregate amount of new Borrowing:     $__________________
Type of Loans in new Borrowing:     __________________
Date of Continuation or Conversion:    __________________
Length of Interest Period for Eurodollar Loans
(1, 2, or 3 months):    ___________ months
To meet the conditions set out in the Agreement for such Conversion/Continuation, Borrower
hereby represents, warrants, acknowledges, and agrees to and with Administrative Agent and
each Lender that:
(a) The Responsible Officer of Borrower signing this instrument is a duly elected, qualified and
acting officer of Borrower as indicated below such officer’s signature hereto having all necessary
authority to act on behalf of Borrower in making the request herein contained.
(b) There does not exist on the date hereof any condition or event which constitutes a Default
which has not been waived in writing as provided in Section 10.1(a) of the Agreement.
(c) The Loan Documents have not been modified, amended or supplemented by any unwritten
representations or promises, by any course of dealing, or by any other means not provided for in
Section 10.1(a) of the Agreement. The Agreement and the other Loan Documents are hereby
ratified, approved, and confirmed in all respects.
The Responsible Officer of Borrower signing this instrument hereby certifies that, to the best of
his knowledge after due inquiry, the above representations, warranties, acknowledgments, and
agreements of Borrower are true, correct and complete.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF this instrument is executed as of ______________, 201_.
MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company
By:    Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a
Delaware limited partnership, its
Sole Member
By:    Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company,
Its General Partner
By: ________________________
Jeffrey R. Olmstead
President and Chief Financial Officer
EXHIBIT D
REPAYMENT NOTICE
Reference is made to that certain Credit Agreement dated as of December 20, 2011 (as from time
to time amended, the “Agreement”), by and among MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC
(“Borrower”), Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Administrative Agent, and certain
financial institutions (“Lenders”). Terms which are defined in the Agreement are used herein with
the meanings given them in the Agreement.
The Borrower is repaying Loans as follows:
1.Loans outstanding prior to the repayment referred to herein: $__________
2.    Amount of repayment: $__________
3.    Date of repayment: _______________, 201_.
4.    Type of Loan and amount to which repayment applies:
(a)Base Rate Loan for $__________
(b)Eurodollar Rate Loan with Interest Period of:
(i)    one month             $__________
(ii)two months            $__________
(iii)    three months            $__________
(iv)six months             $__________
The repayment referred to herein complies with [Section 2.6 – Optional Prepayments] OR
[Section 2.7 – Mandatory Prepayments] of the Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF this instrument is executed as of ______________, 201_.
MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company
By:    Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a
Delaware limited partnership, its
Sole Member
By:    Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company,
Its General Partner
By: ________________________
Name:
Title:
EXHIBIT E
CERTIFICATE ACCOMPANYING
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Reference is made to that certain Credit Agreement dated as of December 20, 2011 (as from time
to time amended, the “Agreement”), by and among MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC
(“Borrower”), Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Administrative Agent, and certain
financial institutions (“Lenders”). Terms which are defined in the Agreement are used herein with
the meanings given them in the Agreement.
This Certificate is furnished pursuant to Section 6.2(b) of the Agreement. Together herewith
Borrower is furnishing to Administrative Agent and each Lender Borrower’s *[audited/unaudited]
financial statements (the “Financial Statements”) as at ____________ (the “Reporting Date”).
Borrower hereby represents, warrants, and acknowledges to Administrative Agent and each
Lender that:
(a) the officer signing this instrument is the duly elected, qualified and acting chief financial officer
of the MLP and, as such, is Borrower’s chief financial officer;
(b) the Financial Statements are accurate and complete and satisfy the requirements of the
Agreement;
(c) attached hereto is a Schedule of Calculations showing Borrower’s [compliance/non-
compliance] as of the Reporting Date with the requirements of Sections 7.3, 7.12 and 7.13 of the
Agreement.
(d) on the Reporting Date, Borrower was, and on the date hereof Borrower is, in full compliance
with the disclosure requirements of Section 6.4 of the Agreement, and no Default otherwise
existed on the Reporting Date or otherwise exists on the date of this instrument *[except for
Default(s) under Section(s) ____________ of the Agreement, which *[is/are] more fully described
on a schedule attached hereto].
(e) *[Unless otherwise disclosed on a schedule attached hereto,] The representations and
warranties of Borrower set forth in the Agreement and the other Loan Documents are true and
correct on and as of the date hereof (except to the extent that the facts on which such
representations and warranties are based have been changed by the extension of credit under
the Agreement), with the same effect as though such representations and warranties had been
made on and as of the date hereof.
The officer of the MLP signing this instrument hereby certifies that he has reviewed the Loan
Documents and the Financial Statements and has otherwise undertaken such inquiry as is in his
opinion necessary to enable him to express an informed opinion with respect to the above
representations, warranties and acknowledgments of Borrower and, to the best of his knowledge,
such representations, warranties, and acknowledgments are true, correct and complete.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this instrument is executed as of ____________, 20__.
MID-CON ENERGY PARTNERS, LP, a
Delaware limited liability company
By:    Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company,
Its General Partner
By: ________________________
Jeffrey R. Olmstead
President and Chief Financial Officer
EXHIBIT F
ASSIGNMENT AND ASSUMPTION
This Assignment and Assumption (this “Assignment and Assumption”) is dated as of the Effective
Date set forth below and is entered into by and between [Insert name of Assignor] (the
“Assignor”) and [Insert name of Assignee] (the “Assignee”). Capitalized terms used but not
defined herein shall have the meanings given to them in the Credit Agreement identified below
(the “Credit Agreement”), receipt of a copy of which is hereby acknowledged by the Assignee.
The Standard Terms and Conditions set forth in Annex 1 attached hereto are hereby agreed to
and incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this Assignment and Assumption as if
set forth herein in full.
For an agreed consideration, the Assignor hereby irrevocably sells and assigns to the Assignee,
and the Assignee hereby irrevocably purchases and assumes from the Assignor, subject to and
in accordance with the Standard Terms and Conditions and the Credit Agreement, as of the
Effective Date inserted by Administrative Agent as contemplated below (i) all of the Assignor’s
rights and obligations as a Lender under the Credit Agreement and any other documents or
instruments delivered pursuant thereto to the extent related to the amount and Percentage Share
identified below of all of such outstanding rights and obligations of the Assignor under the
respective facilities identified below (including, without limitation, the Letters of Credit included in
such facilities) and (ii) to the extent permitted to be assigned under applicable Law, all claims,
suits, causes of action and any other right of the Assignor (in its capacity as a Lender) against
any Person, whether known or unknown, arising under or in connection with the Credit
Agreement, any other documents or instruments delivered pursuant thereto or the loan
transactions governed thereby or in any way based on or related to any of the foregoing,
including, but not limited to, contract claims, tort claims, malpractice claims, statutory claims and
all other claims at law or in equity related to the rights and obligations sold and assigned
pursuant to clause (i) above (the rights and obligations sold and assigned pursuant to clauses (i)
and (ii) above being referred to herein collectively as, the “Assigned Interest”). Such sale and
assignment is without recourse to the Assignor and, except as expressly provided in this
Assignment and Assumption, without representation or warranty by the Assignor.
1.    Assignor:    ______________________________
2.
Assignee:    ______________________________ [and is an [Affiliate][Approved Fund of
[identify Lender]/[Eligible Assignee1]
3.    Borrower:    MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC
4.Administrative Agent:         Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
5.
Credit Agreement:    Credit Agreement, dated as of December 20, 2011, among MID-CON
ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as Administrative
Agent, and Lenders from time to time party thereto.
6.    Assigned Interest:
Aggregate Amount of
Commitment for all Lenders
Percentage Share
Assigned
$________________
$________________
$________________
Amount of
Commitment
Assigned
 
$______________________________%
$______________________________%
$______________________________%
Assignee
 
 
 
 
[7.    Trade Date:    __________________]2 
Effective Date: __________________, 20__ [TO BE INSERTED BY AGENT AND WHICH
SHALL BE THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF RECORDATION OF TRANSFER IN THE REGISTER
THEREFOR.]
The terms set forth in this Assignment and Assumption are hereby agreed to:
ASSIGNOR
[NAME OF ASSIGNOR]
By: _____________________________
Title:
ASSIGNEE
[NAME OF ASSIGNEE]
By: _____________________________
Title:
[Consented to and]3 Accepted:
WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, as
Administrative Agent
By: _________________________________
Name:
Title:
[Consented to:]
4 
MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company
By:    Mid-Con Energy Partners, LP, a
Delaware limited partnership, its
Sole Member
By:    Mid-Con Energy GP, LLC, a
Delaware limited liability company,
Its General Partner
By: ________________________
Jeffrey R. Olmstead
President and Chief Financial Officer
STANDARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR
ASSIGNMENT AND ASSUMPTION
1.    Representations and Warranties.
1.1.    Assignor. The Assignor (a) represents and warrants that (i) it is the legal and beneficial
owner of the Assigned Interest, (ii) the Assigned Interest is free and clear of any lien,
encumbrance or other adverse claim and (iii) it has full power and authority, and has taken all
action necessary, to execute and deliver this Assignment and Assumption and to consummate
the transactions contemplated hereby; and (b) assumes no responsibility with respect to (i) any
statements, warranties or representations made in or in connection with the Credit Agreement or
any other Loan Document, (ii) the execution, legality, validity, enforceability, genuineness,
sufficiency or value of the Loan Documents or any collateral thereunder, (iii) the financial
condition of Borrower, any of its Subsidiaries or Affiliates or any other Person obligated in respect
of any Loan Document or (iv) the performance or observance by Borrower, any of its Subsidiaries
or Affiliates or any other Person of any of their respective obligations under any Loan Document.
1.2.    Assignee. The Assignee (a) represents and warrants that (i) it has full power and authority,
and has taken all action necessary, to execute and deliver this Assignment and Assumption and
to consummate the transactions contemplated hereby and to become a Lender under the Credit
Agreement, (ii) it meets all requirements of an Eligible Assignee under the Credit Agreement
(subject to receipt of such consents as may be required under the Credit Agreement), (iii) from
and after the Effective Date, it shall be bound by the provisions of the Credit Agreement as a
Lender thereunder and, to the extent of the Assigned Interest, shall have the obligations of a
Lender thereunder, (iv) it has received a copy of the Credit Agreement, together with copies of the
most recent financial statements delivered pursuant to Section 6.2 thereof, as applicable, and
such other documents and information as it has deemed appropriate to make its own credit
analysis and decision to enter into this Assignment and Assumption and to purchase the
Assigned Interest on the basis of which it has made such analysis and decision independently
and without reliance on the Administrative Agent or any other Lender, and (v) if it is a Foreign
Lender, attached hereto is any documentation required to be delivered by it pursuant to the terms
of the Credit Agreement, duly completed and executed by the Assignee; and (b) agrees that (i) it
will, independently and without reliance on the Administrative Agent, the Assignor or any other
Lender, and based on such documents and information as it shall deem appropriate at the time,
continue to make its own credit decisions in taking or not taking action under the Loan
Documents, and (ii) it will perform in accordance with their terms all of the obligations which by
the terms of the Loan Documents are required to be performed by it as a Lender.
2.    Payments. From and after the Effective Date, the Administrative Agent shall make all
payments in respect of the Assigned Interest (including payments of principal, interest, fees and
other amounts) to the Assignor for amounts which have accrued to but excluding the Effective
Date and to the Assignee for amounts which have accrued from and after the Effective Date.
3.    General Provisions. This Assignment and Assumption shall be binding upon, and inure to
the benefit of, the parties hereto and their respective successors and assigns. This Assignment
and Assumption may be executed in any number of counterparts, which together shall constitute
one instrument. Delivery of an executed counterpart of a signature page of this Assignment and
Assumption by telecopy shall be effective as delivery of a manually executed counterpart of this
Assignment and Assumption. This Assignment and Assumption shall be governed by, and
construed in accordance with, the law of the State of New York.
4851-4855-1477v.5 4839-1738
EXHIBIT B – PAGE 1    MID-CON ENERGY PROPERTIES
COMPILED CREDIT AGREEMENT