
-----BEGIN PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
Proc-Type: 2001,MIC-CLEAR
Originator-Name: webmaster@www.sec.gov
Originator-Key-Asymmetric:
 MFgwCgYEVQgBAQICAf8DSgAwRwJAW2sNKK9AVtBzYZmr6aGjlWyK3XmZv3dTINen
 TWSM7vrzLADbmYQaionwg5sDW3P6oaM5D3tdezXMm7z1T+B+twIDAQAB
MIC-Info: RSA-MD5,RSA,
 FvzfyHKKOjyV4npBJ/LdNwNev8+ei1S4xhPOMaTH62xLFzrvcuIDWLNDakDiiZFu
 v7M1TSHBpx/59bAOr1wOmQ==
<SEC-DOCUMENT>0000073779-05-000021.txt : 20051122
<SEC-HEADER>0000073779-05-000021.hdr.sgml : 20051122
<ACCEPTANCE-DATETIME>20051122141927
ACCESSION NUMBER:
CONFORMED SUBMISSION TYPE:
PUBLIC DOCUMENT COUNT:
CONFORMED PERIOD OF REPORT:
FILED AS OF DATE:
DATE AS OF CHANGE:
10QSB/A
1
20050930
0000073779-05-000021
20051122
20051122
FILER:
COMPANY DATA:
COMPANY CONFORMED NAME:
CENTRAL INDEX KEY:
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION: WHOLESALE-COMPUTER & PERIPHERAL
OCG TECHNOLOGY INC
0000073779
EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE [5045]
IRS NUMBER:
STATE OF INCORPORATION:
FISCAL YEAR END:
132643655
DE
0630
FILING VALUES:
FORM TYPE:
SEC ACT:
SEC FILE NUMBER: 000-05186
FILM NUMBER:
10QSB/A
1934 Act
051220890
BUSINESS ADDRESS:
STREET 1:
STREET 2:
CITY:
STATE:
ZIP:
BUSINESS PHONE:
56 HARRISON ST
SUITE 501
NEW ROCHELLE
NY
10801
914-576-8457
MAIL ADDRESS:
STREET 1:
STREET 2:
CITY:
STATE:
ZIP:
56 HARRISON ST
SUITE 501
NEW ROCHELLE
NY
10801
FORMER COMPANY:
FORMER CONFORMED NAME: OCG TECHNOLOGIES INC
DATE OF NAME CHANGE:
19851217
FORMER CONFORMED NAME: DATA DISPLAY SYSTEMS INC
DATE OF NAME CHANGE:
19730422
FORMER COMPANY:
</SEC-HEADER>
<DOCUMENT>
<TYPE>10QSB/A
<SEQUENCE>1
<FILENAME>f10qsba905.txt
<TEXT>
                                UNITED STATES
                      SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
                            Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-QSB/A
(Mark One)
    [X] QUARTERLY REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the quarterly period ended September 30, 2005
[ ] TRANSITION REPORT UNDER SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE EXCHANGE ACT
For the transition period from          to
                                                    ---------   ---------
Commission file number            0-5186
                                                                   -------
OCG TECHNOLOGY, INC.
       ----------------------------------------------------------------
      (Exact name of small business issuer as specified in its charter)
DELAWARE                            13-2643655
        -------------------------------      -------------------------------
        (State or other jurisdiction of     (IRS Employer Identification No.)
         incorporation or organization)
56 Harrison Street, New Rochelle, New York 10801
               ------------------------------------------------
                   (Address of principal executive offices)
(914) 576- 8457
                          -------------------------
                         (Issuer's telephone number)
- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (Former name, address and former fiscal year, if changed since last report)
Check whether the issuer (1) filed all reports required to be filed by
Section 13 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act during the past 12 months (or for
such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports),
and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.
[X] Yes   [   ] No
State the number of shares outstanding of each of the issuer's classes of
common equity, as of the latest practicable date:
<TABLE>
        Class                            Shares Outstanding at November 6, 2005
        -----------------------------    --------------------------------------
        <S>
<C>
Common Stock ($.01 par value)    49,901,121 Shares
</TABLE>
OCG TECHNOLOGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
<TABLE>
                            INDEX
PART 1. FINANCIAL INFORMATION                     PAGE NUMBER
        -----------------------------                     -----------
        <S>                                              <C>
        Item  1.  Financial Statements
Consolidated Condensed Balance Sheets
                  September 30, 2005 and June 30, 2005        1
Consolidated Condensed Statements of
                  Operations for the Three Months Ended
                  September 30, 2005 and 2004                 2
Consolidated Condensed Statements of
                  Cash Flow for the Three Months Ended
                  September 30, 2005 and 2004                 3
Notes to Consolidated Condensed
                  Financial Statements                        4
Item  2.  Management's Discussion and
                  Analysis of Financial Condition and
                  Results of Operations                       6
Item  3.  Controls and Procedures                    13
PART II - OTHER INFORMATION
Item 2.   Changes In Securities                      14
Item 6.   Exhibits and Reports on Form 8-K           14
</TABLE>
OCG TECHNOLOGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
                  CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
            September 30, 2005 and June 30, 2005
                          (Unaudited)
<TABLE>
2005              
2004
                                                           -------------      
--------
<S>                                              <C>                <C>
        ASSETS
              Current Assets:
               Cash                                         $   5,515         $ 
6,104
               Accounts receivable                                  0           
787
               Inventory                                        4,386          
14,674
                                                               ------          
------
              Total Current Assets                              9,901          
21,565
Property and equipment, net of accumulated
               depreciation of $96,207 and $94,349              2,960           
4,819
Capitalized software costs, net of accumulated
               amortization of $101,101 and $33,529            78,192          
56,998
Other assets                                      4,972           
4,972
                                                               ------          
------
                    TOTAL ASSETS                            $  96,025        $ 
88,354
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIT
              Current Liabilities                                          g
$  60,000
$
Deferred revenue
-
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities        59,679
55,011
               Notes payable                                  193,251         
194,352
                                                              -------         
-------
              Total Current Liabilities                       312,930         
249,363
Notes payable, stockholders                     190,700         
188,700
Stockholders' Deficit
               Series C Preferred stock, $0.10 par
               value; 200,000 shares authorized,
               issued and outstanding                          20,000          
20,000
Series E Preferred stock, $0.10 par
               value; 100,000 shares authorized,
               33,333 shares issued and outstanding             3,333           
3,333
Series F Preferred stock, $0.10 par
               value, 400,000 shares authorized,
               zero issued and outstanding                          -           
-
Common stock, $0.01 par value; 50,000,000
               shares authorized, 49,901,120 issued and
               outstanding                                    499,011
499,011
Additional paid-in capital                  26,696,445      
26,696,445
                 Less: treasury stock, at cost
                 (12,500 shares)                              (62,500)       
(62,500)
Accumulated deficit                        (27,563,895)   
(27,505,998)
                                                           ----------     
----------
              Total Stockholders' Deficit                    (407,606)      
(349,709)
        TOTAL LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' DEFICIT       $    96,024    $    
88,354
</TABLE>
   See the accompanying notes to the financial statements.
1
OCG TECHNOLOGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
       CONSOLIDATED CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
    For the three months ended September 30, 2005 and 2004
                         (UNAUDITED)
<TABLE>
2005               2004
                                                       --------           
--------
Restated
<S>                                                 <C>                 <C>
  Revenues                                             $ 47,925            
$82,145
  Less: Cost of sales                                    27,843             
43,089
                                                         ------             
------
              Gross margin                               20,082             
39,056
                                                         ------             
------
  Expenses:
              Marketing, general and administrative      33,224             
27,839
              Depreciation                                1,858              
3,027
              Amortization                                4,526              
3,355
              Impairment of capitalized software costs        0             
21,878
              Product development costs                  37,602             
46,236
                                                         ------             
------
  Total expenses                                         77,211            
102,336
                                                         ------            
-------
Gain (loss) from continuing operations                (57,129)           
(63,280)
Loss on sale of marketable securities                                    
(41,300)
  Interest - net                                           (767)             
1,196
                                                      ---------           
--------
  Net gain (loss)                                    ($  57,896)         
($103,384)
Weighted average number of shares outstanding during
     the period                                       49,901,121        
45,762,903
Loss per Common Share - basic and diluted                   $-*               
$-*
  *Amounts less than ($.005)
</TABLE>
  See accompanying notes to consolidated condensed financial statements
2
OCG TECHNOLOGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
                      STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
            Three Months Ended September 30, 2005 and 2004
                             (UNAUDITED)
<TABLE>
                                                               2005             
2004
                                                              ------            
--------
Restated
<S>                                                      <C>               <C>
  Cash flows from operating activities:
        Net gain (loss)                                    $ (57,896)        $  
(103,381)
        Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used
         in operating activities:
        Depreciation                                           1,858            
3,026
        Amortization                                           4,526            
3,354
        Loss from sale of securities                               0            
41,300
Changes in assets and liabilities
        Deferred income
        Receivables                                              787            
(8,254)
60,000
Inventory
10,288
(21)
Accounts payable and accrued expenses                  4,668            
14,744
                                                              ------            
------
                    Net cash used in operating activities     24,231            
(27,354)
Cash flows from investing activities:
        Decrease in note receivable                                0            
0
        Capitalized software development costs               (25,719)           
(21,878)
Proceeds from sale of marketable securities                0            
5,000
                                                             -------            
------
         
(16,878)
Net cash used in investing activities     (25,719)
Cash flows from financing activities:
        Increase in loans payable, shareholders                2,000
        Increase in credit line                               (1,101)           
9,883
        Proceeds from issuance of common stock                     0            
11,600
                                                              ------            
------
         Net cash provided by financing                          899            
21,483
                                                              ------            
------
  Net decrease in cash                                          (589)           
(22,749)
Cash, beginning of period                                    6,104            
29,257
                                                              ------            
------
Cash, end of period                                         $5,515           $
6,508
                                                              ======           
========
</TABLE>
  See accompanying notes to consolidated condensed financial statements
3
OCG TECHNOLOGY, INC.  AND SUBSIDIARIES
        NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED CONDENSED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
                             (Unaudited)
NOTE 1 - BASIS OF PRESENTATION
The accompanying unaudited interim consolidated financial statements of OCG
Technology, Inc. and subsidiaries ("OCG") have been prepared in accordance with
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and
the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"), and should be read
in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes
thereto contained in OCG's Annual Report filed with the SEC on Form 10-KSB. In
the opinion of management, all adjustments, consisting of normal recurring
adjustments, necessary for a fair presentation of financial position and the
results of operations for the interim periods presented have been reflected
herein. The results of operations for the interim periods are not necessarily
indicative of the results to be expected for the full year. Notes to the
consolidated financial statements which would substantially duplicate the
disclosure contained in the audited consolidated financial
statements for 2005 as reported in the 10-KSB have been omitted.
Restatement.  Restatements of fiscal 2005 were made.  See Note 2 for details.
NOTE 2 - GOING CONCERN
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming
that OCG will continue as a going concern. As shown in the accompanying
financial statements, OCG has suffered recurring losses from operations.  These
conditions raise substantial doubt as to OCG's ability to continue as a going
concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be
necessary if OCG is unable to continue as a going concern. Management's
plans in regard to these matters are described below.
OCG has experienced recurring losses from operations and has relied on the sale
of its common and preferred stock and borrowings to fund its operations. If
necessary, OCG intends to provide additional working capital through the sale
of its equity securities. Although in the past OCG has been able to provide
working capital through the sale of its equity securities and borrowings, there
can be no assurances that it will succeed in its efforts, which creates doubt
about OCG's ability to continue as a going concern.
NOTE 3 - RESTATEMENT
The consolidated financial statements for the three months ended September 30,
2004 were restated as a result of the determination by management that 1)
certain capitalized software development costs under Statement of Financial
Accounting Standards No. 86, "Accounting for the Costs of Computer Software to
Be Sold, Leased, or Otherwise Marketed" ("SFAS 86") were not realizable,
2) that certain accounts receivable were uncollectible, and 3) that shares
issued to non-employees for services should have been expensed in full upon
issuance.  The accounting errors resulted in a misstatement in accounts
receivable, prepaid expenses and other current assets, total current assets,
capitalized software costs, total assets, accumulated deficit, total
stockholders' equity, marketing, general and administrative expense,
amortization expense, impairment of capitalized software costs, total expenses,
net loss from operations, net loss, and net loss per share. There were also
related adjustments to OCG's consolidated statement of cash flows.
Effects on the consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2004:
<TABLE>
As Previously
Reported
---------- -----------
Restated
<S>                                    <C>               <C>
Accounts receivable
Other current assets
Total current assets
Capitalized software costs, net
Total assets
Accumulated deficit
</TABLE>
Effects on Consolidated statement of operations for the three months
ended September 30, 2004:
<TABLE>
$    21,046 $     7,542
     35,320
     81,111      32,574
            364,450
462,614
                (26,577,916) (26,947,257)
93,273
287
43,646
As Previously
Reported
---------- -----------
Restated
<S>                                    <C>               <C>
Marketing, general and administrative
Depreciation and amortization
Impairment of capitalized software costs  -
Total expenses
Loss from operations
Net loss
</TABLE>
31,419      6,380
    21,878
   125,493    102,333
(86,437)
(126,542)
(103,381)
$   47,839 $   27,839
(63,277)
4
OCG TECHNOLOGY, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
               MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF
            FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
A SUMMARY OF INCREASES (DECREASES) IN THE ITEMS INCLUDED IN
         THE CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF LOSS IS SHOWN BELOW:
General
  The following discussion and analysis should be read in
  conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes
  thereto appearing elsewhere herein.  The following discussion
  contains certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of
  Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the
  Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the Company intends that such
  forward-looking statements be subject to the safe harbors created
  thereby.  These forward-looking statements include predictions,
  estimates and other statements that involve a number of risks and
  uncertainties.  While this outlook represents the Company's
  current judgment on the future direction of the business, such
  risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ
  materially from any future performance suggested herein.
The Company has experienced recurring losses from operations and
  has relied on the sale of equity interests in the Company  and
  loans from shareholders to fund its operations.  If necessary,
  the Company intends to provide additional working capital through
  the sale of equity interests in the Company.  Although, in the
  past, the Company has been able to provide working capital
  through the sale of equity interests in the Company and loans,
  there can be no assurances that it will succeed in its efforts,
  which creates a doubt about its ability to continue as a going
  concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
  The discussion and analysis of the Company's financial condition
  and results of operations following are based upon its
  consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in
  accordance with generally accepted accounting principles of the
  United States of America.  The preparation of these financial
  statements requires the use of estimates and judgements that
  affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and
  expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and
  liabilities.  The Company believes that the estimates,
  assumptions and judgements involved in the accounting policies
  described below have the greatest potential impact on its
  financial statements, so the Company considers these to be its
  critical accounting policies.  Because of the uncertainty
  inherent in these matters, actual results could differ from the
  estimates used in applying the critical accounting policies.
  Within the context of these critical accounting policies, we are
  not currently aware of any reasonably likely events or
  circumstances which would result in materially different amounts
  being reported.
Capitalized Software Costs
  Capitalized software costs are amortized over the estimated
  useful life.  Changes in circumstances, such as technological
  advances or shortfalls in marketing estimates, can result in
  differences between the actual and estimated useful life. In
  accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards
  No. 86, "Accounting for the Costs of Computer Software to Be Sold,
  Leased, or Otherwise Marketed," (SFAS No. 86), we compare the
  unamortized capitalized cost of the software to the net realizable
value of the software.  The amount, if any, by which the unamortized
  capital costs exceed the net realizable value of the software is
  written off.
The Company had a write off of $21,878 of capitalized software
  costs during the quarter ended September 30, 2004, and no write
  off for the quarter ended September 30, 2005, respectively, in
  compliance with the Company's policy relating to reevaluating the
  value and useful life of this long-lived asset.
5
Revenue Recognition
  The Company has four sources of income: (1) sale of inventoried
  merchandise on our Web sites; (2) commissions received from
  vendors who link to our Web sites; (3) advertising fees; and (4)
  software license fees.
  
  Sale of inventoried merchandise.
  This revenue stream is reported on a "gross" basis in compliance
  with EITF 99-19, because the Company purchases the merchandise
  from the source it selects; is at risk for the purchaser's
  credit; and the Company ships the merchandise. The Company
  reports the gross sales price as revenue and expenses the cost of
  the merchandise and the shipping costs as "cost of sales".  The
  Company is almost always paid by credit card at the time of
  purchase and occasionally by check.  Sales are booked when the
  merchandise is shipped.  The merchandise is not shipped until the
  credit is approved.
Commissions received from vendors
  The Company acts as a commissioned broker by displaying a
  vendor's products on the Company's Web sites.  When a consumer
  indicates a desire to purchase an item, the order is collected
  through the Web site and processed by the third party seller.
  The Company receives a commission on such sale after it is
  consummated.  When the Company is paid, it reports the
  "commissions" on a "net" basis in compliance with EITF 99-19.
  The Company reports commissions this way because: (a) it does not
  have any direct costs; (b) it does not purchase the product sold;
  and  (c) it does not have any credit risk on the sale, and it
  does not handle or ship the product when sold.  The Company
  notifies the seller of an interested buyer and it receives a
  commission check from the seller upon the consummation of a sale.
   At that time the Company reports the revenue on a "net" basis.
Advertising fees
  The Company receives fees for placing advertisements on its Web
  sites. At the end of the month the Company sends an invoice to
  the advertiser and enters it on its books as income from
  advertising fees.
Software license fees
  The Company accounts for software license fees in accordance with
  SOP 97-2.  Revenues are recognized when all of the following
  criteria are met: (a) persuasive evidence of an arrangement
  exists; (b) delivery has occurred; (c) the vendors fee is fixed
  or determinable; and (d) collectiblity is probable.
All licenses are evidenced by a written contract.  License fees,
  paid for use of the software, are annual fees, generally payable
  monthly, or quarterly, in advance, based on the number of
  patients of the Healthcare Provider or are based on uses (per
  patient visit), which are generally, purchased in advance.  The
  license fee includes updates to the software  during the term of
the license.  The software contains considerable medical
  information and the Company keeps this medical content current
  through periodic reviews and updates.  New updates are
  incorporated automatically and at no cost to the customer. The
  Company does not sell the software or any updates separately and
  therefore, has not established VSOE.  The Company will recognize
  income ratably over the license term.
Results of Operations
  Total revenues decreased from $82,145 for the three months ended
  September 30, 2004 as compared to $47,925 for 2005, a decrease of
  $34,221.  The Company's revenues for the three months ended
  September 30, 2005, consisted of: $47,925 from the sale of
  merchandise (a decrease of $25,981 for the same period in 2004);
  and no income from commissions (a decrease of $7,610 for the same
  period in 2004).  The decrease in merchandise sales occurred as a
  result of changes made to the Web site on which our shopping cart
  resides, making access to our shopping cart more difficult.  The
  Company received $60,000 for granting  a license to use the
  Company's software, PrimeCare Version Nine on September 29, 2005,
  which was booked to deferred income as of September 30,2005.
Cost of sales decreased from $43,089, for the three months ended
  September 30, 2004, to $27,843, for the three months ended September
  30, 2005, which resulted from the decrease in the sales of merchandise.
Marketing, general and administrative expenses decreased $5,385
  for the three months ended September 30, 2005, as compared to the
  same period for 2004, primarily from the decrease of $6,000 in
  sales related expenses.
6
Product development costs decreased $8,634 during the three months
  ended September 30, 2005 compared to the same period in 2004 mainly
  as a result of a decrease in payroll.
  
  Liquidity and Capital Resources
  At September 30, 2005, the Company had a current ratio of .032 to 1
  compared to .086 to 1 as of  September 30, 2004.  The net loss for
  the three months ended September 30, 2005, was $57,896 compared to
  $103,381 for the same quarter of 2004.  The calculation of loss for
  the three months ended September 30, 2005, did not take into
  consideration the receipt of $60,000.00 in license fees for
  PrimeCareTM Version Nine, which was booked as deferred income.  The
  decrease of $45,488 in the loss for the three months ended September
  30, 2005, as compared to the same period for 2004, was primarily due
  to the write off of capitalized costs of $21,878 as an impairment,
  since there were no license fees for said period, and a loss from
  the sale of marketable securities of $41,300, which occurred in the
  2004 period.  The Company has experienced recurring
  losses from operations and has been unable to provide sufficient
  working capital from operations and has relied significantly on
  the sale of equity interests in the Company, and the exercise of
  warrants and loans from shareholders to fund its operations.
Cash on hand, inventory and receivables were $9,901 at September
  30, 2005.  Although, in the past, the Company's principal means
  of overcoming its cash shortfalls from operations was from the
  sale of the Company's stock, loans and the exercise of warrants,
  there can be no assurances that the Company will succeed in its
  efforts in the future, especially since 49,890,582 shares of
  Common stock of the 50,000,000 authorized have been issued,
  therefore the Company only has Preferred shares available for
  issue.  However, in view of the license agreement recently
  entered into, discussed in more detail under "Marketing" below
and other continuing efforts of the Company, the Company believes
  that it could obtain sufficient working capital from operations
  through marketing PrimeCareTM Version Nine and its Internet
  products.
Marketable securities
  The Company had advanced funds totaling $334,500, plus accrued
  interest at 7% per annum, pursuant to a grid note, dated February
  4, 2002 (the "Note").  The Company received a security interest
  in accounts receivable of the borrower anticipated to be
  generated under certain sales contracts which provide for
  borrower to install and maintain the health care system for
  certain countries. On October 10, 2004, the Company agreed to
  accept 3,709,230 restricted (unregistered) shares of the
  borrower's common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, (the
  "Stock") in full payment of the Note ($334,500 of principal, plus
  $36,423 of accrued interest, for the total amount of $370,923).
  The market value on October 10, 2004, of the Stock received was
  $704,753. The Company realized $167,761 from the sale of all of
  the shares, which resulted in a total loss of $203,162, of
  which $41,300 occurred during the September 2004 quarter.
Products Overview.
Although prior to the quarter ended September 30, 2005, the
  Company's primary source of revenues have been derived from the
  operation of the "shopping cart" on the fitness Web site known as
  www.DeniseAustin.com, the Company believes that the PrimeCare(TM)
  Patient Management System, Version Nine ("PrimeCareTM Version
  Nine ) and its related Web sites will become the major source of
  the Company's revenues.  This is more fully discussed below under
   "Competition" and "Marketing".
Competition:   PrimeCareTM Version Nine creates an electronic
  medical record documenting the patient-physician encounter.
  There are more than 200 EHR (electronic health records) on the
  market today, according to the Fact Sheet, of the Health
  Information Requests for Proposals, in the request for proposals
  of the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
  Technology of the Department of Health & Human Services, dated
  June 6, 2005,
  http://www.os.dhhs.gov/healthit/documents/RFPfactsheet.pdf.  To
  date, market penetration by both the Company and its competitors
  has been very small.   The consensus is that no more than 2% of
  U.S. doctors use diagnostic software, according to an article
  appearing in the May 23, 2005 edition of the Wall Street Journal
  entitled "Software for Symptoms", which discusses the use of
  computers in medicine.  It points out that use of software can be
  cost prohibitive, time-consuming and cumbersome, and that there
  are concerns regarding computerized mistakes.  Based on this and
  other information, we do not believe that any competitor has a
  significant share of the market.
  
  The article raises the question as to why  diagnostic software
  has not found more of a market, stating that  "Some doctors say
  it takes too much time to enter extensive patient data into some
  systems." It then continues with, "If your HMO allows you 10 and
  a half minutes to see a patient how are you going to do this?"
  quoting David Goldmann,  a physician who serves as vice president
  and editor in chief of the Physicians' Information and Education
  Resource, a guide to clinical care published by the American
  College of Physicians in Philadelphia.
7
However, unlike competitive electronic medical records ("EMR") or
computerized patient records ("CPR"), PrimeCareTM Version Nine
  can actually reduce the time needed to collect and organize the
  patient-physician encounter documentation.  PrimeCareTM Version
  Nine achieves this goal in several ways.  In particular,
  PrimeCareTM Version Nine incorporates an authoritative and
  comprehensive knowledge database of approximately 280 symptom and
  problem oriented patient questionnaires ("Questionnaires") for
  diagnostic and follow-up office visits.  During an office visit,
  the patient responds to questions from appropriate
  Questionnaires, prior to being seen by the physician, and without
  requiring physician time or presence.  When the patient has
  completed his or her Questionnaire(s), a preliminary diagnostic
  report is generated for the physician to review prior to the
  face-to-face encounter with the patient.  This report contains
  all the patient's "positive" answers, pertinent "negative"
  answers, and lists diagnostic possibilities triggered by the
  patient's responses, in alphabetical order, together with those
  responses which gave rise to diagnostic consideration.
PrimeCareTM Version Nine does not make any decisions.  It
  gathers, organizes,  and prepares information for the physician
  to review as an aid in making the correct diagnosis.  As the
  patient's responses to interview questions are recorded, there
  are incorporated into the patient record, in real time, without
  additional effort required on the part of either physician or
  medical staff, and without requiring dictation and subsequent
  transcription.  This characteristic is more fully discussed
  below.
Competitive systems, on the other hand, generally require that
  the physician personally elicit the clinical information needed
  to make the diagnosis directly from the patient, mainly by
  verbally by asking the patient questions.   A physician may not
  ask every patient the same questions for the same symptoms or
  problems, nor will different physicians always ask the same
  questions for the same problem.  Once the information has been
  obtained, and frequently, after being recorded in temporary
  hand-written notes, the physician then enters the data acquired
  during the patient encounter into a system; in some cases, by
  typing the data directly into a computer program; and in others
  by selecting the physician's diagnosis from a computer program,
  which then brings up on the computer, a list of symptoms relating
  to that diagnosis, from which the physician checks off the
  patient's symptoms, on then entering the data into that patient's
  record.
The Company believes that when the time savings and efficiencies
  of PrimeCareTM Version Nine become more widely known, PrimeCareTM
  Version Nine will make a significant penetration of the potential
  market.  The Company has not identified any competitive patient
  management system which embodies the patient-centric,
  self-administered medical interview feature of PrimeCareTM
  Version Nine.
When the physician portion of the patient encounter commences,
  the physician reviews the PrimeCareTM Version Nine preliminary
  report, examines the patient, determines a diagnosis, treatment,
  and follow-up plan.  The physician records his examination
  findings and the results of his medical decision-making by  using
  PrimeCareTM Version Nine, which contains problem-appropriate
  selections of both abnormal and normal findings, relevant
  diagnoses, medications and other treatment options, as well as
  test, education, and follow-up selections.  The physician selects
and prescribes medications, recording them all in the patient's
  record by a click of the mouse or using the keyboard, all of
  which is done in real time.
Because the PrimeCareTM Version Nine encounter reports the
  diagnostic possibilities, the physician is less apt to overlook
  or forget an uncommon or unusual diagnostic possibility.
  PrimeCareTM Version Nine makes a more complete record since it
  contains every question asked, every answer, and the list of
  associated diagnostic possibilities.  While competitive systems
  increase the physicians' workload, PrimeCareTM Version Nine
  reduces the paperwork burden imposed on the physician.  The
  patient can answer the PrimeCareTM Version Nine Questionnaires in
  the physicians office, or via the Internet from work or home,
  prior to arriving at his or her appointment.
  
8
    PrimeCare(TM) Version Nine
PrimeCareTM Version Nine is a complete, ground-up redesign and
  re-write of the Company's initial electronic medical record
  ("EMR"). The overall system architecture has been changed to
  simplify deployment and increase security; the supporting data
  base structures have been enhanced; the client interface has been
  redesigned to more accurately reflect the operational needs of
  the end-users; user installation has been greatly simplified; and
  end-user hardware costs dramatically reduced.
PrimeCareTM Version Nine's overall system architecture
  incorporates a robust three-tier client-provider-relational
  database management system ("RDBMS") design, structured to
  support geographically separated tiers. The client (end-user)
  tier of PrimeCareTM Version Nine connects with the middle or
  provider tier via secure Internet communications.  The provider
  tier, in turn, connects with the data base tier, thereby
  isolating and protecting the data base and protecting the
  patients' medical data from uncontrolled exposure on the
  internet. The provider and data base tiers are designed to
  support multiple, distinct clients simultaneously. The client
  application has been designed to allow easy internationalization
  and localization (easy adaptation to local currency, date and
  time conventions).
The supporting databases have been redesigned to remove
  unnecessary redundancies, including a major redesign of the
  patient/physician encounter Questionnaires.  Provisions have been
  added for support of an unlimited number of alternative
  languages. Currently, language support is offered in English and
  Spanish, which was substantially completed during September,
  2005.  The terms of a recently signed license agreement provides
  for the licensee to pay for development of a Portuguese version.
  The addition of both French, and Simplified Chinese have been
  started, but will not be completed in the near future. Italian,
  German, Korean, Japanese have been identified as candidates for
  translation as well.
PrimeCare(TM) Version Nine is a Windows(TM) application.  The
  client tier will run on Windows 98SE or any later Windows desktop
  operating system,  such as Windows 2000, Windows NT, or Windows
  XP.  It will not run on Unix or Linux.  The server (provider
  tier) and data base tiers of PrimeCare(TM) Version Nine is hosted
  on redundant Windows 2000 or Windows XP servers with appropriate
  backup, and standby support.
As a three-tier application, PrimeCareTM Version Nine requires
only the client tier application to be installed at the end-user
  location.  Although the client (end-user) tier uses the Internet
  to communicate with the provider tier, it is not a browser-based
  application, thereby eliminating the many compatibility and
  security issues involved in supporting multiple browser
  configurations. The PrimeCareTM Version Nine client is a
  specially written front-end application, designed to be
  downloaded by the client via a web connection, and then installed
  at the client's location using normal Windows installation
  procedures.
The three-tier architecture of PrimeCareTM Version Nine provides
  many advantages, including easy client installation; reduced
  on-site hardware and support requirements; enhanced data
  security; and maximum flexibility.  PrimeCareTM Version Nine's
  reduced installation and maintenance costs and its flexibility
  enables it to be adapted to a wide variety of health care
  organizational uses, including national and local health care
  systems, military organizations, correctional facilities, HMOs,
  hospitals with outpatient services, clinics, group practices and
  solo practitioners.
9
The PrimeCareTM Version Nine system can support multiple
  reimbursement models, including free demo, no-charge use,
  sponsored use, flat fee, periodic (monthly / annual) fee,
  activity based fees, and option-based fees.
  
  Beyond simply being a user friendly, patient management system
  that is patient, physician and staff, interactive, the
  PrimeCareTM Version Nine system: (i) is Health Insurance
  Portability Accountability Act ("HIPAA") compliant; (ii)
  collectively contains over 100,000 complaint and disease state
  questions, over 2,000 diagnoses, over 675 physician reference
  articles, over 300 patient education articles; (iii) does not
  require the patient to have computer or typing skills; (iv)
  enables the physician to obtain their patients' detailed History
  of Present Illness ("HPI") by having the patient answer the
  Questionnaires without requiring physician or staff presence; (v)
  allows the physician to interact directly with PrimeCareTM
  Version Nine to select and document the normal and abnormal
  physical findings, assessments, tests, prescriptions and
  treatment plan for the patient; (vi) provides automatic (real
  time) calculation of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
  (formerly, Health Care Financing Administration) mandated
  Evaluation and Management ("E&M") code, with a full audit trail,
  used for determining the reimbursement level by Medicare, health
  insurance  providers and other third party payers for the office
  visit;  (vii) creates significant clinical and patient databases
  for outcomes research.
When the patient arrives at, or telephones, the doctor's office,
  a staff member selects an appropriate Questionnaire or
  questionnaries, based upon the patient's chief complaint and/or
  symptoms, and if the patient is at the doctor's office, takes and
  enters the patient's vital signs. The patient at the doctor's
  office is then seated at a computer, or if at home or office then
  via the Internet,  answers complaint-specific questions contained
  in the Questionnaire, by using either the keyboard number keys or
  mouse to indicate answers that apply to the patient.  No typing
  or computer skills are required. When the patient completes his
  or her Questionnaire(s), PrimeCareTM Version Nine prepares a
  Preliminary Report (the "Report") for the physician to review
  before examining the patient.
This report contains any nursing notes, and patient's vital
  signs, along with, most importantly, the patient's detailed HPI,
  that includes all of the positive and significant negative
  responses to the questions contained in the completed
  Questionnaire(s), plus an alphabetical list of diagnostic
  possibilities with the triggering patient responses annotated.
  By freeing up the time physicians would normally have to spend
  asking patient history questions and recording responses,
  PrimeCareTM Version Nine permits physicians to see more patients
  and/or to spend more quality time with each patient.  PrimeCareTM
  Version Nine is also easy for physicians to understand and use.
  The same simple key stroke or mouse click process used by the
  patient allows the physician or appropriate staff member to
  select and document physical findings (normal and abnormal),
  assessments, tests, and treatment plan; to prescribe medications;
  to select patient education handout materials; and to specify
  follow-up instructions.
By automatically collecting and electronically storing the
  patient's encounter documentation, a permanent, unalterable
  electronic record is of the visit is generated, and the need for
  dictation and transcription, with their associated costs, is
  virtually eliminated. The physician or appropriate staff member
  can also enter additional comments that expands upon any answer
  selected by the patient in the Questionnaire, a physical finding,
  an assessment, a treatment plan, a prescription, or about any
  subject that may be appropriate.  At the conclusion of the
  encounter a final summary report of the visit that includes the
  patient's HPI, physical findings, assessment, tests,
  prescriptions, treatment plan, patient educational materials and
  the scheduled follow-up visit, are stored electronically in the
  patient's file.  A copy of the documentation can be printed for
  the patient to keep in his or her own personal medical record, a
  practice that has been shown to reduce the number of callbacks
  from patients asking for clarification or repetition of the
  physician's instructions to them, further reducing the time and
  cost burden of both physician and medical staff.
CodeComplierTM:
The Company has also developed CodeComplierTM, an application
  software program used in conjunction with the Company's
  PrimeCareTM Version Nine and PrimeCareOnTheWebTM.  As each item
  of information is entered into and collected by PrimeCareTM
  during the patient encounter, the CodeComplierTM organizes the
  data in the proper classification and using the Centers for
  Medicare & Medicaid Services' (CMS, formerly, HCFA) Documentation
  Guidelines, automatically calculates the Evaluation and
  Management ('E&M") code level, with full audit trail, used for
  determining the reimbursement level by Medicare and other third
  party payers for the History, Physical Findings and Decision
  Making sections of the office visit. It totally eliminates the
  time and effort that would otherwise be required by the physician
  or office personnel to complete this task. CodeComplierTM takes
  the guesswork out of E&M and third party payer compliance.
  CodeComplierTM is an integral part of PrimeCareTM Version Nine.
  
        PrimeCareOnTheWeb.com (the "PCW Site"):
10
The PCW Site is a unique physician and patient interactive Site
  that: (i) uses PrimeCareTM Version Nine's unique Questionnaires
  for diagnostic and follow-up office visits, physician reference
  articles, patient education material, and the  CodeComplierTM for
  real time calculation of E&M code; (ii) enables physicians to
obtain their patient's detailed HPI by having the patient answer
  Questionnaires via the Internet without requiring physician time;
  (iii) saves the physician and staff the time required to obtain
  the HPI, thus allowing them to give more attention to each
  patient and/or see more patients; (iv) produces an extremely
  comprehensive HPI that includes all of the "yes" answers,
  pertinent negatives and a list of the diagnostic possibilities
  with the answers repeated that support each diagnostic
  consideration; (v) is HIPAA compliant; (vi) protects all Internet
  communication and the confidentiality rights of every user
  through a unique user ID and password per Questionnaire to be
  answered and secure digital certificates (vii) encrypts all data
  for storage; (viii) enables creating a significant database for
  outcomes research; and (ix) automatically provides registered
  physicians individual Web sites on YourOwnDoctorTM.
YourOwnDoctor.com (the "YOD Site"):
The YOD Site is a web community created, owned, operated and
  maintained by the Company that: (i) provides free individual Web
  sites for physicians, physician groups, and other health care
  providers that register for PrimeCareOnTheWebTM; (ii) enables
  physicians to promote their services through displaying
  credentials, including photos of each physician and staff in the
  office, listing specialties, office hours, directions, maps,
  phone numbers, e-mail addresses, and accepted insurance plans;
  (iii) provides useful links to other medical sites; (iv) provides
  a direct link from physician site to PCW that enables patient to
  access appropriate Questionnaire and complete; (v) provides
  direct link to YourOwnHealthTM for use by patients.
YourOwnHealth.com (the "YOH Site"):
The YOH Site is a unique, free online health and wellness site
  designed to empower health care consumers to be better prepared
  for their next visit to the doctor. The YOH Site offers: (1) the
  "Medical Interview" that: (i) enables visitors to securely and
  anonymously select and complete from approximately 104 of the 280
  Questionnaires contained in PrimeCareTM Version Nine; (ii)
  generates and makes available to the visitor a detailed HPI
  report based upon their responses; (iii) permits the visitor to
  answer the Questionnaires in either English or Spanish; (iv)
  encrypts all medical data and uses digital certificates for
  Internet communication; (v) provides banner links to the YOD Site
  and www.DeniseAustin.com. (2) "YourOwnHealthTM Notebook": (i) is
  a secure depository for storage of personal and family medical
  data for Registered Members; (ii) can be accessed only through
  the use of registered IDs and Passwords; (iii) encrypts all
  medical data and uses digital certificates from VeriSignTM for
  Internet communication; (iv) provides a convenient way to keep
  track of personal health issues such as allergies, immunizations,
  medications and others that can be kept and edited on designated
  lists; (v) allows the Member to save their completed HPI
  Questionnaire reports and to add personal notes and reminders to
  the record. (3) "YourOwnHealthTM Reference" provides extensive
  health care consumer education material relating to diseases,
  disease management, medical procedures and prescription and
  common over the counter medications, including drug interaction.
Revenue Sources and Marketing:  The principal markets for the
  PrimeCareTM Version Nine are national and local health care
  systems, military organizations, correctional facilities, HMOs,
  hospitals with outpatient services, ambulatory/outpatient medical
  facilities, group practices and individual practitioners
(collectively, "Healthcare Providers").  PrimeCareTM Version Nine
  is designed to support multiple reimbursement models, including
  free demo, no charge use, sponsored use, flat fee, periodic
  (monthly quarterly, semi-annual and annual) fee, activity based
  fees and option based fees.  The Company intends to license
  PrimeCareTM Version Nine to Healthcare Providers and to
  organizations that will sub-license the software to Healthcare
  Providers.
11
According to the American Medical Association, there are over
  650,000 physicians in the U.S. creating a very large potential
  market for the System. The Company estimates that as many as
  250,000 of these physicians could use PrimeCareTM Version Nine
  routinely.
  
  Licensing Fees:
  Currently, the Company's license revenues from PrimeCareTM
  Version Nine have not been substantial and no assurances can be
  given that the marketing plan will succeed.  However, during the
  quarter ending September 30, 2005, the Company entered into a ten
  year license agreement with a company based in Argentina.  The
  Medical Director of the Licensee, a prominent, highly regarded
  physician in Argentina, has been using PrimeCareTM Version Nine
  since November, 2004.  As part of the consideration for becoming
  the exclusive licensee within the free trade association known as
  Mercosur, whose members are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay
  and Uruguay, the Licensee paid the Company $60,000 and has agreed
  to fund the translation and internationalization of PrimeCareTM
  Version Nine in both Spanish and Portuguese.  The Spanish version
  was substantially completed during September 2005.  The Licensee
  will sub-license PrimeCareTM Version Nine to health care
  providers in the Mercosur and train them in its use.   In the
  event that the gross revenues derived by Licensee from sub
  licensing PrimeCare V9, are less than two million five hundred
  thousand U.S. dollars (US$2,500,000) for the third year of the
  Term of the agreement, or any year thereafter, the Agreement will
  become non-exclusive for the balance of the term.  The License
  provides that the fee to be charged to a sub-licensee shall be
  not less than four US dollars (US$4) per annum, per patient of
  each sub-licensee, without regard to the number of patient uses
  of the software during that year, unless the Company agrees, in
  writing, to a lower fee.  The Licensee intends to begin
  installation and training of PrimeCareTM Version Nine in January
  of 2006, and anticipates that by the third quarter of 2006, there
  will be a significant stream of revenues.
Advertising Fees:
  Advertising revenues are dependant upon the number of visitors
  that use the Company's Web sites.  The Company believes that the
  use of  PrimeCare(TM) Version Nine by licensees will increase
  awareness and use of the Company's Web sites and thus result in
  increased advertising fees.
The Company has entered into an agreement with Hackensack
  University Medical Center ("HUMC"). The agreement provides for
  the use of the Company's Web sites by HUMC's medical services
  organization ("MSO"), North Jersey Medical Management Services,
  L.L.C. This MSO has over 1,000 physicians. HUMC, and its
  Physicians Hospital Organization, have created www.HUMCMD.net, a
  complete Physician/Patient Internet Service Provider ("ISP")
  providing top quality Internet connectivity to members of its
  physician network, plus access to key internal HUMC applications.
The HUMCMD site has both a "Physician Portal" and "Patient
Portal".  The site currently contains the Company's PCW Site and
  YOH Site.  The Company's advertising revenues are dependent upon
  HUMC's marketing efforts to its Staff Physicians and patients
  which to date has been minimal.
Outcomes Research.
  Potentially, the Company could receive fees or grants for
  conducting outcomes research for pharmaceutical companies,
  teaching hospitals, governmental agencies and  philanthropic
  organizations.  The Company anonymizes, encrypts and stores the
  data from both the completed diagnostic and follow-up
  Questionnaires. This ever-growing medical database can be
  analyzed in various ways to determine the effectiveness of
  treatment plans, medications, etc.
Fitness Web Site:
The Company has marketing arrangements with www.DeniseAustin.com
  ("DeniseAustin.com"), currently the Company's primary source of
  revenues.  The Company has entered into two agreements with the
  manager of the Web site.  Under one agreement, the Company
  provides and operates the "shopping cart" on the site and the
  second agreement retains the Company as the exclusive seller of
  Denise Austin videos and DVDs on the site.  The Manager markets
  and promotes the site.  The fitness and wellness Web site known
  as www.DeniseAustin.com features Denise Austin, a nationally
  known fitness expert, who has had a daily fitness show on
  television for over 15 years. The Company's shopping cart sells a
  variety of Denise Austin products on the Web site. Visitors and
  fans are able to shop online for their favorite Denise Austin
  signature exercise videos, books, equipment, gear, private label
  apparel and food supplements.
  
12
           Competition:   There are a large number of sellers of
  fitness  videotapes including those of Denise Austin, such as
  retail stores and other Web sites.  However, the Company is the
  exclusive seller of fitness videos and DVDs on DeniseAustin.com
  which is promoted by Denise Austin, the host of Lifetime
  Television's "Denise Austin's Fit & Lite" and "Denise Austin's
  Daily Workout".   She is also a columnist for Prevention magazine
  and has written many books, including "Fit and Fabulous After
  40," "Lose Those Last 10 Pounds" and "Shrink Your Female Fat
  Zones."  As a result of ads and other forms of promotion, people
  come to the Web site, and pay to join, and become members of, and
  participate in, Denise Austin's Fit Forever, all of which
  generates visitors to the Web site and our shopping cart.
Government Regulation
The Company is operating in the medical field, which is
  subject to extensive federal, state and local regulations.
  Neither the PrimeCareTM Version Nine, nor the CodeComplierTM
  require FDA filings or approval.  However, PrimeCareTM Version
  Nine must be, and is, compliant with the Health Insurance
  Portability Accountability Act ("HIPAA") to enable physicians to
  use it.  HIPAA was enacted, in part, to establish national
  standards for electronic health care transactions and it
  addresses the security and privacy of health data during
  electronic data interchange.  However, there can be no assurance
  that new laws will not be passed, or current regulations changed,
  the enactment of which could negatively effect, or prohibit, the
  marketability of PrimeCareTM Version Nine.
The Company believes that it can obtain sufficient working
capital from operations through marketing PrimeCareTM Version
  Nine and its other Internet products.
Currently, the Company has lines of credit with RBC Centura Bank
  for a maximum of borrowing of $20,000 and has no material
  commitments for capital expenditures outstanding.
Item 3.  Controls and Procedures
An evaluation was carried out under the supervision and with the
  participation of the Company's management, including the
  President/Chief Financial Officer ("CFO"), of the effectiveness
  of the Company's disclosure controls and procedures.  Based on
  that evaluation, the President/CFO has concluded that as of the
  end of the period covered by this report, the Company's
  disclosure controls and procedures are effective to provide
  reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed by
  the Company in reports that it files or submits under the
  Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded, processed,
  summarized and timely reported as provided in the Securities and
  Exchange Commission rules and forms.  The Company periodically
  reviews the design and effectiveness of our internal controls
  over financial reporting, including compliance with various laws
  and regulations that apply to the Company's operations.  The
  Company makes modifications to improve the design and
  effectiveness of its internal control structure, and may take
  other corrective action, if the Company's reviews identify
  deficiencies or weaknesses in its controls.  No changes occurred
  during the quarter ended September 30, 2005 in the Company's
  internal controls over financial reporting that have materially
  affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the
  Company's internal control over financial reporting.
                                13
                     PART II - OTHER INFORMATION
Item 2.  Changes In Securities
During the three months ended September 30, 2005, no shares of
  the Company's Stock were sold and no warrants to purchase shares
  were issued.
Item 6.  Exhibits and Reports on Form 8-K
                    (a)      31.1     Certification pursuant to
  Rule 13a-14 AND 15d-14 of the Securities Exchange act of 1934, as
  adopted pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley act of 2002
32.1     Certification pursuant to 18
  U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the
  Sarbanes-Oxley act of 2002
(b)      Reports on Form 8-K
                             No Report on Form 8-K was filed during
  the quarter ended September 30, 2005.
14
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Sections 13 or 15(d) the
  Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly
  caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned,
thereunto duly authorized.
OCG TECHNOLOGY, INC.
BY /s/Edward C. Levine
                                    EDWARD C. LEVINE,
                                    PRESIDENT
                                    CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER)
DATED: November 11, 2005
Exhibit 31.1
15
302 CERTIFICATION  SMALL BUSINESS CERTIFICATION OF PRESIDENT
I, Edward C. Levine, President of the Registrant, OCG Technology,
  Inc. hereby certify that:
I have reviewed this quarterly Form 10-QSB
             for the periods ending September 30, 2005
             and 2004 of OCG Technology, Inc.;
2)       Based on my knowledge, this
             quarterly report does not contain any
             untrue statement of a material fact or
             omit to state a material fact necessary to
             make the statements made, in light of the
             circumstances under which such statements
             were made, not misleading with respect to
             the period covered by this quarterly report;
3)       Based on my knowledge, the
             financial statements, and other financial
             information included in this report,
             fairly present in all material respects
             the financial condition, results of
             operations and cash flows of the
             Registrant as of, and for, the periods
             presented in this quarterly report;
4)       I am solely responsible for
             establishing and maintaining disclosure
             controls and procedures (as defined in
             Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and
             15d-15(e)) and internal control over
             financial reporting (as defined in
             Exchange Act Rules 13a - 15(f) and 15d-
             15(f)) for the Registrant and I have:
designed such disclosure controls
                      and procedures or caused such
                      disclosure controls and
                      procedures to be designed under
                      my supervision, to ensure that
                      material information relating to
                      the Registrant, including its
                      consolidated subsidiaries, is
                      made known to us by others within
                      those entities, particularly
during the period in which this
                      quarterly report is being prepared;
designed such internal control
                      over financial reporting, or
                      caused such internal control over
                      financial reporting to be
                      designed under my supervision, to
                      provide reasonable assurance
                      regarding the reliability of
                      financial reporting and the
                      preparation of financial
                      statements for external purposes
                      in accordance with generally
                      accepted accounting procedures;
evaluated the effectiveness of
                      the Registrant's disclosure
                      controls and procedures and
                      presented in this report our
                      conclusions about the
                      effectiveness of the disclosure
                      controls and procedures as of the
                      end of the period covered by this
                      quarterly report based on such
                      evaluation; and
disclosed in this quarterly
                      report any change in the
                      Registrant's internal control
                      over financial reporting that
                      occurred during the period ending
                      September 30, 2005 that has
                      materially affected, or is
                      reasonably likely to materially
                      affect, the Registrant's internal
                      control over financial reporting;
                      and
5)       I have disclosed, based on my
             most recent evaluation of internal control
             over financial reporting, to the
             Registrant's auditors and the audit
             committee of the Registrant's board of
             directors (or persons performing the
             equivalent function):
a)        all significant
                      deficiencies and material
                      weaknesses in the design or
                      operation of internal control
                      over financial reporting which
                      are reasonably likely to
                      adversely affect the Registrant's
                      ability to record, process,
                      summarize and report financial
                      information; and
b)       any fraud, whether or
                      not material, that involves
                      management or other employees who
                      have a significant role in the
                      Registrant's internal control
                      over financial reporting.
Date:  November 11, 2005
                                By: /s/ Edward C. Levine
                                    Edward C. Levine, President/Chief
                                    Financial Officer
16
Exhibit 32.1
CERTIFICATION OF PRESIDENT/CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
Pursuant to section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
              2002 (18 U.S.C. ss. 1350), the undersigned, Edward C.
              Levine, President and Chief Executive Officer, of OCG
              Technology, Inc., a Delaware corporation, (the
              "Company"), does hereby certify, to his knowledge,
              that :
The Quarterly Report on Form 10-QSB for the period
              ended September 30, 2005 of the Company (the "Report")
              fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a)
              or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
              the information contained in the report fairly
              presents, in all material respects, the financial
              condition and result of operations of the Company.
By: /s/ Edward C. Levine
                  Edward C. Levine,
                  President/Chief Financial Officer
November 11, 2005
</TEXT>
</DOCUMENT>
</SEC-DOCUMENT>
-----END PRIVACY-ENHANCED MESSAGE-----
17