
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 2, 2016
Registration No. 333-
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM S-3
UNDER
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
URANIUM RESOURCES, INC. 
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction of 
incorporation or organization)
75-2212772
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification Number)
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)
6950 South Potomac Street, Suite 300
Centennial, Colorado 80112
(303) 531-0470
Jeffrey L. Vigil
Vice President—Finance and Chief Financial Officer
Uranium Resources, Inc.
6950 South Potomac Street, Suite 300
Centennial, Colorado 80112
(303) 531-0470
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)
Copies to:
Paul Hilton, Esq.
David R. Crandall, Esq. 
Hogan Lovells US LLP
One Tabor Center, Suite 1500
1200 Seventeenth Street 
Denver, Colorado 80202 
Telephone: (303) 899-7300 
Facsimile: (303) 899-7333
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public:  From time to time after the effective date of this 
registration statement.
If the only securities being registered on this Form are being offered pursuant to dividend or interest reinvestment plans, please 
check the following box:   
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415 
under the Securities Act of 1933, other than securities offered only in connection with dividend or interest reinvestment plans, 
check the following box:   
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, please check 
the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the 
same offering.   
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following box and 
list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.   
If this Form is a registration statement pursuant to General Instruction I.D. or a post-effective amendment thereto that shall 
become effective upon filing with the Commission pursuant to Rule 462(e) under the Securities Act, check the following box.   
If this Form is a post-effective amendment to a registration statement filed pursuant to General Instruction I.D. filed to register 
additional securities or additional classes of securities pursuant to Rule 413(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box. 
  
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller 
reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 
12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer 
Non-accelerated filer 
(Do not check if a smaller reporting company)


Accelerated filer  
Smaller reporting company  
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of each class of
securities to be registered
Amount to be 
registered(1)
Common Stock, par value 
$0.001 per share
97,894
Proposed maximum 
offering price per
unit(2) 
$1.43
Proposed maximum 
aggregate offering
price (2) 
$139,988
Amount of
registration fee
$14
(1)  This registration statement also relates to such additional shares of common stock of the registrant as may be issued with
respect to such shares of common stock by way of a stock dividend, stock split or similar transaction.
(2)  Estimated solely for the purpose of calculating the registration fee pursuant to Rule 457(c) under the Securities Act of 1933, 
as amended (the “Securities Act”), based upon the average high and low per share prices of the registrant’s common stock as 
reported on the Nasdaq Capital Market on July 27, 2016.
The registrant hereby amends this registration statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its effective 
date until the registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this registration statement shall 
thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act or until the registration statement shall 
become effective on such date as the Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. These securities may not be 
sold until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is effective. This 
prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is not soliciting an offer to buy these securities in 
any state or jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted.
SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED AUGUST 2, 2016
PROSPECTUS
97,894 Shares of Common Stock
This prospectus relates to the resale from time to time of up to an aggregate of 97,894 shares of our
common stock by the selling stockholders named herein, consisting of 47,229 shares of common stock issued 
to Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. for financial advisory services provided in connection with the Company’s 
acquisition of Anatolia Energy Limited, and 50,665 shares of common stock issued to a consultant in 
satisfaction of payments due under a consultancy agreement entered into by Anatolia Energy Limited.
All of the proceeds from the sale of the shares covered by this prospectus will be received by the selling
stockholders. We will not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of those shares. Our registration of the 
common stock covered by this prospectus does not mean that the selling stockholders will offer or sell any of 
the common stock. The shares may be offered and sold from time to time by the selling stockholders named 
herein through public or private transactions at fixed prices, at prevailing market prices at the time of sale, at 
prices related to the prevailing market price, at varying prices determined at the time of sale, or at negotiated 
prices. See “Plan of Distribution” for a more complete description of the ways in which the common stock 
may be sold.
Our common stock is currently traded on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “URRE” and on the
ASX under the symbol “URI”.  On August 1, 2016, the last reported sale price of our common stock on the 
Nasdaq Capital Market was $1.42 per share.
Investing in our securities involves a high degree of risk. You should read “Risk Factors” beginning
on page 3 of this prospectus and the reports we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, incorporated by reference in this 
prospectus, to read about factors to consider before purchasing our securities.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved
or disapproved of these securities or determined if this prospectus is truthful or complete. Any 
representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is                    , 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS .................................................................................................................ii 
DISCLOSURE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS ..............................................ii 
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY ....................................................................................................................1 
RISK FACTORS.......................................................................................................................................3 
USE OF PROCEEDS................................................................................................................................4 
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON STOCK AND DIVIDEND POLICY....................................................5 
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS..................................................................................................................5 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION .....................................................................................................................7 
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK .................................................................................................9 
LEGAL MATTERS..................................................................................................................................11 
EXPERTS .................................................................................................................................................11 
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION..............................................................................11 
INFORMATION INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.........................................................................11
We have not authorized anyone to provide you with information different from that contained or 
incorporated by reference in this prospectus, and we take no responsibility for any other information 
that others may give you. If anyone provides you with additional, different or inconsistent information, 
you should not rely on it. This prospectus is not an offer to sell, nor is it a solicitation of an offer to buy, 
the securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted. You should not assume that the 
information contained in this prospectus or any prospectus supplement is accurate as of any date other 
than the date on the front cover of this prospectus or any such prospectus supplement, or that the 
information contained in any document incorporated by reference is accurate as of any date other than 
the date of the document incorporated by reference, regardless of the time of delivery of this prospectus 
or any sale of a security. Our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects may have 
changed since those dates.
As permitted by the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), the 
registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part includes additional information not contained in 
this prospectus. You may read the registration statement and the other reports we file with the SEC at the 
SEC’s web site or at the SEC’s offices described below under the heading “Where You Can Find More 
Information.” Before investing in our common stock, you should read this prospectus, as well as the additional 
information described under “Where You Can Find More Information” and “Information Incorporated by 
Reference.”
References to the “Company,” “URI,” “we,” “our” and “us” in this prospectus are to Uranium Resources,
Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries, unless the context otherwise requires. This document includes trade 
names and trademarks of other companies. All such trade names and trademarks appearing in this document 
are the property of their respective holders.
i
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement that we filed with the SEC using a “shelf” registration 
process or continuous registration process. Under this shelf registration process, the selling stockholders may, 
from time to time, sell the common stock described in this prospectus in one or more offerings. This 
prospectus provides you with a description of the common stock which may be offered by the selling 
stockholders. Each time a selling stockholder sells common stock, the selling stockholder may be required to 
provide you with this prospectus and, in certain cases, a prospectus supplement containing specific information 
about the selling stockholder and the terms of the securities being offered. That prospectus supplement may 
include additional risk factors or other special considerations applicable to those securities. Any prospectus 
supplement may also add, update or change information in this prospectus. If there is any inconsistency 
between the information in this prospectus and any prospectus supplement, you should rely on the information 
in that prospectus supplement. You should read both this prospectus and any prospectus supplement together 
with additional information described under “Where You Can Find More Information” and “Information 
Incorporated by Reference” before investing in our common stock.
DISCLOSURE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus and the documents we have incorporated by reference contain forward-looking statements 
within the meaning of the federal securities laws. Forward-looking statements convey our current expectations 
or forecasts of future events. We intend such forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor 
provisions for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
Forward-looking statements are generally identifiable by use of the words “estimate,” “project,” “believe,”
“intend,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “expect” and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements include 
management’s expectations regarding our adequacy of funding, liquidity, burn rate, exploration plans, reserves 
and mineralized uranium material, capital requirements, timing of receipt of mining permits and access rights, 
acquisition or partnering opportunities, sales or exchanges, the closing of the transaction with Laramide 
Resources, the repayment or renegotiation of our loan agreement with Resource Capital Fund V L.P., 
production capacity of mining operations for properties in the Republic of Turkey, South Texas and New 
Mexico and planned dates for commencement of production at such properties. Our ability to predict results or 
the actual effect of future plans or strategies is inherently uncertain. Actual results could differ materially from 
those in forward-looking statements because of, among other reasons, the factors described below and in the 
periodic reports that we file with the SEC from time to time, including Forms 10-K, 10-Q and 8-K and any 
amendments thereto. The forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance. They are based 
on numerous assumptions that we believe are reasonable, but they are open to a wide range of uncertainties 
and business risks.
Key factors that could cause actual results to be different than expected or anticipated include, but are not
limited to:
 
 
 

the availability of capital to URI; 
the spot price and long-term contract price of uranium; 
risks associated with our foreign operations; 
the ability of URI to enter into and successfully close acquisitions or other material transactions, 
including without limitation the transaction with Laramide Resources;
  government regulation of the mining industry and the nuclear power industry in the United States and
the Republic of Turkey;  
legislation and other actions by the Navajo Nation;
 
  operating conditions at our mining projects;  

the world-wide supply and demand of uranium;
ii
  weather conditions;  
  unanticipated geological, processing, regulatory and legal or other problems we may encounter; 
 
 

currently pending or new litigation;  
timely receipt of mining and other permits from regulatory agencies; and  
the risks set forth herein under the caption “Risk Factors.”
In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on
forward-looking statements, which are inherently unreliable and speak only as of the date of this prospectus or 
as of the date of any document incorporated by reference in this prospectus. When considering forward-
looking statements, you should keep in mind the cautionary statements in this prospectus and the documents 
incorporated by reference. We are not under any obligation, and we expressly disclaim any obligation, to 
update or alter any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or 
otherwise, except as required by law. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-
looking events discussed in or incorporated by reference in this prospectus might not occur.
iii
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights selected information about Uranium Resources, Inc. and this offering of common
stock. This summary does not contain all of the information that may be important to you in making an 
investment decision. For a more complete understanding of Uranium Resources, Inc. you should read 
carefully this entire prospectus, including the “Risk Factors” section and the other documents we refer to and 
incorporate by reference. Unless otherwise indicated, “common stock” means our common stock, par value 
$0.001 per share. Unless otherwise noted, all share and per share information has been adjusted to reflect the 
one-for-twelve reverse stock split of our common stock that became effective after the close of trading on 
March 7, 2016.
Uranium Resources Overview
Uranium Resources, Inc. is a uranium exploration, development and production company. We were
organized in 1977 to acquire and develop uranium projects in South Texas using the in-situ recovery (“ISR”) 
process. We have historically produced uranium by ISR methods in the state of Texas where we currently have 
ISR projects and two licensed processing facilities. Following our 2015 acquisition of Anatolia Energy, we are 
focused on advancing to near-term production the Temrezli ISR project in Central Turkey. URI also controls 
extensive exploration properties in the region of the Temrezli project, which are held under nine exploration 
and operating licenses covering approximately 32,000 acres, with numerous exploration targets, including the 
potential satellite Sefaatli project, which is located approximately 30 miles southwest of the Temrezli project. 
In addition, we control approximately 190,000 acres of mineral holdings in the prolific Grants Mineral Belt of 
the State of New Mexico, a portion of which we have entered into a definitive purchase agreement to sell and 
approximately 12,000 acres in the South Texas uranium province. URI acquired these properties over the past 
25 years along with an extensive information database of historic drill-hole logs and analysis. None of URI’s 
properties are currently in production.
Our principal executive offices are located at 6950 South Potomac Street, Suite 300, Centennial, CO
80112, and our telephone number is (303) 531-0470. Our website is located at www.uraniumresources.com. 
Information contained on our website or that can be accessed through our website is not incorporated by 
reference into this prospectus.
For additional information as to our business, properties and financial condition, please refer to the
documents cited in “Where You Can Find More Information.”
Recent Developments
Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital
On April 8, 2016, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”), with 
Aspire Capital Fund, LLC, an Illinois limited liability company (“Aspire Capital”), which provides that, upon 
the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, Aspire Capital is committed to 
purchase up to an aggregate of $12.0 million of our shares of common stock over the approximately 30-month 
term of the Purchase Agreement following receipt of shareholder approval, which was obtained at the 
Company’s Annual Meeting of Stockholders on June 7, 2016.
1
The Offering
The following summary is provided solely for your convenience and is not intended to be complete. You
should read the full text and more specific details contained elsewhere in this prospectus. For a more detailed 
description of our common stock, see “Description of Common Stock.”
Common Stock Offered by the  
Selling Stockholders
Outstanding Common Stock After 
This Offering
Use of Proceeds
Plan of Distribution
Nasdaq Capital Market Symbol
ASX Symbol
Risk Factors
97,894 shares of common stock issued or issuable by the 
Company, consisting of 47,229 shares of common stock issued 
to Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. for financial advisory services 
provided in connection with the Company’s acquisition of 
Anatolia Energy Limited, and 50,665 shares of common stock 
issued to a consultant in satisfaction of payments due under a 
consultancy agreement entered into by Anatolia Energy 
Limited. 
 
8,257,522 shares
The proceeds from the sale of the common stock covered by 
this prospectus will be received by the selling stockholders. The 
Company will not receive any of the proceeds from any sale by 
any selling stockholder of the common stock covered by this 
prospectus. See “Use of Proceeds.”
The shares may be offered and sold from time to time by the 
selling stockholders named herein through public or private 
transactions at fixed prices, at prevailing market prices at the 
time of sale, at prices related to the prevailing market price, at 
varying prices determined at the time of sale, or at negotiated 
prices. See “Plan of Distribution.”
URRE
URI
Investing in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. 
You should carefully consider the risks described in the section 
entitled “Risk Factors,” as well as any other information in this 
prospectus, any prospectus supplement and any document 
incorporated herein by reference, before purchasing our 
common stock.
_____________________ 
 
(1)  The number of shares of common stock to be outstanding after this offering is based on 8,257,522 shares
of common stock outstanding as of August 2, 2016 and excludes 321,700 shares issuable upon the 
exercise of stock options outstanding as of June 30, 2016, 21,667 shares issuable upon the vesting of 
restricted stock units outstanding as of June 30, 2016, 183,333 shares underlying warrants issued in 
connection with our March 2015 registered direct offering, and 256,410 shares issuable upon the 
conversion of amounts outstanding under our loan agreement with Resource Capital Fund V L.P. 
(“RCF”).
2
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. Before making an investment
decision, you should carefully consider the risks described below, as well as the risks described under the 
caption “Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 and 
in the other filings we make with the SEC pursuant to Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, which we have incorporated herein by reference. Our business, 
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be materially adversely affected by any of 
these risks, and the market or trading price of our common stock could decline due to any of these risks. 
In addition, please read “Disclosure Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this prospectus, where 
we describe additional uncertainties associated with our business and the forward-looking statements 
included or incorporated by reference in this prospectus. Please note that additional risks not presently 
known to us or that we currently deem immaterial may also impair our business and operations.
Risks Relating to Our Common Stock
The sale of our common stock to Aspire Capital may cause substantial dilution to our existing 
stockholders and the sale of the shares of common stock acquired by Aspire Capital could cause the 
price of our common stock to decline.
We have registered for sale 3,315,000 shares for sale by Aspire Capital under the Purchase
Agreement. The number of shares ultimately offered for sale by Aspire Capital is dependent upon the 
number of shares we elect to sell to Aspire Capital under the Purchase Agreement. Depending upon 
market liquidity at the time, sales of shares of our common stock under the Purchase Agreement may 
cause the trading price of our common stock to decline.
Aspire Capital may ultimately purchase all, some or none of the $12.0 million of common stock
available under the Purchase Agreement. Aspire Capital may sell all, some or none of our shares that it 
holds or comes to hold under the Purchase Agreement. Sales by Aspire Capital of shares acquired 
pursuant to the Purchase Agreement may result in dilution to the interests of other holders of our common 
stock. The sale of a substantial number of shares of our common stock by Aspire Capital, or anticipation 
of such sales, could make it more difficult for us to sell equity or equity-related securities in the future at a 
time and at a price that we might otherwise wish to effect sales. However, we have the right to control the 
timing and amount of sales of our shares to Aspire Capital, and the Purchase Agreement may be 
terminated by us at any time at our discretion without any penalty or cost to us.
The availability for sale of a large amount of shares may depress the market price of URI’s common 
stock.
As of August 2, 2016, approximately 8.3 million shares of our common stock were outstanding, all of
which, except for the certain shares owned by RCF, are freely transferable. In addition, 321,700 shares 
were issuable upon the exercise of stock options outstanding as of June 30, 2016, 21,667 shares were 
issuable upon the vesting of restricted stock units outstanding as of June 30, 2016, 183,333 shares 
underlie warrants issued in connection with our March 2015 registered direct offering, and 256,410 shares 
are issuable upon the conversion of amounts outstanding under our $8.0 million loan agreement with 
RCF. The availability for sale of a large amount of shares by any one or several stockholders may depress 
the market price of our common stock and impair our ability to raise additional capital through the public 
sale of our common stock. We have has no arrangement with any of the holders of the foregoing shares to 
address the possible effect on the price of our common stock of the sale by them of their shares.
3
Terms of subsequent financings may adversely impact our stockholders.
In order to finance our future production plans and working capital needs, we may have to raise funds
through the issuance of equity or debt securities. Depending on the type and the terms of any financing 
we pursue, stockholders’ rights and the value of their investment in our common stock could be reduced. 
A financing could involve one or more types of securities including common stock, convertible debt or 
warrants to acquire common stock. These securities could be issued at or below the then prevailing 
market price for our common stock. We currently have no authorized preferred stock. In addition, if we 
issue secured debt securities, the holders of the debt would have a claim to our assets that would be prior 
to the rights of stockholders until the debt is paid. Interest on these debt securities would increase costs 
and negatively impact operating results. If the issuance of new securities results in diminished rights to 
holders of our common stock, the market price of our common stock could be negatively impacted.
The Company has no history of paying dividends on its common stock, and we do not anticipate paying 
dividends in the foreseeable future.
The Company has not previously paid dividends on its common stock. We currently anticipate that 
we will retain all of our available cash, if any, for use as working capital and for other general corporate 
purposes. Any payment of future dividends will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will 
depend upon, among other things, our earnings, financial condition, capital requirements, level of 
indebtedness, statutory and contractual restrictions applicable to the payment of dividends and other 
considerations that our Board of Directors deems relevant. In addition, the terms of our November 2013 
loan agreement prohibit the Company from declaring or paying dividends on our common stock without 
the consent of RCF. Investors must rely on sales of their common stock after price appreciation, which 
may never occur, as the only way to realize a return on their investment.
USE OF PROCEEDS
The proceeds from the sale of the common stock covered by this prospectus will be received by the selling
stockholders. We will not receive any proceeds from the sale by the selling stockholders of the shares of 
common stock offered by this prospectus.
4
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON STOCK AND DIVIDEND POLICY
Our common stock is traded on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “URRE” and the ASX under 
the symbol “URI.” The last reported sale price of our common stock on August 1, 2016 on the Nasdaq Capital 
Market was $1.42 per share. The following table sets forth the high and low sale prices for our common stock 
for the periods indicated as reported on the Nasdaq Capital Market.
Year Ended December 31, 2014:
High
$48.60 
$37.20 
$37.80 
$32.04
$23.76 
 $19.20 
 $16.08 
 $10.20
$7.80 
 $3.75 
 $1.81
Low
$30.96 
$27.96 
$29.16 
$14.64
$15.60 
$11.04 
$8.16 
$4.20
$2.10 
$1.39 
$1.39
Year Ended December 31, 2015:
First Quarter 
Second Quarter 
Third Quarter 
Fourth Quarter
First Quarter 
Second Quarter 
Third Quarter 
Fourth Quarter
Year Ended December 31, 2016:
First Quarter  
Second Quarter  
Third Quarter (through August 1, 2016)
Following the close of trading on March 7, 2016, URI effected a one-for-twelve reverse stock split of its 
issued and outstanding common stock. The common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market 
on a split-adjusted basis upon the open of trading on March 8, 2016. The high and low sale prices for our 
common stock presented in the foregoing table give effect to the reverse stock split.
We have never declared or paid any cash dividend on our common stock, nor do we currently intend to
pay any cash dividend on our common stock in the foreseeable future. We expect to retain our earnings, if any, 
for the growth and development of our business.
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co.
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
On June 30, 2016, the Company issued 47,229 shares of its common stock to Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. 
(“Cantor Fitzgerald”) pursuant to the terms of a letter agreement (the “Cantor Agreement”), dated March 4, 
2015, between the Company and Cantor Fitzgerald. The shares were issued in satisfaction of $82,462 due to 
Cantor under the Cantor Agreement at a value of approximately $1.746 per share, which share price 
represented the average closing share price for the Company’s common stock on the Nasdaq capital market for 
the five trading days ended June 24, 2016.
Under the Cantor Agreement, Cantor Fitzgerald provided financial advisory services in connection with
the Company’s acquisition of Anatolia Energy Limited (“Anatolia Energy”), which acquisition closed on 
November 9, 2015 (the “Transaction”). Cantor Fitzgerald became entitled to $181,044 pursuant to the Cantor 
Agreement following the closing of the Transaction, $98,582 of which the Company paid in cash. Cantor 
Fitzgerald accepted 47,229 shares in lieu of the remaining $82,462 due under the Cantor Agreement, which 
shares were issued on June 30, 2016.
The shares issued under the Cantor Agreement were issued pursuant to the exemption from registration set
forth in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act.
5
Consultant to Anatolia Energy Limited
On August 2, 2016, the Company issued 50,665 shares of common stock to Robert Annett (the
“Consultant”) pursuant to the terms of a Consultancy Agreement, dated May 1, 2014, between Anatolia 
Energy and Wiranja Pty Ltd (d/b/a Bob Annett Consulting) (the “Consultancy Agreement”). The shares were 
issued in satisfaction of A$100,000 (or approximately US$75,000) due under the Consultancy Agreement 
following the closing of the Transaction at a value of approximately US$1.48 per share, which share price 
represented the volume weighted average price of the Company’s common stock for the five trading days 
ending on July 27, 2016.
Under the Consultancy Agreement, the Consultant provided consulting services to Anatolia Energy and
served as a technical director of Anatolia Energy. The Consultancy Agreement provided for monthly payments 
to the Consultant of A$12,500. The Consultancy Agreement may be terminated by either party upon 12 
months’ advance notice, and Anatolia Energy provided such notice in June 2016. The Consultant agreed to 
accept URI shares, valued based upon the volume weighted average price of the Company’s common stock for 
the five trading days ending on July 27, 2016, in lieu of A$100,000 from Anatolia Energy (which is now a 
wholly-owned subsidiary of URI) due under the Consultancy Agreement for services from November 2015 
through June 2016.
The shares issued under the Consultancy Agreement were issued pursuant to the exemption from
registration set forth in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act.
Shares Covered by this Prospectus
We are registering the shares to permit the selling stockholders and their pledgees, donees, transferees and
other successors-in-interest that receive their shares from the selling stockholders as a gift, partnership 
distribution or other non-sale related transfer after the date of this prospectus to resell the shares when and as 
they deem appropriate.
The following table sets forth: 
 

the name of the selling stockholders;  
the number and percent of shares of our common stock that the selling stockholders beneficially own 
prior to the offering for resale of the shares under this prospectus;  
the number of shares of our common stock that may be offered for resale for the account of the selling 
stockholders under this prospectus; and  
the number and percent of shares of our common stock to be beneficially owned by the selling 
stockholders after the offering of the resale shares (assuming all of the offered resale shares are sold 
by the selling stockholders).


The number of shares in the column “Number of Shares Being Offered” represents all of the shares that 
each selling stockholder may offer under this prospectus. We do not know how long the selling stockholders 
will hold the shares before selling them or how many shares they will sell and we currently have no 
agreements, arrangements or understandings with the selling stockholders regarding the sale of any of the 
resale shares. The shares offered by this prospectus may be offered from time to time by the selling 
stockholders listed below.
6
This table is prepared solely based on information supplied to us by the listed selling stockholders, any 
Schedules 13D or 13G and Forms 3 and 4, and other public documents filed with the SEC, and assumes the 
sale of all of the resale shares. The applicable percentages of beneficial ownership are based on an aggregate of 
8,257,522 shares of our common stock outstanding on August 2, 2016.
Stockholder 
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. 
Robert Annett
TOTAL
Shares Beneficially
Owned Prior to Offering
Number 
47,229 
78,311(1) 
125,540
% 
* 
* 
1.5
Number of 
Shares Being
Offered 
47,229 
50,665 
97,894
Shares Beneficially
Number
Owned After Offering 
% 
* 
* 
*
27,646(1) 
27,646
0
_____________________________ 
*  Less than 1% 
(1)  Includes 26,332 shares held in the form of CHESS Depository Instruments (“CDIs”) on the ASX and options to
purchase 1,314 CDIs.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
The selling stockholders, which term includes their transferees, pledgees or donees or their successors-in-
interest, may sell the shares being offered from time to time in one or more transactions:
  on the Nasdaq Capital Market, ASX or otherwise;  
 
 
 
 

in ordinary brokers’ transactions, which may include long or short sales;  
in transactions involving cross or block trades or otherwise in the over-the-counter market;  
through broker-dealers, who may act as agents or principals;  
in “at the market” offerings to or through market makers into an existing market for the shares;  
in other ways not involving market makers or established markets, including direct sales to purchasers 
in negotiated transactions;  
through a bidding or auction process;  
through one or more underwriters on a firm commitment or best efforts basis;  
through the writing of options, swaps or other derivatives, whether listed on an exchange or otherwise; 
or  
through a combination of such methods of sale or by any other legally available means.
 
 


In addition, subject to compliance with applicable law, the selling stockholders may enter into option,
derivative or hedging transactions with broker-dealers who may engage in short sales of common stock in the 
course of hedging the positions they assume with the selling stockholders, and any related offers or sales of 
shares may be made under this prospectus. In some circumstances, for example, the selling stockholders may 
write call options, put options or other derivative instruments with respect to the shares, which they settle 
through delivery of the shares. These option, derivative and hedging transactions may require the delivery to a 
broker, dealer or other financial institution of shares offered under this prospectus, and that broker, dealer or 
other financial institution may resell those shares under this prospectus.
The selling stockholders may sell the shares at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, at prices related
to those market prices, at negotiated prices or at fixed prices, which may be changed from time to time. The 
selling stockholders also may sell the shares pursuant to Rule 144 or other available exemptions adopted under 
the Securities Act. The selling stockholders may effect transactions by selling shares directly to purchasers or 
to or through broker-dealers. The broker-dealers may act as agents or principals. Broker-dealers, underwriters
7
or agents may receive compensation in the form of discounts, concessions or commissions from the selling 
stockholders or the purchasers of the shares, or both. The compensation of any particular broker-dealer, 
underwriter or agent may be in excess of customary commissions. Any commissions received by them and any 
profit on the resale of shares may be deemed to be underwriting compensation. Because the selling 
stockholders and broker-dealers that participate with the selling stockholders in the distribution of shares may 
be deemed to be “underwriters” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(11) of the Securities Act, the selling 
stockholders may be subject to the prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act.
The selling stockholders may donate, pledge or otherwise transfer their shares in a non-sale related
transaction to any person so long as the transfer complies with applicable securities laws. As a result, donees, 
pledgees, transferees and other successors in interest that receive such shares as a gift, distribution or other 
non-sale related transfer may offer shares of common stock under this prospectus.
The selling stockholders have advised us that they have not entered into any agreements, understandings
or arrangements with any underwriters or broker-dealers regarding the sale of their securities. There is no 
underwriter or coordinating broker acting in connection with the proposed sale of shares by the selling 
stockholders.
The shares will be sold through registered or licensed brokers or dealers if required under applicable state
securities laws. In addition, in certain states the shares may not be sold unless they have been registered or 
qualified for sale in the applicable state or an exemption from the registration or qualification requirement is 
available and is complied with.
Under applicable rules and regulations under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the 
“Exchange Act”), any person engaged in the distribution of the shares may not simultaneously engage in 
market making activities with respect to our common stock for a period of two business days prior to the 
commencement of such distribution. In addition, the selling stockholders will be subject to applicable 
provisions of the Exchange Act and the associated rules and regulations under the Exchange Act, including 
Regulation M, which provisions may limit the timing of purchases and sales of shares of our common stock by 
the selling stockholders. Certain persons participating in an offering may engage in over-allotment, stabilizing 
transactions, short-covering transactions and penalty bids in accordance with Regulation M under the 
Exchange Act that stabilize, maintain or otherwise affect the price of the offered securities. If any such 
activities may occur, they will be described in an applicable prospectus supplement or a document 
incorporated by reference to the extent required. We will make copies of this prospectus available to the selling 
stockholders and have informed them that if either is deemed to be an underwriter, such selling stockholder 
will need to deliver copies of this prospectus to purchasers at or prior to the time of any sale of the shares.
We will receive no proceeds from the sale of shares by selling stockholders pursuant to this prospectus.
We will bear all costs, expenses and fees in connection with the registration of the shares, except that the 
selling stockholders will bear all commissions and discounts, if any, attributable to the sales of the shares. We 
will indemnify the selling stockholders, and the selling stockholders will indemnify us, and may agree to 
indemnify any underwriter, broker-dealer or agent that participates in transactions involving sales of the 
shares, against certain liabilities, including liabilities arising under the Securities Act.
Upon notification to us by the selling stockholders that any material arrangement has been entered into
with a broker-dealer or other agent for the sale or purchase of shares, including through a block trade, special 
offering, exchange distribution, secondary distribution, or purchase by a broker or dealer, we will file a 
supplement to this prospectus, if required, disclosing:
 
 

the name of the participating broker-dealers;  
the number of shares involved;  
the price at which such shares were sold;
8
 

the commissions paid or discounts or concessions allowed to such broker-dealers, where applicable;  
that such broker-dealers did not conduct any investigation to verify the information set out or 
incorporated by reference in this prospectus; and
  other facts material to the transaction.
A prospectus supplement or document incorporated by reference may be filed to disclose additional
information with respect to any sale or other distribution of the shares.
DESCRIPTION OF COMMON STOCK
Our certificate of incorporation authorizes us to issue 100,000,000 shares of common stock, par value
$0.001 per share.  As of August 2, 2016, there were 8,265,547 shares of our common stock issued and 
8,257,522 shares of our common stock outstanding, all of which are fully paid and non-assessable.  In addition, 
321,700 shares were issuable upon the exercise of stock options outstanding as of June 30, 2016, 21,667 shares 
were issuable upon the vesting of restricted stock units outstanding as of June 30, 2016, 183,333 shares 
underlie warrants issued in connection with our March 2015 registered direct offering, and 44,085 shares of 
common stock were reserved for future issuance under our 2013 Omnibus Incentive Plan as of June 30, 2016. 
In addition, under the RCF loan agreement, RCF may convert the $8.0 million drawn thereunder into 256,410 
shares of our common stock at any time.
Each share of our common stock is entitled to one vote for all purposes and cumulative voting is not
permitted in the election of directors. Accordingly, the holders of more than fifty percent of all of the 
outstanding shares of our common stock can elect all of the directors. Matters to be voted upon by the holders 
of our common stock require the affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast at a stockholders meeting at 
which a quorum is present.
There are no preemptive, subscription, conversion or redemption rights pertaining to our common stock.
The absence of preemptive rights could result in a dilution of the interest of existing stockholders should 
additional shares of common stock be issued. Holders of our common stock are entitled to receive such 
dividends as may be declared by our Board of Directors out of assets legally available and to share ratably in 
our assets upon liquidation.
Computershare Trust Company, Canton, Massachusetts is the transfer agent and registrar for our common
stock.
Our common stock is listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “URRE” and the ASX under
the symbol “URI”.
Possible Anti-Takeover Effects of Delaware Law and our Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws
Certain provisions of Delaware law, our restated certificate of incorporation and our amended and restated
bylaws discussed below could discourage or make it more difficult to accomplish a proxy contest or other 
change in our management or the acquisition of control by a holder of a substantial amount of our common 
stock. It is possible that these provisions could make it more difficult to accomplish, or could deter, 
transactions that stockholders may otherwise consider to be in their best interests or in our best interests. These 
provisions are intended to enhance the likelihood of continuity and stability in the composition of our Board of 
Directors and in the policies formulated by the Board of Directors and may discourage certain types of 
transactions that may involve an actual or threatened change of control of us. The provisions also are intended 
to discourage certain tactics that may be used in proxy fights. Such provisions also may have the effect of 
preventing changes in our management.
9
Delaware Statutory Business Combinations Provision
We are subject to the anti-takeover provisions of Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law.
In general, Section 203 prohibits a publicly-held Delaware corporation from engaging in a “business 
combination” with an “interested stockholder” for a period of three years after the date of the transaction in 
which the person became an interested stockholder, unless the business combination is, or the transaction in 
which the person became an interested stockholder was, approved in a prescribed manner or another prescribed 
exception applies. For purposes of Section 203, a “business combination” is defined broadly to include a 
merger, asset sale or other transaction resulting in a financial benefit to the interested stockholder, and, subject 
to certain exceptions, an “interested stockholder” is a person who, together with his or her affiliates and 
associates, owns (or within three years prior, did own) 15% or more of the corporation’s voting stock.
Authorized but Unissued Stock
Our restated certificate of incorporation authorizes the issuance of up to 100,000,000 shares of capital
stock, par value $0.001 per share. As of August 2, 2016, 8,265,547 shares of our common stock were issued 
and 8,257,522 shares of our common stock were outstanding. Our Board of Directors has the authority, 
without further approval of the stockholders, to issue such shares, which would adversely affect the voting 
power and ownership interest of holders of our common stock. This authority may have the effect of deterring 
hostile takeovers, delaying or preventing a change in control, and discouraging bids for our common stock at a 
premium over the market price.
Advance Notice Provisions for Stockholder Proposals and Stockholder Nominations of Directors
Our amended and restated bylaws provide that, for nominations to the Board of Directors or for other
business to be properly brought by a stockholder before a meeting of stockholders, the stockholder must first 
have given timely notice of the proposal in writing to our Secretary. For an annual meeting, a stockholder’s 
notice generally must be delivered not less than 90 days nor more than 120 days prior to the first anniversary 
of the preceding year’s annual meeting. Detailed requirements as to the form of the notice and information 
required in the notice are specified in the amended and restated bylaws. If it is determined that business was 
not properly brought before a meeting in accordance with our bylaw provisions, such business will not be 
conducted at the meeting.
Amendment of Bylaws
Our Board of Directors is expressly authorized to alter or repeal our bylaws.
Special Meetings of Stockholders
Special meetings of the stockholders may be called only by our Chairman, President or pursuant to a
resolution adopted by a majority of the total number of directors. Stockholders may not propose business to be 
brought before a special meeting of the stockholders.
10
The validity of the common stock offered by this prospectus will be passed upon for us by Hogan Lovells
US LLP, Denver, Colorado.
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Uranium Resources, Inc. for the fiscal years ended December 31, 
2015 and December 31, 2014 incorporated by reference in this prospectus and registration statement have been 
audited by Hein & Associates LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their report, 
incorporated by reference herein, and are incorporated by reference in reliance upon that report given on the 
authority of Hein & Associates LLP as experts in accounting and auditing.
The consolidated statements of Anatolia Energy Limited for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2015 and June 
30, 2014 incorporated by reference herein have been audited by Moore Stephens Perth, independent registered 
public accounting firm, as set forth in their report, incorporated by reference herein, and are incorporated by 
reference in reliance upon that report given on the authority of Moore Stephens Perth as experts in accounting 
and auditing.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and special reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC. You
may read and copy any reports, statements or other information that we file at the SEC’s public reference room 
at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, District of Columbia 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for 
more information on the public reference room. Our SEC filings are also available to the public from 
commercial retrieval services and at the website maintained by the SEC at www.sec.gov. The reports and other 
information filed by us with the SEC are also available at our website. The address of the Company’s website 
is www.uraniumresources.com. Information contained on our website or that can be accessed through our 
website is not incorporated by reference into this prospectus.
INFORMATION INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
The SEC allows us to incorporate information into this prospectus “by reference,” which means that we
can disclose important information to you by referring you to another document that we file separately with the 
SEC. The information incorporated by reference is deemed to be part of this prospectus, except for any 
information superseded by information contained directly in this prospectus. These documents contain 
important information about the Company and its financial condition, business and results.
We are incorporating by reference the Company’s filings listed below and any additional documents that
we may file with the SEC pursuant to Section 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act on or after the date 
hereof and prior to the termination of the offering, except we are not incorporating by reference any 
information furnished (but not filed) under Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of any Current Report on Form 8-K and 
corresponding information furnished under Item 9.01 as an exhibit thereto:
  our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015, filed with the SEC on
March 18, 2016;
  our Proxy Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, filed on May 16, 2016;
  our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2016, filed with the SEC on May
11, 2016;
11
  our Current Reports on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on November 9, 2015, February 2, 2016,
February 4, 2016, February 17, 2016, February 26, 2016, March 8, 2016, April 4, 2016, April 8, 2016, 
April 11, 2016 and June 8, 2016 (except that any portions thereof which are furnished and not filed 
shall not be deemed incorporated); and
  The description of our common stock contained in our Form 8-A filed on April 11, 2007, including
any amendments or reports filed for the purpose of updating the description.
We will provide, without charge, to each person to whom a copy of this prospectus has been delivered,
including any beneficial owner, a copy of any and all of the documents referred to herein that are summarized 
in this prospectus, if such person makes a written or oral request directed to:
Uranium Resources, Inc.
6950 South Potomac Street, Suite 300
Centennial, Colorado 80112 
Attn: Corporate Secretary
(303) 531-0470
12
INFORMATION NOTE REQUIRED IN THE PROSPECTUS
PART II
Item 14.  Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution.
The following table sets forth an estimate of the fees and expenses relating to the issuance and distribution 
of the securities being registered hereby, other than underwriting discounts and commissions, all of which shall 
be borne by Uranium Resources, Inc. (the “Company”). All of such fees and expenses, except for the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) registration fee, are estimated:
SEC registration fee 
Legal fees and expenses 
Accounting fees and expenses 
Miscellaneous fees and expenses 
Total Expenses
$ 
14 
 
4,000 
 
4,000 
 
1,986 
$  10,000
Item 15.  Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
Under Delaware law, a corporation may indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be 
made a party to an action (other than an action by or in the right of the corporation) by reason of his service as 
a director or officer of the corporation, or his service, at the corporation’s request, as a director, officer, 
employee or agent of another corporation or other enterprise, against expenses (including attorneys’ fees) that 
are actually and reasonably incurred by him (“Expenses”), and judgments, fines and amounts paid in 
settlement that are actually and reasonably incurred by him, in connection with the defense or settlement of 
such action, provided that he acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably believed to be in or not 
opposed to the corporation’s best interests, and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no 
reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful. Although Delaware law permits a corporation to 
indemnify any person referred to above against Expenses in connection with the defense or settlement of an 
action by or in the right of the corporation, provided that he acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably 
believed to be in or not opposed to the corporation’s best interests, if such person has been judged liable to the 
corporation, indemnification is only permitted to the extent that the Court of Chancery (or the court in which 
the action was brought) determines that, despite the adjudication of liability, such person is entitled to 
indemnity for such Expenses as the court deems proper. The Delaware General Corporation Law (the 
“DGCL”) also provides for mandatory indemnification of any director, officer, employee or agent against 
Expenses to the extent such person has been successful in any proceeding covered by the statute. In addition, 
the DGCL provides the general authorization of advancement of a director’s or officer’s litigation expenses in 
lieu of requiring the authorization of such advancement by the board of directors in specific cases, and that 
indemnification and advancement of expenses provided by the statute shall not be deemed exclusive of any 
other rights to which those seeking indemnification or advancement of expenses may be entitled under any 
bylaw, agreement or otherwise.
Our Restated Bylaws and Restated Certificate of Incorporation provide for indemnification of our directors 
and officers and for advancement of litigation expenses to the fullest extent permitted by current Delaware law. 
In addition, the Company has entered into indemnification agreements with certain directors and officers that 
provide for indemnification and advancement of litigation expenses to fullest extent permitted by the DCGL.
We maintain a policy of directors and officers liability insurance which reimburses us for expenses which
we may incur in connection with the foregoing indemnity provisions and which may provide direct 
indemnification to directors and officers where we are unable to do so.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act, may be permitted to our directors,
officers and controlling persons pursuant to the above, we have been advised that in the opinion of the SEC 
such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore, 
unenforceable.
II-1
Item 16.  Exhibits.
The exhibits listed in the Exhibit Index immediately preceding the exhibits are filed as part of this
registration statement on Form S-3.
Item 17.  Undertakings.
(a)  The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
(1)  To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment to
this registration statement:
(i)
To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act;
(ii)  To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the 
registration statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, 
individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth 
in the registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in 
volume of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed 
that which was registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated 
maximum offering range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the 
Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price 
represent no more than 20% change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in 
the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the effective registration statement; and
(iii)  To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously
disclosed in the registration statement or any material change to such information in the 
registration statement;
provided, however, that subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) above do not apply if the information 
required to be included in a post-effective amendment by those subparagraphs is contained in 
periodic reports filed with or furnished to the Commission by the registrant pursuant to Section 13 
or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), that are 
incorporated by reference in the registration statement.
(2)  That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act, each such post-
effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered 
therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering 
thereof.
(3)  To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities being
registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4)  That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act to any purchaser:
(i)
Each prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3) shall be deemed to be 
part of the registration statement as of the date the filed prospectus was deemed part of and 
included in the registration statement; and
(ii)  Each prospectus required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(2), (b)(5), or (b)(7) as part of a
registration statement in reliance on Rule 430B relating to an offering made pursuant to 
Rule 415(a)(1)(i), (vii), or (x) for the purpose of providing the information required by 
section 10(a) of the Securities Act shall be deemed to be part of and included in the
II-2
registration statement as of the earlier of the date such form of prospectus is first used after 
effectiveness or the date of the first contract of sale of securities in the offering described in 
the prospectus. As provided in Rule 430B, for liability purposes of the issuer and any 
person that is at that date an underwriter, such date shall be deemed to be a new effective 
date of the registration statement relating to the securities in the registration statement to 
which that prospectus relates, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be 
deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof. Provided, however, that no statement 
made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement or 
made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by reference into the registration 
statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement will, as to a purchaser with 
a time of contract of sale prior to such effective date, supersede or modify any statement 
that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the registration 
statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such effective date.
(5)  That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act to any 
purchaser in the initial distribution of the securities: the undersigned registrant undertakes that in a primary 
offering of securities of the undersigned registrant pursuant to this registration statement, regardless of the 
underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the securities are offered or sold to such 
purchaser by means of any of the following communications, the undersigned registrant will be a seller to the 
purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i)  Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the
offering required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
(ii)  Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the
undersigned registrant or used or referred to by the undersigned registrant;
(iii)  The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material 
information about the undersigned registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the 
undersigned registrant; and
(iv)  Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant
to the purchaser.
(b)  The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes that, for purposes of determining any liability under the 
Securities Act, each filing of the registrant’s annual report pursuant to section 13(a) or section 15(d) of the 
Exchange Act (and, where applicable, each filing of an employee benefit plan’s annual report pursuant to 
section 15(d) of the Exchange Act), that is incorporated by reference in the registration statement shall be 
deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such 
securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors,
(c) 
officers and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the 
registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the Securities and Exchange Commission such 
indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is, therefore, unenforceable. In 
the event that a claim for indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of 
expenses incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense 
of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with 
the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has been 
settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such 
indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and will be governed by the 
final adjudication of such issue.
II-3
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant certifies that it has reasonable
grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-3 and has duly caused this 
registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, in the City of 
Centennial, State of Colorado, on the 2nd day of August, 2016.
URANIUM RESOURCES, INC.
By: /s/ Jeffrey L. Vigil                                 
Name:  Jeffrey L. Vigil 
Title:  Vice President – Finance and Chief Financial
Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby 
constitutes and appoints Messrs. Christopher M. Jones and Jeffrey L. Vigil and each of them severally as such 
person’s true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent, each with full power of substitution and resubstitution, for 
such person and in such person’s name, place and stead, in any and all capacities, to sign any and all 
amendments (including post-effective amendments) to this Registration Statement, and any registration 
statement relating to the offering covered by this Registration Statement filed pursuant to Rule 462 under the 
Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto, and other documents in 
connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto each said attorney-in-fact 
and agent full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to 
be done in and about the premises, as fully to all intents and purposes as such person might, or could do in 
person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said attorney-in-fact and agent or any substitute therefor, may 
lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been signed by
the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature
/s/ Christopher M. Jones 
Christopher M. Jones 
/s/ Jeffrey L. Vigil 
Jeffrey L. Vigil
/s/ Patrick N. Burke 
Patrick N. Burke
/s/ Marvin K. Kaiser 
Marvin K. Kaiser
/s/ Tracy A. Stevenson 
Tracy A. Stevenson
Title
Date
August 2, 2016
August 2, 2016
August 2, 2016
August 2, 2016
August 2, 2016
President, Chief Executive Officer 
and Director (Principal Executive
Officer)
Vice President – Finance and Chief
Financial Officer (Principal
Financial and Accounting Officer)
Director
Director
Director
II-4
Exhibit 
Number
EXHIBIT INDEX
Description
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Company (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 
3.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 8, 2016). 
Amended and Restated Bylaws of the Company (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to 
the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 9, 2015). 
Stockholders’ Agreement, dated as of March 1, 2012, by and between the Company and 
Resource Capital Fund V L.P. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s 
Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 7, 2012). 
Bridge Loan Agreement, dated December 17, 2012, by and among the Company, the 
subsidiaries of the Company from time to time party thereto, and Resource Capital Fund V 
L.P. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-
K filed on December 19, 2012). 
Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of March 1, 2012, by and between the Company 
and Resource Capital Fund V L.P. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to the 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on March 7, 2012). 
Loan Agreement, dated November 13, 2013, among the Company, those subsidiaries of the 
Company from time to time party hereto, and Resource Capital Fund V L.P. (incorporated 
by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on 
November 19, 2013). 
Amendment No. 1 to Loan Agreement, dated April 29, 2014, among the Company, those 
subsidiaries of the Company from time to time party hereto, and Resource Capital Fund V 
L.P. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-
K filed on April 30, 2014). 
Amendment No. 2 to Loan Agreement, dated November 5, 2014, among the Company, 
those subsidiaries of the Company from time to time party thereto, and Resource Capital 
Fund V L.P. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.13 to the Company’s Annual Report 
on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014). 
Form of options expiring June 15, 2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015). 
Form of options expiring November 28, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to 
the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015). 
Form of options expiring October 8, 2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to the 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015). 
Form of options expiring September 30, 2016 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.4 to 
the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015). 
Form of options expiring November 30, 2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.5 to 
the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015). 
Form of options expiring November 30, 2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.6 to 
the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015). 
Form of options expiring January 20, 2020 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.7 to the 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015). 
Form of options expiring February 28, 2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.8 to the 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015).
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.11
4.12
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
Exhibit 
Number
4.17
4.18
4.19
4.20
4.21
5.1 
23.1 
23.2 
23.3 
24
Description
Form of options expiring March 2, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.9 to the 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015). 
Form of options expiring March 6, 2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.10 to the 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015). 
Form of options expiring June 30, 2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.11 to the 
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on November 13, 2015). 
Form of warrant to purchase common stock dated April 4, 2015 (incorporated by reference 
to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on April 4, 2016). 
Registration Rights Agreement between the Company and Aspire Capital Fund, LLC dated 
April 8, 2016 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s Current Report on 
Form 8-K filed on April 11, 2016). 
Opinion of Hogan Lovells US LLP as to the legality of the securities being registered. 
Consent of Hogan Lovells US LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1). 
Consent of Hein & Associates LLP. 
Consent of Moore Stephens Perth. 
Power of Attorney (included on signature page).
Hogan Lovells US LLP 
One Tabor Center, Suite 1500 
1200 Seventeenth Street 
Denver, Colorado 80202 
T  +1 303 899 7300 
F  +1 303 899 7333 
www.hoganlovells.com
August 2, 2016 
 
 
Board of Directors 
Uranium Resources, Inc. 
6950 South Potomac Street, Suite 300 
Centennial, Colorado 80112 
 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen:
We  are  acting  as  counsel  to  Uranium  Resources,  Inc.,  a  Delaware  corporation  (the 
“Company”),  in  connection  with  its  registration  statement  on  Form S-3  (the  “Registration 
Statement”), filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Act of 1933, 
as  amended,  relating  to  the  resale  from  time  to  time  by  the  selling  stockholders  identified  in  the 
prospectus  constituting  a  part  of  the  Registration  Statement  of  up  to  97,894  shares  of  the 
Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, comprising: (i) 47,229 shares of common 
stock issued to Cantor Fitzgerald &  Co. pursuant to that certain letter agreement, dated March  4, 
2015,  between  the  Company  and  Cantor  Fitzgerald  &  Co.,  in  satisfaction  of  fees  due  thereunder, 
and  (ii)  50,665  shares  of  common  stock  issued  to  Robert  Annett  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  a 
Consultancy  Agreement,  dated  May  1,  2014,  between  Anatolia  Energy  Limited,  a  wholly-owned 
subsidiary  of  the  Company,  and  Wiranja  Pty  Ltd  (d/b/a  Bob  Annett  Consulting)  (collectively,  the 
“Shares”).  This  opinion  letter  is  furnished  to  you  at  your  request  to  enable  you  to  fulfill  the 
requirements of Item 601(b)(5) of Regulation S-K, 17 C.F.R. § 229.601(b)(5), in connection with the 
Registration Statement.
For  purposes  of  this  opinion  letter,  we  have  examined  copies  of  such  agreements, 
instruments  and  documents  as  we  have  deemed  an  appropriate  basis  on  which  to  render  the 
opinions hereinafter expressed.  In our examination of the aforesaid documents, we have assumed 
the  genuineness  of  all  signatures,  the  legal  capacity  of  all  natural  persons,  the  accuracy  and 
completeness of all documents submitted to us, the authenticity of all original documents, and the 
conformity  to  authentic  original  documents  of  all  documents  submitted  to  us  as  copies  (including 
telecopies).  As to all matters of fact, we have relied on the representations and statements of fact 
made in the documents so reviewed, and we have not independently established the facts so relied 
on.  This opinion letter is given, and all statements herein are made, in the context of the foregoing.
Hogan Lovells US LLP is a limited liability partnership registered in the District of Columbia.  “Hogan Lovells” is an international legal practice that includes Hogan Lovells US 
LLP and  Hogan  Lovells  International  LLP, with  offices  in:    Alicante      Amsterdam      Baltimore     Beijing      Berlin      Brussels      Caracas      Colorado  Springs     Denver      Dubai   
Dusseldorf   Frankfurt   Hamburg   Hanoi   Ho Chi Minh City   Hong Kong   Houston   London   Los Angeles   Madrid   Miami   Milan   Moscow   Munich   New York   Northern 
Virginia   Paris   Philadelphia   Prague   Rome   San Francisco   Shanghai   Silicon Valley   Singapore   Tokyo   Ulaanbaatar   Warsaw   Washington DC   Associated offices: 
Budapest   Jakarta   Jeddah   Riyadh   Zagreb.  For more information see www.hoganlovells.com
Board of Directors                              
Uranium Resources, Inc.
- 2 -
August 2, 2016
This opinion letter is based as to matters of law solely on the Delaware General Corporation
Law, as amended. We express no opinion herein as to any other statutes, rules or regulations.
Based upon, subject to and limited by the foregoing, we are of the opinion that the Shares
are validly issued, fully paid, and nonassessable.
This opinion letter has been prepared for use in connection with the Registration Statement.  
We assume no obligation to advise you of any changes in the foregoing subsequent to the effective 
date of the Registration Statement.
We  hereby  consent  to  the  filing  of  this  opinion  letter  as  Exhibit  5.1  to  the  Registration 
Statement  and  to  the  reference  to  this  firm  under  the  caption  “Legal  Matters”  in  the  prospectus 
constituting a part of the Registration Statement.  In giving this consent, we do not thereby admit that 
we are an “expert” within the meaning of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
Very truly yours, 
 
/s/ Hogan Lovells US LLP 
 
HOGAN LOVELLS US LLP
\\DE - 040518/000001 - 1248935 v2
Exhibit 23.2
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We  consent  to  the  incorporation  by  reference  in  this  Registration  Statement  on  Form  S-3  of  Uranium 
Resources, Inc. of our report dated March 18, 2016, relating to our audit of the consolidated financial 
statements as of and for the years ended December 2015 and 2014, which appears in the Annual Report 
on Form 10-K of Uranium Resources, Inc. for the year ended December 31, 2015. Our report included an 
explanatory  paragraph  expressing  substantial  doubt  about  the  ability  of  Uranium  Resources,  Inc.  to 
continue as a going concern. 
 
We also consent to the reference to our Firm under the caption “Experts” in the Prospectus, which is part 
of this Registration Statement. 
 
/s/ Hein & Associates LLP 
 
Hein & Associates LLP 
 
Denver, Colorado 
August 2, 2016
Exhibit 23.3
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration Statement on Form S-3 
of Uranium Resources, Inc. of our report dated September 30, 2015, relating to our audit of the 
consolidated statements of financial position of Anatolia Energy Limited as of June 30, 2015 and 
the related consolidated income statements, consolidated statements of comprehensive income, 
consolidated statements of changes in equity and consolidated statements of cash flows for the 
years then ended.
We also consent to the reference to our firm under the caption “Experts” in the
Registration Statement.
/s/ Moore Stephens Perth 
 
Perth, Australia 
August 2, 2016
\\DE - 040518/000001 - 1031765 v1