
LTD 
(Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement)
ACN: 126 042 215
ANNUAL SHAREHOLDERS REPORT
For the year ended 31 December 2015
CONTENTS 
______________________________________________________________________
Corporate Directory 
 
Review of Operations  
 
Corporate Governance Statement 
 
Directors’ Report 
 
Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income  
 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
 
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 
 
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
 
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 
 
Directors’ Declaration  
 
Auditor’s Independence Declaration 
 
Independent Audit Report to the Members of Triton Minerals Limited 
 
Shareholder Information 
 
Tenement Schedule
Page
3
4
23
36
65
66
67
68
69
120
121
122
125
129
2
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
DIRECTORS 
 
Mr Xingmin (Max) Ji 
Mr Patrick Burke 
Mr Garth Higgo 
Ms Paula Ferreira  
Mr Guanghui (Michael) Ji 
 
COMPANY SECRETARY 
 
Ms Paige Exley  
 
REGISTERED OFFICE 
 
Unit 1, 256 Stirling Hwy 
Claremont WA 6010 
Australia 
 
Telephone: +61 8 6489 2555 
Facsimile: +61 8 6489 2556 
www.tritonminerals.com 
 
ABN 99 126 042 215 
 
AUDITORS 
 
Nexia Perth Audit Services Pty Ltd 
Level 3, 88 William Street 
Perth WA 6000 
Australia 
www.nexia.com.au
Non-Executive Chairman 
Deputy Chairman 
Managing Director & Chief Executive Officer 
Non-Executive Director 
Non-Executive Director 
 
HOME BRANCH: 
 
Australian Securities Exchange Limited  
Level 40 Central Park 
152-158 St George’s Terrace 
Perth WA 6000 
 
ASX Code:  TON 
 
SHARE REGISTRY: 
 
Computershare Investor Services Limited 
Level 11, 172 St Georges Terrace 
Perth WA 6000 
Australia 
Telephone: 1300 750 505 
 
www.computershare.com.au 
 
SOLICITORS 
 
Gilbert + Tobin Lawyers 
1202 Hay Street 
West Perth WA 6005 
Australia 
www.gtlaw.com.au
3
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW 
 
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) (“Triton” or “the Company”) provides 
this  Review  of  Operations  report.  The  significant  milestones  of  the  2015  financial  year  include  the 
following:
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
securing  a  $20  million  equity  placement  facility  with  Long  State  Investments  (“LSI”)  as  a 
reserve  facility  to  ensure  the  Company  can  continue  to  develop  the  Mozambique  graphite 
project;
following discussions with its joint venture partner Grafex Lda (“Grafex”), new terms had been 
agreed with the minority shareholders of Grafex to extend, for a further 12 months to February 
2016, the timeline for the second Tranche payment of US$5 million in cash and US$5 million 
equivalent in Triton shares, for Triton to acquire the remaining 20% equity interest in Grafex 
and  all  of  the  Mozambique  graphite  projects  known  as  Balama  North,  Balama  South  and 
Ancuabe;
the binding agreement to form a strategic alliance with AMG Mining AG (“AMG”), through the 
AMG  subsidiary  of  GK  Ancuabe  Graphite  Mine,  SA  (“GK”).  The  strategic  alliance  is  for  an 
initial exclusive period of two years during which the Parties will collaborate on the exploration, 
identification  and  development  of  graphite  occurrences  in  the  Ancuabe  district,  within  the 
Province of Cabo Delgado in Mozambique. GK’s Mozambique assets include permitted mining 
concession  4C  that  encompasses  a  functional  graphite  producing  plant  (on  care  and 
maintenance)  and  associated  mining  and  production  infrastructure  in  the  Ancuabe  district. 
Triton’s exploration tenure completely surrounds this mining concession;
the  signing  of  a  20  year  binding  off-take  agreement  to  supply  100,000  tonnes  of  graphitic 
concentrate per year at a minimum sale price of US$1,000 per tonne, with Chinese graphite 
products  specialist  Yichang  Xincheng  Graphite  Co.,  Ltd  (“YXGC”)  for  Triton’s  Mozambique 
Graphite  (“TMG”).  Triton  is  afforded  exclusive  rights  to  supply  graphite  to  YXGC  from 
Mozambique, Madagascar, Malawi and Tanzania;
the entry into two binding joint venture agreements with Chinese graphite products specialist 
YXGC to develop and produce graphite enhanced products in Mozambique and China. The 
joint  venture  companies  will  source  Triton  Mozambique  Graphite  (“TMG”)  concentrate 
exclusively from Triton to develop enhanced graphite products;
the  confirmation  that  initial  tests  undertaken  on  TMG  concentrate  successfully  produced 
battery  grade  spherical  graphite,  graphene  oxide,  commercial  scale  production  of  high 
strength composite graphite material and fire resistant polystyrene foam; and
the  Company  raised  approximately  $13.7  million  through  the  issue  of  approximately  47.6 
million fully paid ordinary shares and 3.5 million unlisted options.
Subsequently,  on  2  March  2016,  the  Directors  resolved  to  place  the  Company  into  voluntary 
administration  and  appointed  Messrs  Martin  Jones,  Andrew  Smith  and  Dermott  McVeigh  of  Ferrier 
Hodgson as joint and several administrators of the Company (together, the “Administrators”) pursuant 
to section 436A of the Corporations Act. 
 
On 3 March 2016, the Company’s securities were suspended from trading on the official list of ASX. 
Following  appointment  of  the  Administrators,  the  powers  of  the  Company’s  officers  (including 
Directors)  were  suspended  and  the  Administrators  assumed  control  of  the  Company’s  business, 
property and affairs. 
 
On  25  July  2016,  the  DOCA  was  executed  by  the  Company  and  Administrator,  whereupon  the 
Company entered deed administration and the Administrators became the Deed Administrators of the 
Company.
4
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
GRAPHITE PROJECTS 
MOZAMBIQUE – Cabo Delgado Province 
 
Triton,  through  its  majority  80%  equity  interest  in  Grafex  Lda,  is  the  registered  holder  of  eight  (8) 
exploration licenses, of which six (6) have been granted and two (2) are in application, in the Cabo 
Delgado Province of northern Mozambique. The licenses comprise three (3) project areas, known as:
-  Balama North Project 
-  Balama South Project 
-  Ancuabe Project  
-
All three project areas, which can be seen in Figure 1 below, are considered prospective for graphite.
Figure 1: Overview of the Graphite Project Licenses in northern Mozambique
BALAMA NORTH PROJECT 
 
The Balama North project is located approximately 230km west of Pemba, in northern Mozambique, 
in the vicinity of known graphite mineralisation. The Balama North project currently contains the world’s 
largest and fourth largest graphite resources, at Nicanda Hill and Cobra Plains respectively.
5
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Nicanda Hill 
 
MINERAL RESOURCE 
The  Company’s  most  significant  achievement  to  date  is  the  announcement  in  October  2014  of  the 
maiden  Mineral  Resource  Estimate  (“MRE”)  at  Nicanda  Hill  following  only  six  months  from  the 
commencement  of  drilling  at  Nicanda  Hill.  Since  the  initial  MRE  for  Nicanda  Hill  was  released  in 
October 2014, Triton has completed, as a part of the Definitive Feasibility Study (“DFS”) work program 
in 2015, an additional 5,516m of drilling in 51 drill holes comprising 25 reverse circulation (RC) holes 
and 26 diamond holes. The resource is now defined by a total of 21,864m of drilling in 148 drill holes 
comprising 86 RC holes and 62 diamond holes. 
 
Triton notes that apart from the additional drilling data, there are no material differences between the 
updated  2015  resource  estimation  methodology  and  that,  utilised  in  2014  for  the  initial  MRE  for 
Nicanda  Hill.  The  MRE  ranks  Triton’s  Nicanda  Hill  deposit  as  the  largest  combined  graphite  and 
vanadium deposit in the world. 
 
The total MRE as at 31 December 2015 comprises 1,443 Million Tonnes (“Mt”) at an average grade of 
11.1%TGC  containing  160.32Mt  of  graphitic  carbon  and  4.22Mt  at  an  average  grade  of  0.29%  of 
Vanadium  Pentoxide  (“V2O5”)  classified  as  either  Inferred  Mineral  Resources  or  Indicated  Mineral 
Resources in accordance with the guidelines of the Australasian Code for the Reporting of Exploration 
Results,  Mineral  Resources  and  Ore  Reserves  (JORC  Code,  2012  Edition)  as  reflected  in  Table  1 
below. This Mineral Resource has been reported inside geological wireframes (defined on the basis 
of mineralised graphite intercepts) and equates to a nominal 5% TGC cut-off grade.
Classification
Tonnes
Grade
(Mt)
(TGC%)
Measured
Indicated
Inferred
Total
33
375
1,036
1,443
12.34
11.08
11.08
11.11
Contained 
Graphite
(Mt)
4.06
41.51
114.75
160.32
Grade
(V2O5%)
0.34
0.29
0.29
0.29
Contained
V2O5
(Mt)
0.11
1.10
3.01
4.22
Table 1: Nicanda Hill Mineral Resource Estimate Table (reported using 5%TGC cut-off grade) 
Note that some table numbers may not tabulate exactly due to the effects of rounding in the table.
Competent Person’s Statement
The information in this report that relates to the Mineral Resource estimate at Nicanda Hill is based on, and fairly represents, 
information which has been compiled by Mr James Ridley. Mr Ridley is a Principal Geologist at Jorvik Resources Pty Ltd, who 
is an independent consultant to the Company and a Member of the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy. Mr Ridley 
has  sufficient  experience  that  is  relevant  to  the  style  of  mineralisation  and  type  of  deposit  under  consideration  and  to  the 
activity that is being undertaken to qualify as Competent Person as defined in the 2012 Edition of the ‘Australasian Code for 
Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves. Mr Ridley consents to the inclusion in this report of 
the matters based on his information in the form and context in which they appear. 
 
Annual Review 
The  Company  reported  an  upgraded  MRE  at  Nicanda  Hill  on  30  October  2015.  As  a  result  of  the 
annual review of the Company’s Nicanda Hill resource there has been no change to the resource since 
it  was  reported  on  30  October  2015.  In  addition,  James  Ridley,  of  Jorvik  Resources  remains  the 
Competent Person for reporting of the MRE at Nicanda Hill, to the date of this report in 2016, for the 
MRE completed by Jorvik in 2015. 
 
Governance of Nicanda Hill Resource  
The  Company  engages  external  consultants  and  Competent  Persons  to  prepare  and  calculate 
estimates of its Nicanda Hill Resource. These estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed by 
the  Board  and  Management  for  reasonableness  and  accuracy.  The  results  of  the  Nicanda  Hill 
Resource estimates are then reported in accordance with the JORC Code and other applicable rules. 
Where material changes occur during the year to a project, including the project’s size, title, exploration 
results or other technical information, then previous resource estimates and market disclosures are 
reviewed for completeness. The Company reviews the Nicanda Hill Resource as at 31 December each
6
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
year. Where a material change has occurred in the assumptions or data used in previously  reported 
Nicanda  Hill  Resource,  a  revised  resource  estimate  will  be  prepared  as  part  of  the  annual  review 
process. 
 
MINERALOGICAL 
Mineralogical tests taken from the various in situ samples obtained during the year from across the 
Nicanda Hill mineralisation footprint have verified a range of graphite flake sizes from fines through to 
jumbo flake. Results contained head grades of up to 28%TGC from the various samples. In addition, 
these tests also confirmed the persistent presence of vanadium within the graphitic samples, obtaining 
grades up to 0.50% V2O5. 
 
These  mineralogical  test  results  showed  on  average  the  graphite  flake  size  distribution  from  the 
samples tested are as follows; 23% of the graphite samples are very large flake which are 212µm or 
larger,  36%  are  greater  than  106µm (medium  to large flake),  17%  are  greater  than 75µm (medium 
flake), and 24% are less than 75µm (small flake) in size. These results are outlined below in Table 2.
Graphite Flake Sizes
Flake Distribution
+400µm
+212µm
+106µm
+75µm
-75µm
7.3%
15.9%
36.0%
17.1%
23.7%
100%
Table 2. Mineralogical Flake size distribution of the graphite as obtained from samples at Nicanda Hill.
METALLURGICAL RESULTS 
During the year, Triton received metallurgical test work results that have confirmed that the Nicanda 
Hill graphite ore, through standard flotation methods, is readily able to produce graphite concentrates 
which assay from 95.8%TGC to 97.3%TGC. 
 
Triton also began a metallurgical program, being undertaken by  Mintek (Johannesburg),  which  has 
been  incorporated  into  the  feasibility  program.  This  new  program  includes  variability  metallurgical 
testing to identify and confirm larger areas of near-surface large flake graphite material and to verify 
the methodology for the optimisation in the recovery of the various graphite flake sizes. 
 
The metallurgical results received during the year confirmed that the graphitic concentrate produced 
through  the  standard  flotation  methods  contains  low  levels  of  impurities,  which  confirms  that  the 
graphite is liberating cleanly from the graphitic ore. 
 
The  tests  verified  low  levels  of  volatiles  and  impurities.  These  flotation  tests  produced  graphite 
concentrates with a weighted average purity of 97.1%TGC, 2.7% Ash and 0.2% Volatiles, without the 
need for chemical treatment. 
 
Metallurgical  tests  have  further  confirmed  that  Triton  is  able  to  upgrade  the  Nicanda  Hill  graphite 
concentrate up to 99.9%C using a simple chemical wash. 
 
To upgrade graphite flotation concentrate, samples were digested in 20% solution of hydrochloric acid 
(HCl) at 20% solids (w/w) for 4 hours at 80ºC in a water bath to remove carbonate and iron oxides.  
 
The residue was then thoroughly washed to remove all acid and leached in 8% solution of hydrofluoric 
acid (HF) at 20% solids (w/w) for 4 hours at 90ºC to remove silicates. The final residue was thoroughly 
washed, dried and assayed for graphitic carbon.
7
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Leaching  is  a  very  effective  method  to  remove  gangue  minerals  from  graphite  concentrate  without 
flake size reduction. The amount of consumables required for the purification process is very low due 
to the very high grade of the graphite concentrate and the low levels of the impurities which can be 
readily removed.  
 
In addition to the above, the metallurgical test work undertaken to date shows that both vanadium and 
zinc are present in the process tailings after the flotation and separation of the graphite concentrate 
from the ore. Also of note is the presence of other base metals, including titanium, in the tailings.  
 
In the initial testing, vanadium was readily upgraded through a standard flotation of graphite tailings to 
produce vanadium concentrate with grades up to 0.74% V2O5.  
 
A zinc concentrate assaying 7% was also produced from the graphite tail through a simple flotation 
process.  
 
Further metallurgical investigations are required in order to optimise flotation conditions and improve 
both vanadium and zinc recoveries so that they may be further upgraded. Accordingly, the vanadium 
and zinc potential of the Nicanda Hill resource is still to be fully understood.  
 
Should the vanadium and zinc be found to be upgradable from the tailings as a saleable concentrate, 
this would have a significant positive impact on the overall economics and profitability of a potential 
mine at Nicanda Hill. 
 
OFF-TAKE AGREEMENT - YXGC 
On  1  April  2015,  the  Company  announced  the  signing  of  a  20  year  binding  off-take  agreement  to 
supply  100,000  tonnes  of  graphitic  concentrate  per  year  at  a  minimum  sale  price  of  US$1,000  per 
tonne,  with  Chinese  graphite  products  specialist  Yichang  Xincheng  Graphite  Co.,  Ltd  (“YXGC”)  for 
Triton’s Mozambique Graphite (“TMG”) (“Agreement”). Triton has exclusive rights to supply graphite 
to YXGC from Mozambique, Madagascar, Malawi and Tanzania.  
 
The binding off-take agreement is conditional upon the following conditions being met within 36 month 
of signing the Agreement:
 
 
 

Triton receiving all relevant government approvals; 
Triton commissioning a processing plant or plants; 
Triton achieving commercial production of Material to the satisfaction of Triton; and 
Triton providing YXGC notice of its intention to commence deliveries of Material.
The  Off-take  agreement  was  subsequently  terminated  by  YXGC  on  21  March  2016  following  the 
Company’s appointment of Administrators, Ferrier Hodgson, on 2 March 2016.  
 
GRAPHITE PRODUCTS 
There are multiple uses for flake graphite which include:
-  Expandable  Graphite  (insulation  foam,  soft  foams,  mattresses,  carpets,  textiles,  coatings,
plastic foils, rubber products, pipe closing systems, fire retardants, graphite foil);
-  Micronised  Graphite  Powder  (photovoltaic,  high  temperature  furnaces,  lamp  carbon,
lubricants, carbon brushes);
-  Spherical Graphite (anodes in lithium ion batteries) and  
-  Recarburisation (steel making and iron casting).
According to the independent IMO study, which assessed metallurgical and mineralogical test results 
received  by  the  Company,  the  applications  for  which  the  TMG  concentrate  is  suitable,  include  the 
following:
Lithium Ion, Spherical Graphite and Fuel Cells
-  Dry Cell, Lead Acid and Alkaline Batteries  
- 
-  Refractory Crucibles  
-  Foundry Core and Mould Wash
-  Brake Linings  
-  Carbon Brushes  
-  Powder Metallurgy  
-  Graphite Powders
8
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
-  Gaskets  
-
Lubricants and Releasing Agents
-  Polymer Additives  
-  Conductive Polymers and Plastics
Expandable Graphite 
During March 2015, Triton confirmed that initial material testing completed by an independent facility 
located in Asia, has confirmed that Triton’s Mozambique Graphite (TMG) can be expanded up to 1,000 
times. 
 
Not all graphite is expandable. However, if the graphite possesses the required physical properties the 
graphite is normally expanded by immersing the natural flake graphite concentrate, usually at a grade 
of 95% to 99% TGC, in a bath of chromic acid, then concentrated sulfuric acid, which forces apart the 
crystal lattice planes, thus expanding or increasing the flake graphite surface area from 500 to 1,000 
times in size. 
 
The expanded graphite is used to produce flexible graphite sheets and foils which are subsequently 
used  for  manufacturing  high-performance gasket material  for  high-temperature  use, packaging and 
other sealing materials in critical applications of high pressure environments. 
 
The expanded graphite can also be used to create a compound to insulate molten metal in a ladle or 
red-hot steel ingots and decrease heat loss, or as a fire-stop which is fitted around a fire door or in 
sheet metal collars surrounding plastic pipe (during a fire, the graphite expands and chars to resist fire 
penetration and spread) 
 
After being made into graphite foil, the foil is machined and assembled into the bipolar plates in fuel 
cells. Graphite foil is also a major component of heat sinks for laptop computers which keeps them 
cool while saving weight. Graphite foil laminate is also used in valve packings or made into gaskets.  
 
Expanded  graphite  is  an  extremely  valuable  and  highly  sought  after  material  and  is  a  critical 
component in battery market. 
 
Battery Grade Spherical Graphite 
During August 2015, Triton confirmed that initial tests undertaken on typical Nicanda Hill flake graphite 
concentrate  by  a  highly  reputed  American-based  laboratory,  using  jet  milling  (spheroidisation) 
equipment, has successfully produced spherical graphite. 
 
Nicanda  Hill  flake  graphite  concentrate  was  utilised  in  the  initial  tests  due  to  the  presence  of  the 
naturally occurring high purity finer flake material. The benefits of using this naturally-occurring material 
directly, is the reduction in the time and costs required to grind the concentrate particles to the required 
size. 
 
The  initial  milling  tests  (using  a  patented  process)  was  applied  to  a  sample  of  Nicanda  Hill  flake 
graphite concentrate with an average feed size of less than 100 microns (-140 mesh). The outcomes 
of this initial test resulted with the successful production of a wide range of spherical graphite particles 
ranging from 5 to 40 microns.   
 
The spherical graphite industry utilises a standard deviation system for classifying particle distribution 
and they have found that the smaller spherical graphite particle size will create a larger surface area 
which has a higher density and will increase storage capacity potential of the graphite particle.  
 
Triton confirms the spherical graphite produced in these initial limited tests consisted of an average of 
90% distribution at <35 microns, 50% distribution at <13 microns and 10% distribution at <4.5 microns. 
The spherical graphite was produced by patented air powered jet milling equipment.  
 
Research  has  found  the  spherical  graphite  particle  size  for  Li-ion  batteries  are  split  into  two  main 
categories. The Li-ion course sizing battery requires spherical graphite with particle sizes ranging from 
25 microns to 48 microns, whilst the fine sizing battery requires spherical graphite with particle sizes 
ranging from 3 microns to 25 microns. Therefore, these initial tests demonstrate Triton’s Nicanda Hill 
graphite is ideally suited for the creation of the spherical graphite and use both categories of the ever 
growing Li-ion battery market.
9
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Spherical graphite has the potential to substantially increase the range of TMG products and Triton 
will  now  review  the  additional  options  available  and consider  the  benefits  of  incorporating  a  scaled 
production process of spherical graphite into future product streams. 
 
Graphene Oxide 
In tests conducted by a Government-sponsored laboratory in Singapore, Graphene Oxide (“GO”) has 
been successfully produced from various graphite concentrate grades of TMG product. 
 
Commercial-grade Graphene Oxide was readily produced from a broad range of TMG concentrates, 
using  the  standard  extraction  methods.  These  initial  results  are  considered  by  Triton  to  be 
encouraging. 
 
In  these  industry-standard  production  runs  only  1.5  grams  of  TMG  concentrate  was  required  to 
produce approximately 250ml of high concentration graphene oxide solution. 
 
Triton confirms the same Singapore laboratory has also successfully created Graphene powder from 
the TMG products by simply reducing (drying) the TMG Graphene Oxide solution. Once the Graphene 
powder has been created it is actually insoluble in water. 
 
There are many applications which use GO and the list continues to grow. There are many obstacles 
to  be  overcome  before  GO  can  be  used  commercially  in  most  areas  but  advancements  are  being 
made every day and some of the key areas of development for GO include bioengineering, composite 
materials, energy technology and nanotechnology. 
 
The Company will continue to explore opportunities to refine the production of Graphene Oxide. As 
the predicted global demand for graphene oxide and graphene grows. 
 
High strength composite graphite sheet material and fire resistant polystyrene foam 
In October 2015, the Company announced the successful trial of commercial-scale production of high 
strength  composite  graphite  materials  and  fire  resistant  polystyrene  foam,  using  TMG  concentrate 
from Nicanda Hill, at the Yichang Xincheng Graphite Co., Ltd (YXGC) factory in China. 
 
Enhanced graphite products’, such as composite sheeting and expanded graphite foil, main uses are 
formed thermal insulators such as gaskets, fire door seals, electronic parts and battery heat shields. 
 
ENHANCED GRAPHITE MANUFACTURING JOINT VENTURES - YXGC 
On 14 May 2015, the Company announced the entry into two binding joint venture agreements with 
Chinese graphite products specialist  YXGC  to develop and produce graphite enhanced products in 
Mozambique and China. The joint venture companies will source TMG concentrate exclusively from 
Triton to develop enhanced graphite products. 
 
Triton will hold a 70% interest in the Mozambique joint venture (Mozambique JV) of which Triton will 
be the operator. The Mozambique JV is conditional upon on conditions being waived or satisfied by 
the relevant party, either Party may terminate the Joint Venture: 
 
Triton will hold a 49% interest in the China joint venture (China JV) of which YXGC will be the operator. 
The China JV is conditional upon on the following conditions being waived or satisfied by the relevant 
party  from  the  date  which  is  thirty  six  (36)  months  from  the  Commencement  Date,  13  May  2015, 
whereby either party may terminate the Joint Venture:
-
-
-
Triton  commissioning  to  its  sole satisfaction a processing  plant  or  plants  of  a size and 
scale  capable  of  satisfying  the  graphite  concentrate  demand  to  produce  Enhanced 
Product; 
incorporation of an entity/company of which the shareholders are Triton and YXGC each 
holding  shares  commensurate  to  their  Participating  Interest  within  6  months  of  the 
Commencement Date (JV Company); 
receiving  all  relevant  Mozambique  Government  approvals;  all  relevant  Chinese 
Government approvals or any other relevant Government approvals (including Australia);
10
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
agreeing on an appropriate site for the Graphite Enhance Products Plant in China Hubei 
province of Xingshan; 
entry  into  a  Shareholders  Agreement  between  Triton  &  YXGC  in  relation  to  the  JV 
Company which incorporates the terms and intent of the Joint Venture; 
agreeing  on the  Graphite  Enhance  Products  Plant  design,  construction  cost,  timetable 
and size; 
agreeing to items/decisions of the Joint Venture that require unanimous approval of the 
Parties; 
agreeing to an initial Joint Venture budget and work program; 
agreeing on the initial cost and initial capital contributions (“Initial Contribution”); 
undertaking the following items within six months from the Commencement Date; 
opening a Joint Venture bank account, with both Parties as co-signatories to the account; 
each Party depositing US$1 million into the Joint Venture bank account; and 
establishing a joint venture management team.
-
-
-
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
The two joint venture agreements were subsequently terminated by YXGC on 21 March 2016 following 
the Company’s appointment of Administrators, Ferrier Hodgson, on 2 March 2016. 
 
DEFINITIVE FEASIBILITY STUDY 
In  2015  Triton  engaged  a  complete  technical  team  of  experts,  who  possess  a  high  degree  of 
experience in graphite, to assist Triton with the completion of the Definitive Feasibility Study and an 
Environmental  Management  and  Impact  Assessment  in  relation  to  Triton’s  Mozambique  graphite 
project.  
 
The technical team included:
-  DRA Global; 
-  Orelogy; 
-  Golder Associates; 
- 
- 
-  EOH Coastal and Environmental Services (Pty) Ltd.
Jem-Met; 
Legacy Project Solutions; and
Nicanda West/P66 Zone 
 
IDENTIFICATION 
During August 2015, as a result of the DFS drilling program, the Company identified a new substantial 
jumbo flake graphite zone, known as P66, to the north-west of the existing MRE at Nicanda Hill, which 
was later renamed as Nicanda West. 
 
The  diamond  drill  hole  GBND0055  intersected  strong  graphitic  mineralisation  with  extensive  jumbo 
flake graphite present in the drill core. Triton subsequently completed additional drill holes both north 
and  south  of  the  original  P66  intersection,  which  confirmed  the  continuity  of  jumbo  flake  graphite 
mineralisation over a considerable distance.  
 
Visual inspections of the drill core samples obtained from the Nicanda West/P66 zone show very large 
graphite flakes and coarse gneissic texture associated with higher metaphorica grade. 
 
The  drilling  program  comprised  of  a  total  of  eleven  diamond  and  three  reverse  circulation  (RC) 
drillholes. Assay results have been received for six of these drillholes. 
 
Nicanda West is distinguished by the dominance of large (>150µ) and jumbo (>300µ) flake graphite 
that forms the main mineral constituent of a gneissic  host rock. Given the dominance of high-value 
flake sizes the minimum targeted average grade of this style of deposit range is 5%TGC. This is in 
contrast  to the  more  typical  deposits  of  the  Balama  North  region,  including Nicanda Hill,  where  the 
host  rocks  comprise  graphite-amphibole  schist  with  target  average  grades  of  10%TGC  comprising 
dominantly fine (<75µ) to fine-medium (75-150µ) flake sizes.
11
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Figure 2: Integrated Nicanda Project Plan
Drilling  results  received  in  2015  indicate  large  thicknesses  of  graphite  mineralisation  that  form  true 
widths of up to 190m as intersected in GBND0059 which returned an average of 4.6%TGC over the 
entire length of the hole (including a total of 53m of internal dilution) from near-surface to 200m at the 
end  of  hole  which  finished  in  mineralisation.  Selective  higher  grade  zones,  some  averaging  up  to 
12.9%TGC, are developed within the broader mineralised  zone.  The  weighted average grade of all 
intersections above cut off is 6.5%TGC over four stacked units that form a cumulative true width of 
92m. 
 
The drill results for Nicanda West indicate both uniformity and continuity of graphite grade both along 
strike  and  down  dip,  with  increasing  graphite  mineralisation  trending  towards  the  north-east  of  the 
prospect.  The  overburden  is  limited  to  a  2m  thick  veneer  of  alluvial  sediments.  The  initial  target  at 
Nicanda West, as suggested by the VTEM data, extends over a minimum strike length of 1,000m.  To 
date only 400m or 40% of strike length has been drill tested. 
 
Nicanda West is located approximately 1km west from the Nicanda Hill prospect which contains the 
world’s  largest  graphite  and  vanadium  resources.  Triton’s  Cobra  Plains  graphite  deposit  is  located 
along strike from Nicanda Hill towards the southwest. Including Nicanda West, 232 exploration and 
resource delineation holes have been completed on the Balama North Project. Numerous geotechnical 
and hydrological holes have also been completed in support of the Nicanda Hill DFS.
12
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Subsequently in 2016, Triton announced an MRE at the Nicanda West/P66 zone location. 
 
METALLURGICAL RESULTS 
Initial sighter flotation test work has been completed by SGS Lakefield Oretest Pty Ltd (Perth) on a 
10kg composite core sample obtained from the P66 zone, which is located to the north-west of the 
main Nicanda Hill prospect.  
 
The key objective of the testing was to ascertain the liberation qualities of large flake graphite, such 
that  a  successful  outcome  would  justify  a  more  comprehensive  flotation  test  work  and  concentrate 
production program. 
 
Initial metallurgical test work carried out on core samples from GBND0055 (the first hole drilled at the 
P66 zone), confirms the substantial presence of large liberated flake graphite particles.  
 
The large flake graphite in the P66 sample was readily liberated by crushing, grinding, rougher and 
cleaner flotation, with no additional regrind required. Flotation tests confirm that 53% of the discrete 
mass graphite particles are larger than 150µm (+100 mesh) (Table 3).
MICRON
MESH
DISCRETE MASS (%)
>300
150-300
75-150
<75
50
100-50
200-100
200
12.6
40.2
25.0
22.2
Table 3: P66 - Size by assay of flotation feed.
A concentrate grade of 96.1%TGC achieved at a recovery of 97.4% with a head grade of 11%TGC. 
These initial results on the P66 zone graphite samples are considered by Triton to be encouraging and 
justify  the  progression  to  a  comprehensive  metallurgical  test  work  program  and  bulk  concentrate 
production run. 
 
The confirmation of the large and jumbo size fractions of high grade graphite flakes recovered from 
flotation is consistent with the mineralogical observations. It is expected that the larger size flakes will 
improve the graphite concentrate available from Nicanda Hill. 
 
Optimization of the metallurgical process is expected to further enhance the quality of the final product 
concentrate. The Company is reviewing options to determine whether the graphite concentrate from 
the P66 zone can be further upgraded through flotation. Triton is aiming to obtain similar purity levels 
to those recently achieved with Nicanda Hill, that being in excess of 99%TGC, without the use of acid 
leaching. 
 
NICANDA WEST CONCENTRATE PRODUCTION 
Following the positive outcomes from the initial standard flotation tests, a limited production run was 
carried out by SGS Lakefield Oretest (Perth) to generate a sufficient sample of battery-specification 
concentrate in order to ship to interested parties and to carry out, at their request, more detailed particle 
induced x-ray emission (PIXE) and x-ray diffraction (XRD) test work.  
 
These  testing  procedures  are  specific  to  the  requirements  for  producing  spherical  graphite  for 
application in lithium ion batteries.
Nicanda West
Nicanda West
hi-spec
Mass %
6.7
37.1
43.8
13
Flake Size
standard
Mesh
Micron
Mass %
50
>300
-50 to100
150-300
Total
>150
12.6
40.2
52.8
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
100 to -200
75-150
200
Total
Recovery
Grade
<75
<150
25.0
22.2
47.2
97.4
96.1
30.2
26.0
56.2
96
97.7
Table 4: Comparative flotation test work results from Nicanda West (P66)
By means of a simple four-stage flotation process a total graphitic carbon grade of 97.7% was achieved 
with a large proportion of large and jumbo flake preserved. 
 
For  non-battery  applications  a  lower  grade  can  be  targeted.  This  would  preserve  an  even  more 
dominant proportion of large flake.  
 
Triton considers these initial metallurgical results to be positive and is expecting further positive results 
with the completion of additional optimised metallurgical test work. 
 
Cobra Plains Deposit 
 
In February 2014, the Company announced its maiden Inferred Mineral Resource estimate at Cobra 
Plains  of the  Balama North project. As  at 31 December 2015,  the resource comprises 103Mt  at an 
average  grade of  5.2%TGC,  containing  5.7Mt  of  graphitic  carbon.  This  resource is  classified  as  an 
Inferred  Mineral  Resource  in  accordance  with  the  guidelines  of  The  Australasian  Code  for  the 
Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves (JORC Code, 2012 Edition) 
as reflected in Table 5 below.
Deposit
Classification
Tonnes
Cobra Plains
Inferred
(Mt) 
103
Grade 
(TGC%)
5.2
Contained Graphite
(Mt) 
5.7
Table 5: Cobra Plains Mineral Resource Estimate Table (reported above a 2% graphitic carbon cut-off grade)
Competent Person’s Statement 
The information in this report that relates to Mineral Resource estimate at the Cobra Plains deposit on Balama North project is 
based on, and fairly represents, information and supporting documentation prepared by Mr Mark Drabble, who is a Member of 
the Australasian Institute of Mining & Metallurgy. Mr Drabble is not a full-time employee of the Company. Mr Drabble is employed 
as a Consultant from Optiro Pty. Ltd. Mr Drabble has sufficient experience which is relevant to the style of mineralisation and 
type of deposit under consideration and to the activity which he is undertaking to qualify as a Competent Person as defined in 
the 2012 Edition of the ‘Australasian Code for Reporting of Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves (the JORC Code)’. Mr Drabble 
consents to the inclusion in this report the exploration results and the supporting information in the form and context  on which 
they appear. 
 
Annual Review 
The Company reported its maiden Mineral Resource at Cobra Plains on 26 February 2014. As a result 
of  the  annual  review  of  the  Company’s  Cobra  Plains  resource,  there  has  been  no  change  to  the 
resource since it was first reported on 26 February 2014. 
 
Governance of Cobra Plains Resource 
The  Company  engages  external  consultants  and  Competent  Persons  to  prepare  and  calculate 
estimates of its Cobra Plains Resource. These estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed 
by  the  Board  and  Management  for  reasonableness  and  accuracy.  The  results  of  the  Cobra  Plains 
Resource estimates are then reported in accordance with the JORC Code and other applicable rules. 
Where material changes occur during the year to a project, including the project’s size, title, exploration 
results or other technical information, then previous resource estimates and market disclosures are 
reviewed for completeness. The Company reviews it Cobra Plains Resource as at 31 December each 
year. Where a material change has occurred in the assumptions or data used in previously reported 
Cobra  Plains  Resource,  a  revised  resource  estimate  will  be  prepared  as  part  of  the  annual  review 
process.
14
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
ANCUABE PROJECT 
 
The Ancuabe project is located approximately 60km due west from Pemba, in northern Mozambique. 
As can be seen in Figure 4 below, the Company’s tenements surround the historic Ancuabe Mine.
Figure 3: Ancuabe Project licenses
EXPLORATION ACTIVITIES 
A program comprising over 1,800 line km of the helicopter-borne geophysical survey of VTEM Plus 
(Full-Waveform) and magnetic gradiometer (VTEM Survey) was completed over the Ancuabe project 
licenses late in 2014. A total of 10 VTEM-based large and significant conductive responses (typical of 
high grade graphite mineralisation) have been identified within License 5336 of the project area.  
 
Prospect area 1 (Figure 4  below) is particularly significant as it appears to form a potential satellite 
mineralised body along strike north east from the historic Ancuabe graphite mine, which is currently 
held by Graphite Kropfmuehl (“GK”), the operational graphite division of AMG Mining AG. Further, this 
location is important given its close proximity to the small functioning graphite processing plant at the 
Ancuabe graphite mine site.
Figure 4: VTEM Target Areas and initial rock chip sample results
During August 2015, Triton commenced a limited initial drilling program designed to test a number of 
VTEM-based targets at Ancuabe.
15
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Access to some drill targets was restricted due to the rough terrain and heavy vegetation, so Triton 
mobilised a D6 bulldozer to site in order to create the relevant assess tracks. 
 
The earthworks, carried out in clearing and preparation of some drill pads, exposed limited graphitic 
mineralisation at surface, which includes very high grade and jumbo flake graphitic material.   These 
near-surface finds confirm the previous identification of graphitic outcropping.  
 
During  November  2015,  Triton  announced  the  completion  of  the  initial  drilling  program  at  the  T12 
prospect at the Ancuabe Graphite Project. Ancuabe T12 has been tested by a total of 11 diamond and 
18 reverse circulation (RC) drillholes (Figures 4). Assay results have been received for eight of these 
drillholes are detailed below and assay results for the remaining holes will be reported as they become 
available. 
 
Drilling results received to date are considered to be encouraging for the initial exploratory program 
designed to test the T12 geophysical anomaly. Results have been received for eight holes in the 29 
hole program which tested a 700m long section located at the western edge of a 4km long anomaly 
(Figure 4). A representative from independent resource consultants Jorvick Resources Pty Ltd (Perth) 
has completed a site visit to Ancuabe to ensure that all sampling, logging and QAQC procedures have 
been conducted to industry standards and to independently verify the surface expressions of graphite 
mineralisation. 
 
Ancuabe  is  distinguished  by  the  dominance  of  jumbo  (>300µm)  and  super  jumbo  (>500µm)  flake 
graphite that forms the main mineral constituent of a gneissic host rock. Given the dominance of high-
value flake sizes the minimum targeted average grade of this style of deposit range is 5%TGC. Due 
to the high prices that jumbo and super-jumbo flake graphite can attract, Triton’s target grades and 
tonnages for the initial program of exploratory drilling were set at 5%TGC over downhole (mineable) 
widths of not less than 3m ie.,a grade x tonnage (GT) criteria of 15.  
 
Preliminary metallurgical test work completed by Triton, based on graphite outcrop samples, returned 
encouraging recovered flake size results with 72% >300µm. Trial concentrate production achieved an 
average grade of 98.2%TGC at 97% recovery through a simple four stage flotation process.  
 
Ancuabe T12 is located 9km east north east of the Graphite Kropfmühl (GK) graphite operation that is 
currently undergoing refurbishment in preparation for recommencement of graphite production. Whilst 
in operation with the previous owners - Kenmare Resources Plc the mine was world-renowned as a 
preferred source of large-flake high-value graphite.  
 
Triton has a formal 2 year strategic alliance with GK to explore and identify the graphite potential of 
the Ancuabe region. In early November 2015 both GK and Triton management completed a day long 
site visit at Ancuabe. The visit involved an extensive review of the current exploration and development 
activities being completed by both companies at Ancuabe and to facilitate a further strengthening and 
understanding of the current and future alliance between the companies. 
 
Graphite mineralisation  has  been  discovered at  the  T16  target  which is  located 4km  due east  from 
T12. Large flake graphite, similar to that found at T12, is exposed continuously over a horizontal width 
of 100m over strike length of approximately 800m. T16 is located on the T16-T17 target horizon that 
is separate from the T12 – T15 trend. The implications of this discovery are:
  Confirmation  that  an  additional  large  flake  graphite  trend  exists  to  the  east  of  the  T12-T15
trend,
  Additional potential to define economic concentrations of large flake high-value graphite, and 
  Potential satellite source of graphitic material for a proposed centralised processing plant.
Subsequently in 2016, Triton announced a mineral resource estimate at the Ancuabe T12 location.
16
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Figure 5: Ancuabe Eastern Graphite Zone - Drillhole Location Plan
(graphite-VTEM target zones shown in yellow)
Ancuabe  has  the potential  for  a bulk mining  scenario  which  would make it  possible for  a long-term 
assured source of flake graphite concentrate, having the most highly desired and valued qualities of 
flake size, purity and consistency. 
 
METALLURGICAL RESULTS 
A metallurgical test work program from the Ancuabe Graphite  project was undertaken at the Mintek 
Laboratories in Johannesburg. The material used for this test work was derived from a representative 
100kg composited reconnaissance sample of outcropping graphite mineralisation averaging 14%TGC. 
 
The results confirm the high value potential of the Ancuabe project, with high graphite grades of up to 
24%TGC obtained in certain coarse size fractions and the majority of the graphite flake sizes contained 
within the jumbo and super jumbo flake range. The objectives of the testing was to achieve a grade of 
>90% while maintaining maximum flake size.  
 
The preliminary metallurgical tests confirmed grades of up to 98.7% TGC, after only 4 cleaner stages 
after a single bead mill regrind has very positive implications for potential downstream economics of 
processing the Ancuabe graphite ore. 
 
The latest flotation results continue to demonstrate the strong presence and recovery of jumbo graphite 
flakes, and including graphite flakes in excess of 3mm being identified during the flotation process.
Flake Size
Ancuabe
Mesh  Micron (μm)
Mass %
Super Jumbo 
Jumbo 
Large 
Medium 
  
Small
35
35-48 
48-80 
80-100
Total
100-200
>500
300-500 
180-300 
150-180
>150 
75-150
43.2 
29.4 
15.6 
3.3 
91.5 
5.5
17
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Very Fine 
  
Recovery 
Concentrate Grade
200
Total
<75 
<150
3.0 
8.5 
95.8 
97.8
Table 6. Mineralogical Flake size distribution of the graphite as obtained from samples at Ancuabe.
Figure 6.  Graph of graphite concentrate flake size distribution
ANCUABE BULK CONCENTRATE PRODUCTION 
Due to the high customer demand for samples of Triton’s Ancuabe graphite concentrate, a trial bulk 
production cycle was initiated at Mintek in Johannesburg.  
 
In addition the sample run was used to compare the laboratory test work completed earlier in 2015, 
with a larger scale production scenario.  
 
During  this  production  cycle  an  average  grade  of  98.2%TGC  was  achieved  with  a  metallurgical 
recovery of 97%.
18
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Figure 7: Ancuabe Discrete Particle Size Distribution
During the bulk sample test work graphite concentrates were produced in excess of 98%TGC, whilst 
still  preserving  the  majority  of  graphite  flake  sizes.  The  graphite  flakes  were  obtained  through  the 
standard methods of crushing, grinding, rougher and cleaner flotation.  
 
The Company found that over 85% of the graphite particle sizes were larger than 150µm (+100 mesh) 
(Figure 6) and the majority were in excess of 300µm (+50 mesh).
Figure 8. Jumbo graphite flake recovered from Ancuabe.
These results demonstrate the high quality of the Ancuabe graphite and concentrate samples  were 
despatched to several parties across the globe that have expressed interest in testing the material. 
 
Very large flake graphite sourced from Ancuabe may provide Triton the ability to produce a wide size 
range of high quality graphite concentrates in order to cater for a variety of end-user requirements.
19
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
BALAMA SOUTH PROJECT 
 
The Balama South project is located approximately 35 km south of the Balama township within the 
same  north-east  trending  geological  domain  covered  by  the  Balama  North  project  which  hosts  the 
Cobra Plains deposit and the Nicanda Hill resource. 
 
EXPLORATION PROGRAM 
Triton  has  completed  a  small  reconnaissance  geological  mapping  and  sampling  program  on  the 
Balama South project. The program was designed to confirm the presence of graphitic mineralisation 
as identified by the VTEM survey completed in 2014. A number of rock chip samples were obtained 
from graphitic outcrops and have been sent to the Mintek laboratories in South Africa for analysis. 
 
METALLURGY & ANALYSIS 
Initial flotation test  work was completed on a 32kg rock chip bulk sample collected from the central 
section  of  the  Balama  South  prospect  (Figure  5).  The  test  work  was  conducted  by  Mintek 
(Johannesburg). Balama South host rocks typically comprise very coarse grained schist that contain 
coarse  graphite  flake,  similar  to  the  Ancuabe  style  of  graphite  mineralisation.  The  presence  of 
vanadium in the schist, as evidenced by the presence of roscoellite, is similar to Balama North graphite 
mineralisation. As such this graphite schist appears to be a hybrid style of graphite mineralisation.
Figure 9: Balama South location plan showing bulk sample site overlain on VTEM imagery
Figure 10: Balama South graphite outcrop
20
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Table 7 shows the flake distribution and key results that include a final concentrate grade of 97%TGC 
with recoveries exceeding 90%. More than 34% of the flake size graded above 150µ in size
Flake Size
Balama South
Mesh
Micron
Mass %
80
-80 to100
Total
-100 to 140
-140
Total
Head Grade
Recovery
Con Grade
>180
>150
>150
>105
<105
<150
21.5
12.6
34.1
23.3
42.6
65.9
10.1%
91.0
97%
Table 7: Balama South flotation test work results
These initial test results are considered to be encouraging and further exploration is justified. The main 
VTEM anomaly that is located 5km to the north of the sample site is still to be fully assessed. 
 
GOLD PROJECT 
AUSTRALIA – Albany Fraser Province (WA)  
 
The Fraser Range North project covers the juncture of the Kurnalpi Terrane of the Yilgarn Craton within 
the  Albany-Fraser  Province  in  Western  Australia.  The  Kurnalpi  Terrane  contains  the  large-scale 
Claypan and Pinjin Faults. 
 
In  September  2012  the  Company  executed  a  Joint  Venture  Agreement  which  granted  Matsa 
Resources Limited (“Matsa”) a farm-in 90% interest in the Fraser Range North licenses. 
 
During the year, our Joint Venture partners Matsa continued their work on the project until the licenses 
which constitute the Fraser Range North project were surrendered by the parties in September 2015. 
 
CORPORATE 
 
CAPITAL RAISINGS 
During  the  financial  year  the  Company  successfully  raised  approximately  $13.7  million,  which  has 
allowed  Triton  to  progress  the  development  of  its  Mozambique  graphite  projects  and  fund  the 
achievement of the numerous milestones achieved during the year. The capital raisings also ensured 
that the Company welcomed new institutions and investors to the Company. 
 
LSI FUNDING AGREEMENT 
The  Company  entered  into  a  binding  agreement  with  Long  State  Investments  Limited  (“LSI”),  to 
provide the Company an equity placement funding facility of up to A$20 million, over the next two years 
(“LSI Facility”). 
 
The LSI Facility provides Triton full discretion to access the facility and should the Company do so, the 
Company has the ability to set the share issue price, determine the amount of funds raised through 
placement tranches and when the placement of shares will occur.  
 
Further, the LSI Facility can be utilised by Triton at any time during the 2 year term or terminated early 
without  penalty.  Another  feature  is  that  there  are  no  restrictions  or  penalties  imposed  upon  the 
Company if it raises additional capital through other means.  
 
Triton has obtained the LSI Facility to provide the Company certainty and security in being able to fund 
its current and future activities. The LSI Facility offers Triton a funding solution that is intended to be 
used in conjunction with the more traditional methods of raising capital in the open capital markets.
21
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
REVIEW OF OPERATIONS
Subsequently following the appointment of the Administrators on 02 March 2016, the LSI Facility was 
terminated in accordance with the terms of the agreement. 
 
PROJECT FUNDING - SHENZHEN QIANHAI ZHONGJIN GROUP CO., LTD 
On 27 April 2015, the Company announced the formal signing of a letter of intent (LOI) with Chinese 
equity  firm  and  resources  trading  house,  Shenzhen  Qianhai  Zhongjin  Group  Co.,  Ltd  (“SQZG”). 
Pursuant to the LOI, SQZG have agreed to provide up to US$100 million direct equity investment in 
Triton and up to a US$100 million debt facility funding for a total of up to US$200 million to build and 
develop  a  graphite  concentrate  operation  with  initial  capacity  to  produce  up  to  200,000  tonnes  of 
graphite concentrate per year at Nicanda Hill. 
 
The debt facility will be for a maximum term of five years from the date of funding and during the term 
of  the  loan  and  until  the debt  full  is  paid  in  full,  Triton agrees  to  provide  SQZG  with  up  to  200,000 
tonnes of graphite concentrate at a fixed price US$875 per tonne FOB of material for any shipment, 
subject to purity of the graphite concentrate of not less than 90% and moisture content of up to 1%. 
 
Both the project funding agreement and the off-take agreement are conditional on the completion of a 
formal due diligence by SQZG, to be completed no later than 30 June 2015 and the execution of final 
binding agreements. 
 
On 2 June 2015, the Company announced that SQZG had sought an extension to the LOI equity and 
debt funding due diligence deadline of 30 June 2015 which was announced by the Company on 27 
April 2015, for up to six months to incorporate a formal review of the Ancuabe graphite project as well 
as the Nicanda Hill project. 
 
On  21  December  2015,  the  Company  announced  that  SQZG  had  agreed  to  a  further  in-principle 
extension of the LOI due diligence period to 31 March 2016. Subsequently in 2016 the LOI lapsed. 
 
BOARD APPOINTMENTS  
In June 2015, Mr Christopher Catlow was appointed to the Board as Non-Executive Chairman as Mr 
Alan Jenks assumed the role of Non-Executive Director. In  August 2015,  a new Mozambican Non-
Executive Director, Ms Paula Ferreira, was appointed to the Board. 
 
MANAGEMENT APPOINTMENTS  
In December 2015, Mr Garth Higgo was appointed to the role of Chief Executive Officer following the 
resignation of Mr Bradley Boyle in December 2015. Mr Higgo was subsequently appointed Managing 
Director in January 2016. 
 
Competent Person’s Statement
The information in this report that relates to the Mineral Resource estimate at the Nicanda Hill deposit (Balama North project) 
is based on, and fairly represents, information which has been compiled by Mr James Ridley. Mr Ridley is a Principal Geologist 
at Jorvik Resources Pty Ltd, who is an independent consultant to the Company and a Member of the Australasian Institute of 
Mining and Metallurgy. Mr Ridley has sufficient experience that is relevant to the style of mineralisation and type of deposit 
under consideration and to the activity that is being undertaken to qualify as Competent Person as defined in the 2012 Edition 
of the ‘Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves. Mr Ridley consents to 
the inclusion in this report of the matters based on his information in the form and context in which they appear. 
 
The information in this report that relates to Mineral Resource estimate at the Cobra Plains deposit  (Balama North project) is 
based on, and fairly represents, information and supporting documentation prepared by Mr Mark Drabble, who is a Member of 
the Australasian Institute of Mining & Metallurgy. Mr Drabble is not a full-time employee of the Company. Mr Drabble is employed 
as a Consultant from Optiro Pty. Ltd. Mr Drabble has sufficient experience which is relevant to the style of mineralisation and 
type of deposit under consideration and to the activity which he is undertaking to qualify as a Competent Person as defined in 
the 2012 Edition of the ‘Australasian Code for Reporting of Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves (the JORC Code)’. Mr Drabble 
consents to the inclusion in this report the exploration results and the supporting information in the form and context  in which 
they appear. 
 
Forward-Looking Statements:  
This document may include forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements include, but are not necessarily limited to, 
statements concerning Triton Minerals Ltd’s planned exploration program and other statements that are not historic facts. When 
used in this document, the words such as “could”, “plan”, “estimate” “expect”, “intend”, “may”, “potential”, “should” and similar 
expressions are forward-looking statements. Although Triton Minerals Ltd believes that its expectations reflected in these are 
reasonable, such statements involve risks and uncertainties, and no assurance can be given that actual results will be consistent 
with these forward-looking statements
22
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 
The  Board  of  Directors  is  responsible  for  the  corporate  governance  of  the  Company.  Corporate 
governance  describes  the  framework  of  rules,  relationships,  systems  and  processes  within  a 
company  and  the  way  in  which  authority  is  exercised  and  controlled  within  an  organisation.  The 
Board guides and monitors the business and affairs of the company on behalf of security holders by 
whom they are elected and to whom they are accountable. 
 
The  Board  has  considered  the  eight  principles  of  corporate  governance  as  set  out  by  the  ASX 
Corporate  Governance  Council’s  Corporate  Governance  Principles  and  Recommendations 
(“Principles and Recommendations”). The Principles and Recommendations are not mandatory and 
the  statement  below  discloses  the  extent  to  which  the  Company  has  followed  the  Principles  and 
Recommendations during the period to 31 December 2015. The Company’s Corporate Governance 
Statement and Corporate Governance Plan have been approved by the Board and are available on 
the Company’s website at www.tritonminerals.com.  
 
PRINCIPLES AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The essential corporate governance principles are: 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8
Lay solid foundations for management and oversight; 
Structure the board to add value; 
Act ethically and responsibly; 
Safeguard integrity in corporate reporting; 
Make timely and balanced disclosure; 
Respect the rights of security holders; 
Recognise and manage risk; 
Remunerate fairly and responsibly.
1.  LAY SOLID FOUNDATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT AND OVERSIGHT. 
1.1:  Companies  should  disclose  the  respective  roles  and  responsibilities  of  its  board  and 
management;  and  those  matters  expressly  reserved  to  the  board  and  those  delegated  to 
management.
Roles and Responsibilities:
The roles and responsibilities of the Board are to: 
  Oversee control and accountability of the Company; 

Set  the  broad  targets,  objectives,  and  strategies,  and  ensure  appropriate  resources  are 
available to meet objectives and monitor management performance; 
Assess and review risk exposure, including systems of risk management, internal compliance 
and control, codes of conduct;

  Monitor financial performance and approve major capital expenditure, capital management and
significant acquisitions, divestitures and issue of new securities;
Approve the annual and half-year financial statements;
  Oversee compliance, corporate governance, and legal obligations; 
 
  Recommend to shareholders to appoint and remove the Company’s Auditor; 
 

Approve significant changes to the organisational structure; 
Appoint  and  assess  the  performance  of  the  Managing  Director  and  senior  executives  and 
determine their terms and conditions including remuneration and termination; 
Promote ethical and responsible decision making; and
 
  Report to shareholders.
The roles and responsibilities of management are to: 
  Develop and recommend internal control and accountability systems for the Company; 
 

Implement and maintain mission systems, corporate strategy and performance objectives; 
Implement  and  maintain  systems  of  risk  management  and  internal  compliance  and  controls, 
codes  of  conduct,  legal  compliance  and  any  other  regulatory  compliance  and  if  approved, 
ensure compliance with such systems;
  Monitor employees’ performance, recommend appropriate resources and review and approve
remuneration;
23
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
  Prepare all required financial reports, tax returns, budgets and any other appropriate financial
reports, meet all statutory deadlines and monitor performance against budgets;
  Protect  the  assets  of  the  Company  and  prepare  recommendations  on  acquisitions  and

divestments of assets; 
Implement decisions of the Board of Directors on key standards of the Company covering such 
areas as ethical standards, reputation and culture of the Company and influence and provide 
guidance for employees on these areas; and
  Undertake  best  endeavours  to  add  value  to  the  Company  in  a  professional,  ethical  and
accountable manner.
The Company’s Board charter is included in the Corporate Governance Plan which is available on the 
Company’s website www.tritonminerals.com  
 
1.2: Companies should undertake appropriate checks before appointing a person, or putting forward 
to security holders a candidate for election as a director and provide security holders with all material 
information.  Companies  should  also  provide  security  holders  with  all  material  information  in  its 
possession relevant to a decision on whether or not to elect or re-elect a director.  
 
The Company undertakes appropriate checks before appointing a new director or putting forward to 
security holders a candidate for election as a director. These checks include a review of the person’s 
character,  references,  experience,  education,  qualifications,  criminal  record  and/or  bankruptcy 
record. 
 
The Company provides all material information in its possession relevant to security holders to assist 
in their decision on whether or not to elect or re-elect a director. This information includes: 
  biographical details; including relevant qualifications, skills and experience;  
  details of any other material directorships or executive roles;  
  any material adverse information revealed by background checks;  
  positions, responsibilities or interests that might impact independent judgement;  
 
 
 
This information will typically be provided in the relevant notice of meeting for a shareholders’ meeting 
and also on the Company’s website. 
 
1.3:  Companies  should  have  a  written  agreement  with  each  director  and  senior  executive 
setting out the terms of their appointment 
 
All directors and senior management are appointed through a written agreement that sets out the 
terms of appointment, including their duties, rights and responsibilities. 
 
The directors receive a letter of appointment which includes the following matters:
if the candidate is an independent director; and  
the term of the office currently served by the director.
  estimated time commitment for the role; 
indemnity and insurance arrangements; 
 
remuneration; 
 
the  requirement  to  disclose  director  interests  and  any  matters  which  affect  director 
 
independence; 
 
rights to obtain independent professional advice; 
  obligation not to divulge confidential information; 
 
  access to the company secretary.
consent to the use of electronic means to hold or call a directors meeting; and
Executive directors and senior executives receive an  executive service agreement which includes 
the following matters:
  appointed role, title and reporting line; 
  executive duties and use of company property 
 

remuneration and benefits; 
leave entitlements;
24
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
insurance arrangements; 
intellectual property rights;
 
 
  obligation not to divulge confidential information; and 

terms of termination.
1.4: The Company Secretary should be accountable directly to the Board, through the Chair on 
all matters to do with the proper functioning of the Board. 
 
The Board Charter makes provision that the Company Secretary is accountable to the Board through 
the Chairman and that each Director is able to communicate directly with the Company Secretary 
and vice versa. The Company Secretary is responsible for:
  advising the Board on corporate governance matters, the Company’s constitution and ASX
listing Rules and other applicable laws;
  managing  the  company  secretarial  function  and  facilitating  the  flow  of  information  of  the 
Board,  between  the  Board  and  its  committees  and  between  senior  executives  and  non-
executive directors;  
to  facilitate  the  induction  of  new  directors  and  the  implementation  and  maintain  Board 
policies and procedures; and

  organise Board and Shareholder meetings, taking minutes and communicating with the ASX.
1.5: The Company should have a diversity policy which include requirements for the board to 
set measureable objectives for achieving gender  diversity and to assess annually both the 
objectives  and  progress  in  achieving  them.  The Company  should  disclose  that  policy or  a 
summary of it and its progress towards achieving the objectives. 
 
Diversity Policy 
The  Company  is  dedicated  to  managing  diversity  as  a  means  of  enhancing  the  Company's 
performance and organisational capabilities by recognising and utilising the contribution of diverse 
skills and attributes of all of its directors, officers and employees. 
 
Diversity involves recognising and valuing the unique contribution people can make because of their 
individual background and different skills, experiences and perspectives. Diversity may result from a 
range of factors including age, gender, ethnicity, cultural background or other personal circumstance 
or attribute. The Company values the differences between its personnel and the valuable contribution 
that these differences can make to the Company. 
 
The Company encourages diversity and fosters an environment within the Company that respects 
diversity in the work place and promotes equal opportunities for employment and a work environment 
that is free from harassment. The Company will not permit unwanted conduct based on an officer, 
employee or contractor’s personal circumstances or characteristics. 
 
The Company’s Diversity policy is included in the Corporate Governance Plan which is available on 
the Company’s website. 
 
The Board has set measurable diversity objectives which include:

 

recruiting from a diverse pool of candidates for all positions, including senior management 
and the Board;  
reviewing succession plans to ensure an appropriate focus on diversity;  
identifying  specific  factors  to  take  account  of  in  recruitment  and  selection  processes  to 
encourage diversity;
  developing  programs  to  develop  a  broader  pool  of  skilled  and  experienced  senior
management and Board candidates, including targeted training and development;
  developing a culture which takes account of domestic responsibilities of employees; and  
  any  other  procedural  or  structural  objectives;  initiatives  and  programs  and/or  targets  in 
respect  of  diversification  of  employees,  management  and  supporting  roles  that  are 
appropriate for the Company.
25
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
During the year all senior executives undertook training and professional development programs to 
broaden their skill sets and encourage the development of technical knowledge to support them in 
their roles and in their career development. 
 
The Company has a culture that strives to establish an appropriate work/life balance. All employees 
have access to flexible working arrangements which support employees and consider their domestic 
responsibilities. 
 
During the year, the Company has appointed 1 female director and 1 male director to increase the 
size  of  the  Board  members  from  the  existing  3  male  directors.  Following  the  resignation  of  the 
Managing  Director  in  December  2015,  the  Board  of  Directors  was  a  total  of  4  members  at  the 
reporting date. Therefore the proportion of women on the Board at the reporting date was 25%. In 
future  the  Board  will  seek  to  appoint  further  female  directors  should  a  casual  vacancy  and  an 
appropriately skilled candidate become available. 
 
During  2015,  the  roles  of  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  &  Company  Secretary  and  Corporate  Affairs 
Manager are undertaken by women, representing 40% of the senior executive team. Senior executives 
are those persons who have reporting staff and financial authority delegated by the Board. 
 
The proportion of women employees across the whole organisation at the reporting date was 48%. 
 
During 2015,  the  Company  increased the proportions  of  female representation  at  all  levels  of  the 
organisation. 
 
1.6: Companies should disclose the process for periodically evaluating the  performance of 
the  board,  its  committees  and  individual  directors.  The  entity  should  disclose  whether  a 
performance evaluation was undertaken during the reporting period in accordance with that 
process. 
 
The  Board  Charter  that  forms  part  of  the  Corporate  Governance  Plan  requires  that  an  annual 
performance evaluation be undertaken by the Board to ensure that the responsibilities of the Board 
are discharged in an appropriate manner. The Nomination Committee will conduct an annual review 
of  the  role  of  the  Board,  assess  the  performance  of  the  Board  over  the  previous  12  months  and 
examine  ways  of  assisting  the  Board  in  performing  its  duties  more  effectively.  The  performance 
review  is  led  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Remuneration  and  Nomination  Committee,  who  is  a  Non-
Executive Director. 
 
The performance evaluation process is detailed in the Corporate Governance Plan which is available 
on the Company’s website and the review will include:
comparing the performance of the Board with the requirements of its Charter; 
examination of the Board’s interaction with management; 
the nature of information provided to the Board by management; and
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv)  management’s performance in assisting the Board to meet its objectives.
A similar review will be conducted for each Committee by the Board with the aim of assessing the 
performance of each Committee and identifying areas where improvements can be made. 
 
The performance of the Board has been reviewed and evaluated internally during the period by the 
Chairman through an informal peer review. Additional independent directors with diverse skills and 
experience were appointed during the period as a result of the review. 
 
1.7: Companies should disclose the process for periodically evaluating the performance of 
its  senior  executives.  The  entity  should  disclose  whether  a  performance  evaluation  was 
undertaken during the reporting period.  
 
The annual review of senior executives’ performance and remuneration are carried out by the Chief 
Executive  Officer,  in  accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  executive’s  employment 
agreement.  The  Chief  Executive  Officer  will  make  recommendations  to  the  Nomination  and 
Remuneration Committee (“Committee”). The Chairman of the Board will undertake the review of the 
Chief Executive Officer’s performance and will make a recommendation to the full Board.
26
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
The Committee will meet at least annually or as required, usually on the anniversary  date of each 
service agreement for the particular Director or Key Management Personnel. At these meetings, the 
particular Director declare his/her interest and not vote, and will depart from the meeting, so as not 
to be present whilst the matter in which they have an interest is being discussed. 
 
The evaluation of performance of senior executives has taken place during the year in accordance 
with the process disclosed above.
2. STRUCTURE THE BOARD TO ADD VALUE. 
2.1: The board should establish a nomination committee. The nomination committee should 
be structured so that it:
  has at least three members; 
  consists of a majority of independent directors; 
 
  disclose the charter and the members of the committee; and  
  disclose  the  number  of  times  the  committee  met  throughout  the  period  and  the
is chaired by an independent director;
individual attendances.
The  Company  has  a  formal  charter  for  the  Nomination  Committee  to  assist  the  Committee  to 
discharge its duties, which are included as a part of the Company’s Corporate Governance Plan and 
is available on the Company’s website.  
 
In accordance with the charter, the Committee will periodically review and consider the structure and 
balance of the Board and make recommendations regarding appointments, retirements and terms of 
office of Directors. In particular, the Committee is to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
identify  and  recommend  to  the  Board  candidates  for  the  Board  after  considering  the 
necessary and desirable competencies of new Board members to ensure the appropriate 
mix of skills and experience and after assessment of how the candidates can contribute to 
the strategic direction of the Company; 
approve and review induction procedures for new appointees of the Board to ensure that 
they can effectively discharge their responsibilities; 
assess  and  consider  the  time  required  to  be  committed  by  a  non-executive  Director  to 
properly fulfil their duty to the Company and advise the Board; 
consider and recommend to the Board candidates for election or re-election to the Board 
at each annual shareholders’ meeting; 
review Directorships in other public companies held by or offered to Directors and senior 
executives of the Company; 
review succession plans for the Board with a view to maintaining an appropriate balance 
of skills and experience on the Board; 
arrange  an  annual  performance  evaluation  of  the  Board,  its  Committee  and  individual 
Directors;
(h)  make recommendations to the Board on the appropriate size and composition of the Board;
(i)
and 
make recommendations to the Board on the terms and conditions of appointment to, and 
removal and retirement from, the Board.
The  members  of  the  Remuneration  and  Nomination  Committee  during  the  period  to  July  2015 
included  Messrs  Jenks  and  Gillman,  who  are  not  independent  directors.  The  Remuneration  and 
Nomination Committee  meet  once during the  year.  Refer  to section  11  of  the  directors’  report  for 
details of the directors and committee meetings and attendees. 
 
Mr Catlow was appointed Chairman of the Committee during July 2015 (previously Mr Jenks) and is 
considered an independent director. During August 2015, Ms Ferreira was appointed as a member 
of the Committee, following which Mr Gillman stepped down.  
 
From  the  time  of  Ms  Ferreira’s  appointment  to  the  Remuneration  and  Nomination  Committee  in 
August  2015,  the  Company  was  in compliance  with  principle  2.1.  However,  prior  to that time, the 
Company  did  not  comply  with  principle  2.1  as  the  majority  of  the  Board  of  Directors  were  not 
independent  and  there  were  not  sufficient  independent  directors  to  constitute  a  majority  on  the
27
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Remuneration and Nomination Committee. 
 
2.2: The board should disclose a board skills matrix setting out the mix of skills and diversity 
that the Board currently has or is looking to achieve in its membership 
 
The Board’s membership and structure is selected to provide the Company with the most appropriate 
direction  in  the  areas  of  business  controlled  by  the  Company.  At  the  reporting  date  the  Board 
consisted  of  four  members:  Non-Executive  Chairman,  two  Non-Executive  Directors  and  the 
Technical Director.  
 
The Directors bring a range of knowledge and skills to the Board including geological, legal, finance, 
marketing, corporate governance and geographical knowledge. Triton will seek to appoint additional 
director/s to the Board in 2016 to enhance the Board’s skill set. 
 
The Board has a skills matrix and the skills and experience of the Directors are reviewed on a regular 
basis.  The  table  below  shows  the  skills  and  experience  that  the  Board  considers  important  for  the 
Company and number of members that have the relevant skills and/or experience.
TRITON MINERALS LTD – BOARD SKILLS MATRIX 
31 DECEMBER 2015 
DIRECTOR EXPERIENCE, SKILLS & ATTRIBUTES 
Board Composition 
EXPERIENCE 
Resources industry experience 
Experience in exploration phase of the mining industry 
Board level experience 
Board member of other organisations 
Geographical experience 
Africa, in particular Mozambique 
Capital market experience 
Project development experience 
SKILLS & ATTRIBUTES 
Strategic 
Leadership 
Corporate Governance 
Risk management 
Legal, corporate finance, accounting and tax
BOARD MEMBERS 
4 
 
3
4
2
1 
2 
 
4 
4 
3 
4 
2
2.3:  The  board  should  disclose  the  names  of  the  directors  considered  by  the  Board  to  be 
independent directors and the length of service of each director 
 
In making this assessment, the Board considers all relevant facts and circumstances. Relationships 
that the Board will take into consideration when assessing independence are whether a Director:




is, or has been, employed in an executive capacity by the entity or any of its child entities and 
there has not been a period of at least three years between ceasing such employment and 
serving on the board; 
is, or has within the last three years been, a partner, director or senior employee of a provider 
of material professional services to the entity or any of its child entities; 
is, or has been within the last three years, in a material business relationship (eg as a supplier 
or customer) with the entity or any of its child entities, or an officer of, or otherwise associated 
with, someone with such a relationship; 
is a substantial security  holder  of the  entity  or an officer of, or otherwise associated with, a 
substantial security holder of the entity;
  has  a  material  contractual  relationship  with  the  entity  or  its  child  entities  other  than  as  a
director;
  has close family ties with any person who falls within any of the categories described above;
or
  has been a director of the entity for such a period that his or her independence may have been
compromised.
28
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
At  the  reporting  date,  the  Chairman,  Mr  Christopher  Catlow  appointed  5  June  2015  and  Non-
Executive  Director,  Ms  Paula  Ferreira  appointed  24  August  2015,  were  considered  to  be 
independent.  
 
Non-Executive Director, Mr Alan Jenks is a substantial shareholder of the Company and therefore is 
not  considered  independent.  The  Technical  Director,  Mr  Alfred  Gillman  is  not  considered  to  be 
independent due to his executive role. 
 
2.4: A majority of the board of the Company should be independent directors.  
 
At the reporting date, the Board was comprised equally of 2 independent directors, appointed in June 
and  August  2015  and  2  directors  that  are  not  independent.  During  the  year  ended  31  December 
2015,  the  Company  did  not  comply  with  principle  2.4,  as  the  majority  of  the  Board  were  not 
independent directors.  
 
The Company maintains a mix of directors from different backgrounds with complementary skills and 
experience, however  is aware of the importance of having a Board  with a majority  of its directors 
being independent. In the future the Company intends to seek out and appoint independent directors 
to the  Board  when  additional  directors  are  required in  order  to meet  the  ASX  recommendation of 
maintaining a majority of independent Non-Executive Directors. 
 
2.5: The chair of the Board should be an independent director and should not be the same 
person as the CEO. 
 
During  the  majority  of  the  year,  the  Company  had  a  Non-Executive  Chairman  and  a  Managing 
Director  &  Chief  Executive  Officer  and subsequently  in December  2015  a Chief  Executive Officer 
who was not a director, therefore in accordance with the ASX Corporate Governance Principles, the 
role of Chair and Chief Executive Officer are not undertaken by the same individual. 
 
2.6: The Company should have a program for inducting new directors and provide appropriate 
professional development opportunities for directors to develop and maintain their skills and 
knowledge needed to perform their roles as directors effectively. 
 
All  new  directors  are  appointed  through  a  written  agreement  that  sets  out  their  duties,  rights  and 
responsibilities. The Company Secretary through the Board is responsible for the program to induct 
new directors.  
 
The  Board  encourages  directors  to  continue  their  education  and  maintain  the  skills  required  to 
discharge their duties by providing professional development opportunities. 
 
Independent professional advice 
Each Director has the right to seek independent professional advice at the Company’s expense for 
which the prior approval of the Chairman is required, and is not unreasonably withheld. A copy of 
any such advice received is made available to all members of the Board. 
 
3. ACT ETHICALLY AND RESPONSIBLY 
3.1: Companies should establish a code of conduct for its Directors, senior executives and 
employees and disclose the code or a summary of the code. 
 
The Company is committed to its Directors and employees maintaining high standards of integrity, 
and ensuring that activities are in compliance with the letter and spirit of both the law and Company 
policies.  Each  staff  member  is  made  aware  of  the  Company’s  Policies  and  Procedures  at  the 
commencement of their employment with the Company and regularly throughout their employment.  
 
The Company’s Corporate Code of Conduct is included in the Corporate Governance Plan which is 
available on the Company’s website. All Directors, senior executive and employees are expected to: 
  behave  honestly  and  with  integrity  and  report  other  employees  who  are  behaving
dishonestly;
  operate within the law at all times;
29
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
follow the policies of the Company;
 
  act in the best interests of the Company; 
  act in an appropriate business-like manner when representing the Company, and  
  avoid conflicts of interest.
Unethical  practices  or  inappropriate  behaviour  can  be  reported  to  the  Chief  Executive  Officer, 
Chairman or company Secretary, or in relation to the Board, unethical practices may be reported to 
the Company’s auditor. 
 
4. Safeguard integrity in corporate reporting. 
4.1: The board should have an audit committee. The audit committee should be structured so 
that it:
  has at least three members;  
  consists only of Non-Executive Directors;  
  consists of a majority of independent directors;  
 
  has a formal charter and disclose the charter of the committee;  
  disclose the relevant qualifications and experience of the members of the committee;
is chaired by an independent chair, who is not chair of the board;

and  
the  number  of  times  the  committee  met  throughout  the  period  and  the  individual 
attendances.
If the Company does not have an audit committee disclose the fact and the process it employs 
that independently verify and safeguard the integrity of its corporate reporting, including the 
process for appointment and removal of the external auditor and rotation of the engagement 
partner. 
 
The Company has a formal charter for its Audit and Risk Committee, whose members at the reporting 
date include Messrs Jenks and Catlow and Ms Ferreira. At the reporting date, the Chairperson of the 
Audit  Committee  was  Ms  Ferreira,  who  is  not  the  Chairperson  of  the  Board.  The  Company  has 
determined that Mr Ferreira is the most suitable director to chair the Audit and Risk committee due 
to her competency in accounting, leadership and corporate governance.  
 
The Audit Committee’s primary purpose is to assist the Board in fulfilling its statutory and fiduciary 
responsibilities and provides an active role in the following activities:
  Review the appropriateness of the Company’s accounting policies; 
  Review the content of financial statements; 
  Review the scope of the external audit, its effectiveness, and independence of the external
auditor;
  Ensure  accounting  records  are  maintained  in  accordance  with  statutory  and  accounting
standard requirements;
  Monitor systems used to ensure financial and other information provided is reliable, accurate,
and timely;
  Establish procedures for treatment of accounting complaints; 
  Review  the  audit  process  with the  external  auditors  to ensure  full  and  frank  discussion  of
audit issues;
  Present half and full year financial statements to the Board; 
  Monitor the need for a formal internal audit function and its scope;  
  Assess the performance and objectivity of any internal audit procedures that may be in place;
and 
Identification and management of business risks.

The  Company’s  Audit  Committee  charter  is  included  in  the  Corporate  Governance  Plan  which  is 
available  on  the  Company’s  website  www.tritonminerals.com.  Refer  to  sections  10  and  11  of  the 
Directors’ report for details of the Audit and Risk Committee meetings and attendees and the relevant 
qualifications and experience of the members of the committee. 
 
4.2:  The  Board  should,  before  it  meets  to  approve  the  entity’s  financial  statements  for  a 
financial  period,  receive  from  its  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  a 
declaration  that  in  their  opinion  the  financial  records  of  the  entity  have  been  properly
30
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
maintained  and  that  the  financial  statements  comply  with  the  appropriate  accounting 
standards and give a true and fair view of the financial performance of the entity and that the 
opinion has been formed on the basis of a sound system of risk management and internal 
control which is operating effectively. 
 
Prior to the Board’s approval of its financial statements, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and 
Chief  Financial  Officer  will  report  in  writing  to  the  Board  regarding  the  consolidated  financial 
statements of the Company for the half and full financial year, that:
the financial records have been properly maintained; 
the financial statements and notes comply with the accounting standards; and
 
 
  present a true and fair view, in all material respects, of the Company’s financial position and

performance during the period; and 
the financial statements have been prepared on a sound system of risk management and 
internal control which is operating effectively.
4.3:  The  company’s  external  auditor  should  attend  the  annual  general  meeting  (AGM)  and 
must be available to answer questions from security holder relevant to the audit. 
 
The Company's external auditor, Nexia Perth Audit Services Pty Ltd, attends each annual general 
meeting, and is available to answer questions from shareholders regarding:
 
 


the conduct of the audit;  
the preparation and content of the auditor's report; 
the accounting policies adopted by the Company in relation to the preparation of the financial 
statements; and 
the independence of the auditors in relation to the conduct of the audit.
Shareholders can also provide written questions before the AGM. A list of these questions will be 
distributed  at  the  meeting  and  the  Chairman  will  allow  reasonable  opportunity  for  the  auditor  to 
respond to the questions. 
 
5. MAKE TIMELY AND BALANCED DISCLOSURE 
5.1:  Companies  should  have  a  written  policy  for  complying  with  its  continuous  disclosure 
obligations under the Listing Rules and disclose the policy or a summary of it. 
 
Being  a  listed  entity  on the  ASX,  the Company  has  an obligation under  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  to 
maintain an informed market  with respect  to  its  securities.  Accordingly,  the  Company  advises  the 
market in a timely and balanced manner of all information, required to be disclosed in accordance 
with the ASX Listing Rules, which the Board believes would have a material effect on the price of the 
Company's securities. 
 
The Company has a Continuous Disclosure Policy  which appoints the Company  Secretary as the 
person responsible for communication with the ASX. This role includes responsibility for:
  ensuring compliance with the continuous disclosure requirements of the ASX Listing Rules;  
  overseeing  and  co-ordinating  information  disclosure  to  the  ASX,  analysts,  brokers,
shareholders, the media and the public; and
  providing guidance to directors and employees on disclosure requirements and procedures.
Directors and senior executives have the responsibility to disclose to the Board and the Company 
Secretary of any matters or information that may have a material effect on the price of the Company's 
securities, including misinformation that may be in the public domain. 
 
6. RESPECT THE RIGHTS OF SECURITY HOLDERS 
6.1: The company should provide information about itself and its governance to investors via 
its website.  
 
The  Company’s  website  (www.tritonminerals.com)  provides  timely  and  equal  access  to  security 
holders about the Company’s activities so that they can make informed decisions. The website has 
a dedicated Investors section which publishes all important Company information and relevant ASX 
announcements made to the market as soon as practicable after their release
31
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
The Company’s website has a Corporate Governance section that includes a Corporate Governance 
Plan, the Corporate Governance Statement, the Company Constitution and the Securities Trading 
Policy. The Company’s Corporate Governance Plan includes the Company’ key governance policies 
and charters.  
 
The  Company’s  website  also  includes  information  regarding  the  Company’s  directors  and  senior 
executives as well as various videos and company information to assist security holders and potential 
investors to understand the Company’s business. 
 
6.2  Companies  should  design  and  implement  an  investor  relations  program  to  facilitate 
effective two-way communication with investors. 
 
The  Company  is  committed  to  keeping  shareholders  fully  informed  of  significant  developments 
involving the Company’s affairs. In addition to the Company’s ASX announcements of its financial 
statements,  periodic  reporting  and  Notices  of  Meeting,  the  Company  also  provides  regular 
communication on significant operational matters.  
 
The Company's external auditor, Nexia Perth Audit Services Pty Ltd, attends each annual general 
meeting,  and  is  available  to  answer  questions  from  shareholders.  Shareholders  can  also  provide 
written questions before the AGM. A list of these questions will be distributed at the meeting and the 
Chairman will allow reasonable opportunity for the auditor to respond to the questions. 
 
Investor  information  is  also  released  through  the  Company’s  website  and  directly  to  email 
subscribers.  The  Company  has  made  available  the  relevant  contact  details  (via  the  website)  for 
security holders to make enquires and have also included contact details of the share registry in the 
Corporate Directory section. 
 
6.3:  Companies  should  disclose  the  policies  and  processes  it  has  in  place  to  facilitate  and 
encourage participation at meetings of security holders. 
 
The Company provides the opportunity for shareholders to question the Board and management about 
its activities at the Company's general and annual general meetings, including those that are not able 
to attend the meetings. The Company’s meetings are accompanied by an investor presentation which 
contributes  to  greater  shareholder  engagement  and  has  increased  the  number  of  attendees  at 
meetings. 
 
6.4: Companies should give security holders the option to receive communications from, and 
send communications to the entity and its security register electronically. 
 
Security holders have the option to receive communication from the Company and the share register 
electronically.  The  Company  provides  the  option  on  the  website  for  all  investors  or  interested  to 
subscribe  to  e-mail  alerts  from  the  Company.  The  Company  has  provided  the  opportunity  (via  the 
website) for security holders to make electronic enquires to the company. 
 
The electronic contact details for the share registry are included in the Corporate section of the website. 
 
7. Recognise and manage risk 
7.1 Companies should have a committee or committees to oversee risk each of which:
  has at least three members a majority of whom are independent directors;  
 
is chaired by an independent director;  
  disclose the charter of the committee;  
  disclose the members of the committee; and  
  disclose  the  number  of  times  the  committee  met  throughout  the  period  and  the
individual attendances.
If  the  Company  does  not  have  a  risk  committee  or  committees  disclose  the  fact  and  the 
process it employs to oversee the entity’s risk management framework.
32
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
The Company has a formal charter for its Audit and Risk Committee, whose members at the reporting 
date include Messrs Jenks and Catlow and Ms Ferreira. At the reporting date, the Chairperson of the 
Audit  Committee  was  Ms  Ferreira,  who  is  not  the  Chairperson  of  the  Board.  The  Company  has 
determined that Mr Ferreira is the most suitable director to chair the Audit and Risk committee due 
to her competency in accounting, leadership and corporate governance. 
 
The  Board  oversees  the  Company's  risk  profile  and  identifies  the  material  business  risks.  The 
financial position of the Company and matters of risk are considered by the Board on a regular basis.  
ensuring that controls and procedures to identify, analyse, assess, prioritise, monitor, and manage 
risk are in place, being maintained and adhered to.  
 
In accordance with the charter the Audit and Risk Committee’s role is to:
(a)  Oversee  the  Company’s  risk  management  systems,  practices  and  procedures  to  ensure 
effective  risk  identification  and  management  and  compliance  with  internal  guidelines  and 
external requirements.
(b)  Review reports by management on the efficiency and effectiveness of risk management and
associated internal compliance and control procedures.
The Company has  adopted the risk management procedure disclosed in the Company’s Corporate 
Governance Plan as a part of the Company’s risk management framework. 
 
The Chief Financial Officer and Chief Executive Officer have stated in writing to the Board that: 
  The  statement  given  in  accordance  with  best  practice  recommendation  4.2  (the  integrity  of 
financial statements) is founded on a sound system of risk management and internal compliance 
and control which implements the policies adopted by the Board.
  The  Company’s  risk  management  and  internal  compliance  and  control  system  is  operating
efficiently and effectively in all material respects.
7.2:  The  board  or  a  committee  of  the  board  should  review  the  entity’s  risk  management 
framework  at  least  annually  to  satisfy  itself  that  it  continues  to  be  sound;  and  disclose  in 
relation to each reporting period whether such a review has taken place. 
 
The Company has a risk management framework in place that is based on the principles of AS/NZS 
31000:2009 and the ASX Corporate governance principles and recommendations. During the period 
under review Management and Board of the Company undertook a comprehensive review of the risk 
management framework and made amendments as required. 
 
7.3:  Companies  should  disclose  if  it  has  an  internal  audit  function,  how  the  function  is 
structured and what role it performs or if it does not have an internal audit function the fact and 
the processes it employs for evaluating and continually improving the effectiveness of its risk 
management and internal control processes. 
 
The  Company  is  not  of  a  size  at  the  moment  that  requires  a  separate  internal  audit  function.  The 
Company has a risk management framework and an Audit and Risk Committee charter in place that 
is  reviewed  by  the  Board  on  an  annual  basis  and  amended  as  required.  The  Company  also  has 
adequate  policies  in  relation  to  risk  management,  compliance  and  internal  control  systems.  The 
Company’s  has  a  risk  register  in  place  which  is  reviewed  regularly  and  ensures  that  strategic, 
operational,  legal,  reputational  and  financial  risks  are  identified,  assessed  effectively,  efficiently 
managed and monitored to enable achievement of the Company’s business objectives. 
 
7.4  A  company  should  disclose  whether  it  has  any  material  exposure  to  economic, 
environmental  and  social  sustainability  risks  and,  if  it  does  how  it  manages  or  intends  to 
manage those risks. 
 
The Company is an ASX listed exploration company focussed on graphite. Due  to the nature  of its 
business  the  company  is  exposed  to  economic,  environmental  and  social  sustainability  risks.  The 
Company  has  a  risk  management  framework  in  place  and  a  risk  register  and  polices  to  ensure 
compliance and sufficient internal control systems. The risk register is reviewed and assessed on a 
regular basis and embedded in the culture and practices of the company. Risk treatment plans are in
33
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
place to identify how risk identified will be mitigated. For more information on the material risks of the 
Company refer to the Operating and Financial Review contained within the Directors’ Report. 
 
8. REMUNERATE FAIRLY AND RESPONSIBLY 
8.1: The Board should establish a remuneration committee which:
  has at least three members a majority of whom are independent directors;  
 
is chaired by an independent director;  
  disclose the charter of the committee;  
  disclose the members of the committee; and  
  disclose  the  number  of  times  the  committee  met  throughout  the  period  and  the
individual attendances
If the Company does not have a remuneration committee disclose the fact and the process it 
employs  for  setting  the  level  and  composition  of  remuneration  for  directors  and  senior 
executives and ensuring that such remuneration is appropriate and not excessive. 
 
The  Company  has  a  formal  charter  for  the  Remuneration  Committee  to  assist  the  Committee  to 
discharge its duties, which are included as a part of the Company’s Corporate Governance Plan and 
is available on the Company’s website.  
 
In accordance with the charter, the primary purpose of the Remuneration Committee is to support 
and advise the Board in fulfilling its responsibilities to shareholders by:
(i)
(ii)
(iii) 
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
reviewing and approving the executive remuneration policy to enable the Company to attract 
and retain executives and Directors who will create value for shareholders; 
ensuring that the executive remuneration policy demonstrates a clear relationship between 
key executive performance and remuneration; 
recommending to the Board the remuneration of executive Directors;  
fairly and responsibly rewarding executives having regard to the performance of the Group, 
the performance of the executive and the prevailing remuneration expectations in the market; 
reviewing the Company’s recruitment, retention and termination policies and procedures for 
senior management; 
reviewing and approving the remuneration of Director reports to the Managing Director, and 
as appropriate other senior executives; and 
reviewing and approving any equity based plans and other incentive schemes.
(vii) 
 
The  members  of  the  Remuneration  and  Nomination  Committee  during  the  period  to  July  2015 
included  Messrs  Jenks  and  Gillman,  who  are  not  independent  directors.  The  Remuneration  and 
Nomination Committee meet  once during the  year.  Refer  to section  11  of  the  directors’  report  for 
details of the directors and committee meetings and attendees. 
 
Mr Catlow was appointed Chairman of the Committee during July 2015 (previously Mr Jenks) and is 
considered an independent director. During August 2015, Ms Ferreira was appointed as a member 
of the Committee, following which Mr Gillman stepped down.  
 
From the time of Ms Ferreira’s appointment to the Remuneration and Nomination Committee in August 
2015, the Company was in compliance with principle 8.1. However, prior to that time, the Company 
did not comply with principle 8.1 as the majority of the Board of Directors were not independent and 
there  were  not  sufficient  independent  directors  to  constitute  a  majority  on  the  Remuneration  and 
Nomination Committee. 
 
8.2:  The  company  should  separately  disclose  its  policies  and  practices  regarding  the 
remuneration  of  non  –executive  directors  and  the  remuneration  of  executive  directors  and 
other senior executives: 
 
The  objective  of  the  Company's  remuneration  framework  is  to  ensure  reward  for  performance  is 
competitive and appropriate to the results delivered. The framework aligns executive reward with the 
creation  of  value  for  shareholders,  and  conforms  to market best  practice. The  Remuneration  and 
Nomination  Committee  ensures  that  executive  rewards  satisfy  the  following  key  criteria  for  good 
reward governance practices:
34
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STATEMENT
  Competitiveness and reasonableness; 
  Acceptability to the shareholders; 
  Performance linked; 
  Transparency; and 
  Capital management. 
 
The  Company  has  structured  an  executive  remuneration  framework  that  is  market competitive  and 
complementary to the reward strategy of the organisation.  
 
Refer to the audited remuneration report contained within the Directors’ Report for more information 
regarding the remuneration practices and policies of non-executive directors, executive directors and 
other senior executives. 
 
8.3:  Companies  which  has  an  equity  based  remuneration  scheme  should  have  a  policy  on 
whether  participants  are  permitted  to  enter  into  transactions  (whether  through  the  use  of 
derivatives  or  otherwise)  which  limit  the  economic  risk  of  participating  in  the  scheme  and 
disclose that policy or a summary of it.  
 
The Company has a policy to prohibit its directors and employees, who participate in an equity-based 
incentive  plan  of  the  Company,  from  entering  into  transactions  which  would  have  the  effect  of 
hedging or otherwise transferring to any other person the risk of any fluctuation in the value of any 
unvested entitlement in the Company’s securities. Directors and employees are encouraged to take 
sufficient professional advice in relation to their individual financial position.
35
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
The  Directors  present  their  report  on  the  Company  and  its  controlled  entities  (the  “Group”)  for  the 
financial year ended 31 December 2015. 
 
The Board of Directors
The  following persons  were Directors  of Triton  Minerals  Limited  (the  “Company”)  and were in office 
during the reporting period unless otherwise stated:
Director
Role
Appointment
Resignation
Mr Christopher Catlow   Non-Executive Chairman
5 June 2015
22 July 2016
Mr Alfred Gillman
Technical Director
27 September 2012
22 July 2016
Ms Paula Ferreira
Non-Executive Director
24 August 2015
-
Mr Bradley Boyle
Managing Director &
27 April 2012
1 December 2015
Chief Executive Officer
Mr Alan Jenks
Non-Executive Chairman
28 January 2014
5 June 2015
Non-Executive Director
5 June 2015
10 February 2016
Further information on the Directors is contained in section 10 of this report. 
 
Company Secretary
Ms Paige Exley (Company Secretary, appointed 11 July 2014) 
 
Ms Exley  was Triton’s Chief Financial Officer and Joint Company  Secretary during 2015  and is the 
sole Company Secretary following Mr Brady’s resignation on 2 October 2015. Ms Exley has over 15 
years  of  experience  in  financial  and  management  accounting  roles  with  ASX  listed  companies  and 
more recently has held company secretarial roles for ASX listed and unlisted companies. 
 
Ms Exley holds a Bachelor of Commerce, with a double major in Accounting and Business Law from 
Curtin University  and  is  a  Chartered Secretary  with  a  Post-Graduate Diploma of  Applied Corporate 
Governance from the Governance Institute of Australia. 
 
Mr Michael Brady (Joint Company Secretary, appointed 5 May 2014, resigned 2 October 2015) 
 
Mr  Brady  was  Triton’s  General  Counsel  and  Joint  Company  Secretary.  Mr  Brady  is  a  commercial 
lawyer admitted to the Supreme Court of Western Australia and the High Court of Australia. Mr Brady 
previously worked as a senior lawyer at an Australian top tier international law firm where he principally 
practised commercial and corporate law.  
 
Mr  Brady  holds  undergraduate  degrees  in  Law  and  Psychology  (Murdoch),  a  postgraduate 
qualification  in  Applied  Finance  (Kaplan)  and  is  a  graduate  of  the  Australian  Institute  of  Company 
Directors  (AICD).  Additionally,  Michael  is  undertaking  a  Masters  of  Laws  (Corporate,  Energy  & 
Resources) at the University of Melbourne. 
 
2.  Principal Activity
The  principal  activity  of  the  Group  during  the  financial  period  was  to  acquire,  explore  and  develop 
areas that are highly prospective for graphite,  vanadium, gold, and other precious and base metals 
and minerals in Australia and Mozambique, Africa.
36
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
3.  Operating and Financial Review
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Operations
(i) 
During  2015,  Triton  was  a  mineral  exploration  company  operating  in  Australia  and  Mozambique  to 
acquire, explore and develop areas that are highly prospective for graphite, vanadium, gold, and other 
precious and base metals and minerals. 
 
The Group creates value for shareholders, through exploration activities which develop and quantify 
mineral assets. Once an asset has been developed and quantified within the framework of the JORC 
guidelines the Group may elect to move to production, to extract and refine ore which is then sold as 
a primary product. 
 
During the reporting period the Group was exploring and developing two types of projects:
  Graphite projects in Mozambique 
  Gold project in Fraser Range North in the Albany Fraser province of Western Australia, which
was relinquished during September 2015.
Please refer to the Review of Operations for more information on the status of the projects. 
 
(ii) 
The financial results of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2015 are:
Financial Performance & Financial Position
31 December 2015
31 December 2014
% Change
Cash and cash equivalents 
Net assets 
Revenue & financial income 
Net loss after tax 
Loss per share
$
343,938 
30,192,076 
52,431 
(12,748,684) 
(3.59)
$
1,497,435 
24,083,827 
68,577 
(4,997,855) 
(1.86)
(77)% 
25% 
(24)% 
155% 
93%
a)  Financial Performance 
The loss of the consolidated Group for the financial  year after tax amounted to  $12,748,684 (2014: 
$4,997,855). 
 
The  Group creates  value  for  shareholders  through  its  exploration  expenditure  and  currently  has  no 
revenue  generating  operations.  Revenue  and  financial  income  are  generated  from  interest  income 
from funds held on deposit. As the average funds held on deposit have decreased during the year, 
accordingly the financial income has decreased 24% on the prior year. 
 
During the year, the operations relating to the Mozambique graphite project expanded as the Group 
undertook  a  rapid  exploration,  resource  delineation  and  feasibility  programs.  The  personnel 
requirements  within  the  Group  overall  increased,  which  resulted  in  an  increase  of  directors  and 
employee benefits expense of 96% to $2,159,369 (2014: $1,103,284) and personnel changes led to a 
decrease  in  the  director  and  employee  share  based  remuneration;,  the  share  based  payments 
decreased 50% to $1,336,752 (2014: $2,694,762).  
 
The Group also had an increase in travel expenses of 58% to $497,202 (2014: $314,619) arising from 
the graphite exploration program and the capital raising, promotion and marketing activities undertaken 
by the Chief Executive Officer and Technical Director. 
 
During  the  year,  the  Company  paid  US$5,200,000  (AU$6,732,662)  to  the  minority  shareholders  of 
Grafex  Lda,  to  acquire  an  additional  10%  equity  interest  to  increase  the  Group’s  interest  in  the 
Mozambique  graphite  projects  to  a  90%  interest.  Triton  did  not  remit  the  remaining  tranche  of 
US$1,000,000 in consideration to secure the 90% interest by the payment deadline, 24 February 2016. 
In accordance with the terms and conditions of the share purchase agreements, Triton’s equity interest 
remains at 80% and the Company forfeits the consideration paid to earn the 90% equity interest. At 
the reporting date, 31 December 2015 the amount of $6,732,662 was expensed.
37
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
The table above shows an increase in the net loss after tax of 155% which is largely due to the forfeited 
consideration, excluding that expensed amount, general expenses only increased 20% on the previous 
year.
b)  Going Concern 
The Group’s main activity during the year was the investment of cash in the Group’s exploration assets 
in  the  amount  of  $10,406,960  (per  cash  flow)  (2014:  $11,392,318),  in  particular  the  Mozambique 
graphite  projects.  The  carrying  value  of  the  exploration  assets  and  the  Mozambique  joint  venture 
increased 71% to $39,451,946 (2014: $23,054,859). 
 
The  31  December  2015  financial  report  has  been  prepared  on  the  going  concern  basis  that 
contemplates  the  continuity  of  normal  business  activities  and  the  realisation  of  assets  and 
extinguishment of liabilities in the ordinary course of business.  For the year ended 31 December 2015, 
the Group recorded a loss after tax of $12,748,684, (2014: $4,997,855) and had a net working capital 
deficit of $9,441,592 (31 December 2014: surplus $901,517). 
 
During January 2016, the Company completed a pro rata non-renounceable entitlement offer of one 
(1)  fully  paid  ordinary  share  for  every  three  (3)  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  (Shares)  held  by  eligible 
shareholders on 30 December 2015 at an issue price of $0.09 per share to raise up to $11,296,483 
(before costs),  with one (1) free attaching  option for every  two (2) Shares subscribed for under  the 
offer (Options) (Entitlement Offer). The Entitlement Offer was partially underwritten up to $4 million by 
GMP Securities Australia Pty Limited. 
 
Triton  raised  $4  million  via  the  Entitlement  Offer  through  the  issue  of  44,444,444  Shares  and 
22,222,306 Options. 
 
On  2  March  2016,  the  Directors  resolved  to  place  the  Company  into  voluntary  administration  and 
appointed Messrs Martin Jones, Andrew Smith and Dermott McVeigh of Ferrier Hodgson as joint and 
several administrators of the Company (together, the “Administrators”) pursuant to section 436A of the 
Corporations Act. 
 
On  25  July  2016,  the  DOCA  was  executed  by  the  Company  and  Administrator,  whereupon  the 
Company entered deed administration and the Administrators became the Deed Administrators of the 
Company. The DOCA will complete and be fully effectuated upon each of the following being satisfied:  
  a shareholders’ meeting approves the issue to Minjar Gold Pty Ltd or nominees of 105,248,400 
fully paid ordinary shares at $0.06 per share to raise $6,314,904 (“the Placement”) together 
with 25,000,000 free options to acquire shares in the Company;



the Placement occurs in accordance with the Subscription Agreement (described below);
the Creditors’ Trust Deed is executed;
the Company transfers $5 million together with any chose in action or claim that the Company 
may have against third parties (“Company Causes of Action”) and the benefit of such Company 
Causes of Action to the trustees of the Creditors Trust; and
  all creditors’ claims against the Company (except any excluded claims) are extinguished and
all creditors whose claims have been so extinguished are taken to have a claim against the 
Creditors Trust, equal in amount to their released claim.
Immediately following the execution of the DOCA, the Underwriting Agreement (proposed as part of 
the DOCA) was executed by the Company and Somers & Partners on Monday, 25 July 2016. 
 
Pursuant  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Underwriting  Agreement,  Somers  &  Partners  will 
underwrite  a  non-renounceable  pro-rata  entitlement  issue  of  not  less  than  131,560,567  fully  paid 
ordinary shares at $0.06 per share on the basis of 1 Entitlement Issue Share for every  4 shares to 
raise not less than $7,893,634. 
 
Immediately following the execution of the Underwriting Agreement (proposed as part of the DOCA), 
the Subscription Agreement was executed by the Company and Minjar Gold Pty Ltd on Monday, 25 
July 2016.
38
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
Business Strategies and Prospects for future financial years
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Subscription Agreement, including shareholder approval, 
Minjar Gold Pty Ltd or nominees will subscribe for 105,248,400 fully paid ordinary shares at $0.06 per 
share to raise $6,314,904 and 25,000,000 free options, exercisable at $0.10, expiring 30 June 2018. 
 
Due to the Group being an exploration and development entity, ongoing exploration and development 
activities are reliant on future capital raisings. Based on these facts above, the Directors consider the 
going concern basis of preparation to be appropriate for this financial report. 
 
(iii) 
The  Group  actively  evaluates  the  prospects  of  each  project  as  results  from  each  program  become 
available, these results are available via the ASX platform for shareholders’ information. The Group 
then  assesses  the  continued  exploration  expenditure,  further  asset  development.  The  Group  will 
continue the evaluation of its mineral projects in the future and undertake generative work to identify 
and acquire new projects. 
 
There are specific risks associated with the activities of the Group and general risks which are largely 
beyond the control of the Group and the Directors. The risks identified below, or other risk factors, may 
have a material impact on the future financial performance of the Group and the market price of the 
Company’s shares.
a)  Funding risk 
The Company’s ability to operate its business and effectively implement its business plan within the 
timeframe that it is aiming to achieve will depend in part on its ability to raise funds for exploration, 
feasibility studies, development and operations and to service, repay and refinance debts as they fall 
due. Existing funds will not be sufficient for expenditure required for certain aspects of the Company’s 
business plan, including the potential purchase of all outstanding minority interests in Grafex Limitada, 
acquisitions,  new  or  existing  projects,  further  exploration  and  additional  feasibility  studies.  The 
Company may need to procure additional funding in the short to medium term, and to the extent that 
this  involves  equity  funding,  it  may  result  in  dilution  of  shareholders’  interests.  Debt  financing,  if 
available, may involve restrictions on financing and operating activities. If the Group is unable to obtain 
additional financing as needed, it may be required to reduce the scope of its operations and scale back 
its activities and programs as the case may be. There is however no guarantee that the Group will be 
able to secure any additional funding or be able to secure funding on terms favourable to the Group.
b)  Exploration and Operating Risks 
Mining  exploration  and  production  is  inherently  risky,  uncertain  and  speculative  in  nature.  The 
operations of the Group may be affected by various factors, including failure to locate or identify mineral 
deposits,  failure  to  achieve  predicted  grades  in  exploration  and  mining,  operational  and  technical 
difficulties encountered in mining, sovereign risk difficulties in commissioning and operating plant and 
equipment, mechanical failure or plant breakdown, unanticipated metallurgical problems which may 
affect extraction costs, adverse weather conditions, industrial and environmental accidents, industrial 
disputes and unexpected shortages or increases in the costs of consumables, spare parts, plant and 
equipment.
c)  Environmental Risks 
The operations and proposed activities of the Group are subject to the laws and regulations of Australia 
and  Mozambique  concerning  the  environment.  As  with  most  exploration  projects  and  mining 
operations, the Group’s activities are expected to have an impact on the environment, particularly if 
advanced  exploration  or  mine  development  proceeds.  It  is  the  Company’s  intention  to  conduct  its 
activities  to  the  highest  standard  of  environmental  obligation,  including  compliance  with  all 
environmental laws.
d)  Economic 
General economic conditions, movements in interest and inflation rates and currency exchange rates 
may have an adverse effect on the Company’s exploration, development and production activities, as 
well as on its ability to fund those activities.
e)  Market conditions 
Share market conditions may affect the value of the Company’s quoted securities regardless of the
39
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
Group’s operating performance. Share market conditions are affected by many factors such as:
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
(i)  general economic outlook; 
(ii)  introduction of tax reform or other new legislation; 
(iii)  interest rates and inflation rates; 
(iv)  changes in investor sentiment toward particular market sectors; 
(v)  the demand for, and supply of, capital; and 
(vi)  terrorism or other hostilities.
The market price of securities can fall as well as rise and may be subject to varied and unpredictable 
influences on the market for equities in general and resource exploration stocks in particular. Neither 
the  Company  nor  the  Directors  warrant  the  future  performance  of  the  Group  or  any  return  on  an 
investment in the Company.
f)  Graphite and vanadium price risk 
The demand for, and the price of, commodities are highly dependent on a variety of factors, including 
international  supply  and  demand,  the  price  and  availability  of  substitutes,  technological  advances, 
actions taken by governments and global economic and political developments. Given the Company’s 
main activities, which primarily involve exploration for and potentially the production of graphite and 
vanadium, the Company’s operational and financial performance, as well as the economic viability of 
its  projects,  is  heavily  reliant  on  the  prevailing  global  price  of  these  minerals,  among  other  things. 
Volatility  in  commodity  markets  may  therefore  materially  affect  the  profitability  and  financial 
performance of the Company and the price of its Shares.
g)  Competition 
Competition  from  Australian  and  international  graphite  and  vanadium  producers,  developers  and 
explorers may affect the potential future cash flow and earnings which the Company may realise from 
its operations. For example, the introduction of new mining and processing facilities and any increase 
in competition and supply in the global graphite and vanadium markets could lower the price of these 
commodities.  The  Company  may  also  encounter  competition  from  other  mining  and  exploration 
companies  for  the  acquisition  of  new  projects  required  to  sustain  or  increase  its  potential  future 
production levels.
h)  Speculative investment 
The above list of risk factors ought not to be taken as exhaustive of the risks faced by the Group or by 
investors in the Group. The above factors, and others not specifically referred to above, may in the 
future materially affect the financial performance of the  Group and the value of the Group’s shares. 
Mining exploration and  production  is  inherently  risky,  uncertain  and  speculative  in nature.  Potential 
investors  should  consider  that  the  investment  in  the  Group  is  speculative  and  should  consult  their 
professional advisers before deciding whether to invest. 
 
4.  Significant Changes in the State of Affairs
Long State Investments – Equity Placement Facility 
On 27 January 2015, the Company announced that it had entered into a binding agreement with Long 
State Investments Limited (“LSI”), to provide the Company with an Equity Placement Facility for up to 
$20 million, over two years on the terms and conditions summarised in the ASX announcement. 
 
On 30 January 2015, the Company issued 541,125 fully paid ordinary shares at a deemed issue price 
of $0.1848 as an implementation fee of $100,000 to LSI for the establishment of the Equity Placement 
Facility. 
 
On 23 February 2015, the Company issued 4,548,763 unlisted options exercisable at $0.2748, expiring 
23 January 2018 to LSI as consideration for entering into the Equity Placement Facility. 
 
Acquisition of Mozambique Graphite project 
On 27 January 2015, the  Company also announced that following discussions  with its joint venture 
partner Grafex Lda (“Grafex”), new terms had been agreed with the minority shareholders of Grafex 
to extend, for a further 12 months, the timeline for the second Tranche payment of US$5 million in 
cash  and  US$5  million  equivalent  in  Triton  shares,  for  Triton  to  acquire  the  remaining  20%  equity
40
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
interest in Grafex and all of the Mozambique graphite projects known as Balama North, Balama South 
and Ancuabe (“the Projects”). 
 
Under  the  new  terms,  Triton  paid  an  extension  fee  of  US$200,000  to  the  minority  shareholders  of 
Grafex for the 12 month extension. During this 12 month extension period Triton has undertaken to 
pay a series of instalments of cash and shares to the minority shareholders of Grafex in full satisfaction 
of the second Tranche payment to obtain 100% equity interest in Grafex. 
 
Triton was able to acquire a 90% equity interest in Grafex through the payment of US$3 million in cash 
and US$3 million  equivalent in Triton shares to the  minority shareholders of Grafex. Following this, 
Triton is able to acquire a 100% equity interest in Grafex through the payment of a further US$2 million 
in  cash  and  US$2  million  equivalent  in  Triton  shares.  Once  an  equity  interest  has  been  acquired, 
currently an 80% interest, Triton will maintain the earned equity interest even if it is unable to complete 
payment of the full second Tranche consideration. Triton earned an 80% interest in Grafex and the 
joint venture on 25 August 2014. 
 
On 19 February 2015, the Company paid the extension fee of US$200,000 to the minority shareholders 
of Grafex and issued 7,661,877 fully paid ordinary shares at a deemed issue price of $0.1672 as part 
consideration towards earning a 90% equity interest in Grafex and the Projects.  
 
On 24 March 2015, the Company paid part consideration of US$250,000 to the minority shareholders 
of Grafex and issued 1,671,009 fully paid ordinary shares at a deemed issue price of $0.1924 as part 
consideration towards earning a 90% equity interest in Grafex and the Projects. 
 
On 28 April 2015, the Company paid part consideration of US$250,000 to the minority shareholders 
of Grafex and issued 826,626 fully paid ordinary shares at a deemed issue price of $0.3863 as part 
consideration towards earning a 90% equity interest in Grafex and the Projects. 
 
On 25 May 2015, the Company paid part consideration of US$250,000 to the minority shareholders of 
Grafex  and  issued  917,692  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  at  a  deemed  issue  price  of  $0.3485  as  part 
consideration towards earning a 90% equity interest in Grafex and the Projects. 
 
On 23 June 2015, the Company paid part consideration of US$500,000 to the minority shareholders 
of Grafex and issued 5,032,530 fully paid ordinary shares at a deemed issue price of $0.32 as part 
consideration towards earning a 90% equity interest in Grafex and the Projects. 
 
On 22 July 2015, the Company paid part consideration of US$250,000 to the minority shareholders of 
Grafex  as  part  consideration  towards  earning  a  90%  equity  interest  in  the  Mozambique  graphite 
projects known as Balama North, Balama South and Ancuabe. 
 
On 17 August 2015, the Company paid part consideration of US$500,000 to the minority shareholders 
of  Grafex  as  part  consideration towards  earning  a 90%  equity  interest  in  the  Mozambique  graphite 
projects known as Balama North, Balama South and Ancuabe. 
 
During  the  year  ended  31  December  2015,  Triton  made  payments  of  US$2.2  million  and  issued 
16,109,734  shares  to  the  minority  shareholders  of  Grafex  for  consideration  totalling  US$5,200,000 
(AU$6,732,662) to acquire an additional 10% equity interest in Grafex, to increase the Group’s interest 
in the Mozambique graphite projects to a 90% interest. Triton did not remit the remaining tranche of 
US$1,000,000 in consideration to secure the 90% interest by the payment deadline, 24 February 2016. 
In accordance with the terms and conditions of the share purchase agreements Triton’s equity interest 
remains at 80% and the Company forfeits the consideration paid to earn the 90% equity interest.  
 
Joint Venture - AMG Mining AG 
On 31 March 2015, the Company announced that it had signed a binding agreement to form a strategic 
alliance with AMG Mining AG (“AMG”), through the AMG subsidiary of GK Ancuabe Graphite Mine, 
SA (“GK”). The strategic alliance is for an initial exclusive period of two years during which the Parties 
will  collaborate  on  the  exploration,  identification  and  development  of  graphite  occurrences  in  the 
Ancuabe  district,  within  the  Province  of  Cabo  Delgado  in  Mozambique.  GK’s  Mozambique  assets 
include permitted mining concession 4C that encompasses a functional graphite producing plant (on
41
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
Triton receiving all relevant government approvals; 
Triton commissioning a processing plant or plants; 
Triton achieving commercial production of Material to the satisfaction of Triton; and 
Triton providing YXGC notice of its intention to commence deliveries of Material.
care and maintenance) and associated mining and production infrastructure in the Ancuabe district. 
Triton’s exploration tenure completely surrounds this mining concession. 
 
Off-take Agreement - Yichang Xincheng Graphite Co., Ltd 
On  1  April  2015,  the  Company  announced  the  signing  of  a  20  year  binding  off-take  agreement  to 
supply  100,000  tonnes  of  graphitic  concentrate  per  year  at  a  minimum  sale  price  of  US$1,000  per 
tonne,  with  Chinese  graphite  products  specialist  Yichang  Xincheng  Graphite  Co.,  Ltd  (“YXGC”)  for 
Triton’s Mozambique Graphite (“TMG”) (“Agreement”). Triton has exclusive rights to supply graphite 
to YXGC from Mozambique, Madagascar, Malawi and Tanzania.  
 
The binding off-take agreement is conditional upon the following conditions being met within 36 month 
of signing the Agreement: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
Project Funding - Shenzhen Qianhai Zhongjin Group Co., Ltd 
On 27 April 2015, the Company announced the formal signing of a letter of intent (LOI) with Chinese 
equity  firm  and  resources  trading  house,  Shenzhen  Qianhai  Zhongjin  Group  Co.,  Ltd  (“SQZG”). 
Pursuant to the LOI, SQZG have agreed to provide up to US$100 million direct equity investment in 
Triton and up to a US$100 million debt facility funding for a total of up to US$200 million to build and 
develop  a  graphite  concentrate  operation  with  initial  capacity  to  produce  up  to  200,000  tonnes  of 
graphite concentrate per year at Nicanda Hill. 
 
The debt facility will be for a maximum term of five years from the date of funding and during the term 
of  the  loan  and  until  the debt  full  is  paid  in  full,  Triton agrees  to  provide  SQZG  with  up  to  200,000 
tonnes of graphite concentrate at a fixed price US$875 per tonne FOB of material for any shipment, 
subject to purity of the graphite concentrate of not less than 90% and moisture content of up to 1%. 
 
Both the project funding agreement and the off-take agreement are conditional on the completion of a 
formal due diligence by SQZG, to be completed no later than 30 June 2015 and the execution of final 
binding agreements. 
 
On 2 June 2015, the Company announced that SQZG had sought an extension to the LOI equity and 
debt funding due diligence deadline of 30 June 2015 which was announced by the Company on 27 
April 2015, for up to six months to incorporate a formal review of the Ancuabe graphite project as well 
as the Nicanda Hill project. 
 
Joint Venture Agreements - Yichang Xincheng Graphite Co., Ltd 
On 14 May 2015, the Company announced the entry into two binding joint venture agreements with 
Chinese graphite products  specialist  Yichang Xincheng Graphite Co., Ltd (“YXGC”) to develop and 
produce  graphite  enhanced  products  in  Mozambique  and  China.  The  joint  venture  companies  will 
source Triton Mozambique Graphite concentrate exclusively from Triton to develop enhanced graphite 
products. 
 
Triton will hold a 70% interest in the Mozambique joint venture (Mozambique JV) of which Triton will 
be the operator. The Mozambique JV  was conditional upon  on  a number of conditions either being 
waived or satisfied by the relevant party, either Party may terminate the Joint Venture. 
 
Triton will hold a 49% interest in the China joint venture (China JV) of which YXGC will be the operator. 
The China JV is conditional upon on the following conditions being waived or satisfied by the relevant 
party  from  the  date  which  is  thirty  six  (36)  months  from  the  Commencement  Date,  13  May  2015, 
whereby either party may terminate the Joint Venture:
-  Triton commissioning to its sole satisfaction a processing plant or plants of  a size and scale
-
capable of satisfying the graphite concentrate demand to produce Enhanced Product; 
incorporation  of  an  entity/company  of  which  the  shareholders  are  Triton  and  YXGC  each 
holding  shares  commensurate  to  their  Participating  Interest  within  6  months  of  the 
Commencement Date (JV Company);
42
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
receiving all relevant Mozambique Government approvals; all relevant Chinese Government 
approvals or any other relevant Government approvals (including Australia); 
agreeing  on  an  appropriate  site  for  the  Graphite  Enhance  Products  Plant  in  China  Hubei 
province of Xingshan; 
entry into a Shareholders Agreement between Triton & YXGC in relation to the JV Company 
which incorporates the terms and intent of the Joint Venture; 
agreeing  on  the  Graphite  Enhance  Products  Plant  design,  construction  cost,  timetable  and 
size; 
agreeing  to  items/decisions  of  the  Joint  Venture  that  require  unanimous  approval  of  the 
Parties; 
agreeing to an initial Joint Venture budget and work program; 
agreeing on the initial cost and initial capital contributions (“Initial Contribution”); 
undertaking the following items within six months from the Commencement Date; 
opening a Joint Venture bank account, with both Parties as co-signatories to the account; 
each Party depositing US$1 million into the Joint Venture bank account; and 
establishing a joint venture management team.
-
-
-
-
-
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-
At the date of the appointment of the Administrators, neither party had contributed the deposit of US$1 
million into the joint venture account and complied with the obligation pursuant to the China JV. On 21 
March 2016, YXGC wrote to the Company terminating both the offtake and joint venture agreements. 
 
On 28 September 2015, the joint venture entity, Hubei Xincheng Triton Graphite Technologies Co Ltd, 
was incorporated in the Peoples Republic of China to operate the China JV. 
 
On 30 September 2015, Triton Asia Pte Ltd was incorporated in Hong Kong to hold the Group’s interest 
in Hubei Xincheng Triton Graphite Technologies Co Ltd. 
 
Mozambique Capital Gains Tax 
On 1 January 2015, a Mozambique capital gains tax regime applicable to the mining sector came into 
force.  According  to  this  regime,  the  tax  in  relation  to  a  capital  gain  on  the  transfer  of  mining  rights 
located  in  the  Mozambique  territory  by  non-residents  is  payable  by  the  seller.  In  relation  to  this 
payment, the seller, the buyer or the entity holding the mining rights have joint and several liability for 
the payment of the tax in Mozambique. For more information refer to Note 19. 
 
Other 
During the period, the Company raised approximately $13.7 million through the issue of approximately 
47.6 million fully paid ordinary shares and 3.5 million unlisted options. 
 
On  26  February  2015,  the  Company  announced  the  appointment  of  key  consultants  engaged  to 
complete a Definitive Feasibility Study at Nicanda Hill. 
 
On 28 April 2015, the Company issued 1,000,000 fully paid ordinary shares at a deemed issue price 
of  $0.355 per  share to a consultant, Oriental  Link  Holdings,  for  the  provision  of  consulting  services 
provided to secure a binding off-take agreement with Yichang Xincheng Graphite Co Ltd (“YXGC”). 
 
On  28  May  2015,  the  Company  held  its  Annual  General  Meeting,  where  amongst  other  matters 
shareholders approved the re-election of Mr Alan Jenks as a director of the Company, the ratification 
of prior issues of shares and options as well as an additional 10% placement facility. 
 
On 5 June 2015, the Company appointed Mr Christopher Catlow as Non-Executive Chairman and Mr 
Alan Jenks resigned as Chairman of the Company and became a Non-Executive Director. 
 
On 18 June 2015, the Company issued 1,000,000 fully paid ordinary shares at a deemed issue price 
of  $0.315 per  share to a consultant, Oriental  Link  Holdings,  for  the  provision  of  consulting  services 
provided  to  secure  a  binding  joint  venture  agreement  with  YXGC  to  produce  enhanced  graphite 
products 
 
On 24 August 2015, Ms Paula Ferreira was appointed Non-Executive Director of the Company.
43
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
On 24 August 2015, the Company announced that its registered office and principal place of business 
had changed to Ground Floor, Unit 1, 256 Stirling Highway, Claremont WA 6010. 
 
On 2 October 2015, Mr Michael Brady, ceased his role as Joint Company Secretary.  
 
On 12 November 2015, the company issued 7.5 million performance rights to Directors as approved 
by shareholders at the general meeting held 22 October 2015 pursuant to the Company’s Employee 
Performance Rights Plan. The Director Performance Rights upon vesting, entitle the holder to acquire 
one fully paid ordinary share for nil consideration. The performance rights will expire, if unvested, on 
20 August 2018, and are subject to the following vesting conditions:
  minimum vesting term of 22 months from grant date, being 20 August 2017 (Minimum Vesting
Period);
  Tranche A – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.40 per share.
  Tranche  B-  the  rights  will  vest  upon  the  share  process  reaching  a  5-day  VWAP  of  at  least
$0.60 per share.
  Tranche C – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.75 per share.
  Tranche D – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$1.00 per share
On 12 November 2015, 2 million performance rights lapsed in relation to Mr Michael Brady ceasing 
his role with the Company. 
 
On 1 December 2015, Mr Bradley Boyle ceased his role as Managing Director and  Chief Executive 
Officer. 
 
On  4  December  2015,  Mr  Garth  Higgo  was  appointed as  Chief  Executive Officer.  The  terms  of  his 
appointment included 3.5 million performance rights.  The performance rights, upon vesting, entitle the 
holder to acquire one fully paid ordinary share for nil consideration. The performance rights will expire, 
if unvested, on 20 August 2017, and are subject to the following vesting conditions;
  Continuous employment or engagement by the company up to the satisfaction of the vesting
conditions;
  Tranche A – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.20 per share – 1,000,000 rights will vest
  Tranche  B-  the  rights  will  vest  upon  the  share  process  reaching  a  5-day  VWAP  of  at  least
$0.30 per share- 1,000,000 rights will vest
  Tranche C – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.40 per share- 1,000,000 rights will vest
  Tranche D – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.50 per share- 500,000 rights will vest
The issue of these reporting rights is subject to shareholder approval at the AGM, at the date of this 
report these rights have not yet been issued. 
 
6.  Dividends
No dividends were declared or paid during the year and the Directors do not recommend the payment 
of a dividend. 
 
7.
Indemnities
The Company, for a premium of $25,112 has taken out an insurance policy to cover its Directors and 
officers to indemnify them against any claims and negligence. The Company has agreed to indemnify 
the current Directors and officers of its controlled entities for all  liabilities to another person,  except 
where the liability arises out of conduct involving a lack of good faith. The agreement stipulates that 
the Company shall meet the full amount of any such liabilities, including costs and expenses. No policy 
has been entered into to indemnify the auditors.
44
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
8.  Significant Events After the Balance Sheet Date
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
During January 2016, the Company completed a pro rata non-renounceable entitlement offer of one 
(1)  fully  paid  ordinary  share  for  every  three  (3)  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  (Shares)  held  by  eligible 
shareholders on 30 December 2015 at an issue price of $0.09 per share to raise up to $11,296,483 
(before costs),  with one (1) free attaching  option for every  two (2) Shares subscribed for under  the 
offer (Options) (Entitlement Offer). The Entitlement Offer was partially underwritten up to $4 million by 
GMP Securities Australia Pty Limited. 
 
Triton  raised  $4  million  via  the  Entitlement  Offer  through  the  issue  of  44,444,444  Shares  and 
22,222,306 Options. 
 
On 28 January 2016 Mr Rodney Baxter was appointed Non-Executive Director and Mr Garth Higgo 
was appointed Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer. 
 
On 1 February 2016 Mr Patrick Ellis was appointed Chief Operating Officer and Mr Richard Jarvis was 
appointed Chief Financial Officer. 
 
On 2 February 2016 Mr Garth Higgo’s Executive Service agreement was finalised.  A further 2 million 
performance rights were granted in addition to the 3.5 million on his appointment on 4 December 2015.  
The total 5.5 million performance rights, which vest on 20  August 2017, dependent on the following 
vesting conditions being met or waived by the Company on or prior to vesting date;
  Continuous employment or engagement by the company up to the satisfaction of the vesting
conditions;
  Tranche A – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.20 per share – 1,500,000 rights will vest
  Tranche  B-  the  rights  will  vest  upon  the  share  process  reaching  a  5-day  VWAP  of  at  least
$0.30 per share- 1,500,000 rights will vest
  Tranche C – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.40 per share- 1,500,000 rights will vest
  Tranche D – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.50 per share- 1,500,000 rights will vest
The issue of these reporting rights is subject to shareholder approval at the AGM, at the date of this 
report these rights have not yet been issued. 
 
On 10 February 2016 Mr Rodney Baxter and Mr Alan Jenks resigned as Non-Executive Directors of 
the Company. 
 
On  2  March  2016,  the  Directors  resolved  to  place  the  Company  into  voluntary  administration  and 
appointed Messrs Martin Jones, Andrew Smith and Dermott McVeigh of Ferrier Hodgson as joint and 
several administrators of the Company (together, the “Administrators”) pursuant to section 436A of the 
Corporations Act. 
 
On 3 March 2016, the Company’s securities were suspended from trading on the official list of ASX. 
Following  appointment  of  the  Administrators,  the  powers  of  the  Company’s  officers  (including 
Directors)  were  suspended  and  the  Administrators  assumed  control  of  the  Company’s  business, 
property and affairs. 
 
On  30  April  2016,  the  Chief  Financial  Officer,  Mr  Richard  Jarvis  and  Technical  Director,  Mr  Alfred 
Gillman ceased their executive roles with the Company. 
 
On 17 May 2016, the Company announced maiden inferred mineral resources at Nicanda West and 
Ancuabe project sites. 
 
On 3 June 2016, Mr Garth Higgo’s Executive Service agreement for the role of Chief Executive Officer 
was terminated with one month of notice.
45
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
On 1 July 2016, the Administrators provided their report to creditors pursuant to section 439A(4)(a) of 
the  Corporations  Act  2001.  On 5 July  2016,  the  Administrators  provided a supplementary  report  to 
creditors. The key matters of the reports were:
  The Administrators’ recommendation that the Joint Deed of Company Arrangement (DOCA)
Proposal be adopted by creditors. The proposal comprises:
o  Phase  1:  Subscription  by  Minjar  Gold  Pty  Ltd  (or  its  nominee)  to  105,248,400  fully 
paid  ordinary  shares  at  $0.06  per  share  to  raise  $6,314,904  (Placement)  following 
shareholder approval, together with 25,000,000 free options to acquire shares in the 
Company (each having an exercise price of $0.10 each and an expiry date of 30 June 
2018, with such options to be issued under the entitlement issue prospectus).
o  Phase 2: As soon as practicable after completion of the Placement and termination of 
the  DOCA,  the  Company  will  seek  to  raise  not  less  than  A$7,893,634  via  an 
underwritten  non-renounceable  pro-rata  entitlements 
than 
131,560,567 fully paid ordinary shares (Entitlement Issue Shares) in the capital of the 
Company at $0.06 per share (and on the basis of 1 Entitlement Issue Shares for every 
4 fully paid ordinary shares held in the capital of the Company as at the relevant record 
date)  (Entitlement  Issue).  Somers  &  Partners  Pty  Ltd  shall  be  appointed  as 
underwriter of this issue.
issue  of  not
less
o  Deposit of $1 million which has been deposited into a Ferrier Hodgson Trust account 
by  Somers  as  an  interest  free  loan  to  the  Company,  subject  to  the  terms  and 
conditions of the DOCA.
o  Subject to conditions precedent, the formation of a Creditors Trust and payment of $5 
million (or any shortfall amount) to repay creditors 100 cents in the dollar plus statutory 
interest of 8%, excluding any claim or liability arising from or in connection with the 
Mozambique Government.
  The  Administrators,  through  their  investigations  did  not  identify  any  potential  voidable
transaction by directors that may have been committed under the provisions of the Act.
  Yichang Xincheng Graphite Co. Ltd (YXGC) - On 21 March 2016, YXGC wrote to the Company 
terminating  both  the  agreements  and  making  a  claim  for  US$1  million.  The  Administrators 
have not accepted their claim for damages in the amount of US$1 million as each agreement 
excludes  liability  for  “consequential,  incidental…or  indirect  damages”.  YXGC  have  been 
advised of the rejection of any claim against the Company. The Administrators consider that 
YXGC has no valid claim against the Company.
On 8 July 2016, the Company announced that at the Second Meeting of Creditors held on 8 July 2016, 
the creditors resolved unanimously to execute a Deed of Company Arrangement (DOCA) proposed 
by  Somers  &  Partners  Pty  Ltd  and  Minjar  Gold  Pty  Ltd  in  the  form  set  out  in  the  Administrators’ 
supplementary report dated 5 July 2016. 
 
On 22 July 2016, the Administrators removed Christopher James Catlow and Alfred John Gillman as 
directors of the Company;  and appointed Xingmin (Max) Ji and Guanghui (Michael) Ji representing 
Minjar  Gold  Pty  Ltd  and  Patrick  Nicolas  Burke  representing  Somers  &  Partners  as  directors  of  the 
Company. 
 
On  25  July  2016,  the  DOCA  was  executed  by  the  Company  and  Administrators,  whereupon  the 
Company entered deed administration and the Administrators became the Deed Administrators of the 
Company. The DOCA will complete and be fully effectuated upon each of the following being satisfied:  
  a shareholders’ meeting approves the issue to Minjar Gold Pty Ltd or nominees of 105,248,400 
fully paid ordinary shares at $0.06 per share to raise $6,314,904 (“the Placement”) together 
with 25,000,000 free options to acquire shares in the Company;



the Placement occurs in accordance with the Subscription Agreement (described below);
the Creditors’ Trust Deed is executed;
the Company transfers $5 million together with any chose in action or claim that the Company 
may have against third parties (“Company Causes of Action”) and the benefit of such Company 
Causes of Action to the trustees of the Creditors Trust; and
  all creditors’ claims against the Company (except any excluded claims) are extinguished and
all creditors whose claims have been so extinguished are taken to have a claim against the 
Creditors Trust, equal in amount to their released claim.
46
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
Immediately following the execution of the DOCA, the Underwriting Agreement (proposed as part of 
the DOCA) was executed by the Company and Somers & Partners on Monday, 25 July 2016. 
 
Pursuant  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Underwriting  Agreement,  Somers  &  Partners  will 
underwrite  a  non-renounceable  pro-rata  entitlement  issue  of  not  less  than  131,560,567  fully  paid 
ordinary shares at $0.06 per share on the basis of 1 Entitlement Issue Share for every  4 shares to 
raise not less than $7,893,634. 
 
Immediately following the execution of the Underwriting Agreement (proposed as part of the DOCA), 
the Subscription Agreement was executed by the Company and Minjar Gold Pty Ltd on Monday, 25 
July 2016.  
 
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Subscription Agreement, including shareholder approval, 
Minjar Gold Pty Ltd or nominees will subscribe for 105,248,400 fully paid ordinary shares at $0.06 per 
share to raise $6,314,904 and 25,000,000 free options, exercisable at $0.10, expiring 30 June 2018. 
 
On 27 July 2016, the Deed Administrators and Mr Garth Higgo entered into a short term agreement 
for  a  term  of  3  months,  commencing  3  July  2016,  for  remuneration  of  $400,000  per  annum  plus 
superannuation. Whereby either party may terminate the agreement by one week’s notice in writing.  
 
Since the end of the financial year, the Directors are not aware of any other matter of circumstance 
not otherwise dealt with in this report or financial statements that has significantly or may significantly 
affect the operations of the consolidated Group, the results of those operations, or the state of affairs 
of the Group, in future financial years. 
 
9.  Proceedings on Behalf of the Company
No person has applied for leave of Court to bring proceedings on behalf of the Group or intervene in 
any proceedings to which the Group is a party for the purpose of taking responsibility on behalf of the 
Group for all or any part of these proceedings. 
 
The Group was not a party to any such proceedings during the year. 
 
10.    Information on Directors
Mr Christopher Catlow  Non-Executive Chairman from 5 June 2015 to 22 July 2016
Experience
Mr  Catlow  is  a  highly  qualified  professional  with  over  25  years  of 
international  resources  industry  experience,  having  worked  on  the 
development and operations of oil and gas, hard rock and sand mining 
projects. 
 
Mr  Catlow  played  a  central  role  in  the  formation  of  Iluka  Resources 
Limited and was a senior executive and CFO of the ASX-listed iron ore 
mining  company,  Fortescue  Metals  Group  Ltd  (FMG),  having  joined 
shortly after its formation in 2003. During his seven years at FMG, initially 
as  its  inaugural  Chief  Financial  Officer  and  then  as  its  Investment  and 
Business Development Director, the company financed and brought into 
production  its  major  iron  ore  mining,  processing  and  port  facility  in 
Western  Australia's  Pilbara  region.  The  development  established  FMG 
as Australia's third largest iron ore producer behind Rio Tinto and BHP 
Billiton.  
 
Christopher Catlow has a BSc in Engineering Science from the University 
of  Durham  in  the  UK  and  is  a  Fellow  of  the  Institute  of  Chartered 
Accountants in Australia.
47
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
Interest  in  securities  at 
31 December 2015
142,857 ordinary shares 
3,500,000  performance  rights  expiring  20  August  2018,  conversion 
subject to vesting conditions.
Special responsibilities  Member  of  Audit  and  Governance  Committee,  Nomination  and
Directorships  held 
other listed entities
in
Mr Alan Jenks
Experience
Interest  in  securities  at 
31 December 2015
Remuneration Committees. 
 
 
Mr Catlow has held directorships in the following ASX listed entities in the 
past three years:
-
Previously Chairman of Admedus Limited (ASX: AHZ)
-  Previously  Non-Executive  Director  and  Deputy  Chairman  of 
Sirius Minerals Plc, listed on the London Stock Exchange’s AIM 
market.
Non-Executive Director from 5 June 2015 to 10 February 2016 
Non-Executive Chairman from 28 January 2014 to 5 June 2015 
 
Mr Jenks has over 20 years of experience in early stage investments in 
the  junior  resources  sector,  particularly  companies  with key  projects  in 
Australia and Africa. 
 
Mr. Jenks obtained a vast knowledge of South African PGM exploration 
companies in and around the Bushveld complex. Subsequent to this Mr. 
Jenks, in 2001, had the foresight to successfully build a platinum group 
metals recycling company, Catalytic Converters Recycling Services Ltd 
(“CCRS”).  Mr.  Jenks  is  the  Managing  Director  of  CCRS,  which  is  a 
company  that  specialises  in  the  extraction  and  recovery  of  precious 
metals from spent catalytic converters. 
 
36,390,072 ordinary shares 
1,877,500  unlisted  options,  exercisable  at  $0.10,  expiry  31  December 
2016 
3,500,000  performance  rights  expiring  20  August  2018,  conversion 
subject to vesting conditions.
Special responsibilities  Member  of  Audit  and  Governance  Committee,  Nomination  and
Directorships  held 
other listed entities
in
Remuneration Committees. 
 
Mr Jenks has held no directorships of ASX listed entities in the past three 
years.
48
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
Mr Bradley Boyle
Qualifications
Experience
Interest in securities at 1 
December 2015
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer  from 27 April  2012 to  1 
December 2015 
 
Bachelor  of  Laws  (Murdoch  University),  Graduate  Diploma  in  Applied 
Corporate Governance (Chartered Secretaries Australia), and Graduate 
Diploma in Business Administration (Murdoch University). 
 
Bradley  Boyle  has  extensive  experience  working  in  the  resource  and 
energy sectors. Bradley is an experienced Managing Director of private 
and ASX listed oil and gas and diversified mineral explorer companies. 
In addition, Bradley has been legal counsel and company secretary for 
many listed and unlisted mining and exploration companies.  
 
Mr  Boyle  is  a  commercial  lawyer  admitted  to  the  Supreme  Court  of 
Western  Australia  and  the  High  Court  of  Australia.  Previously,  Bradley 
acquired  a  diverse  range  of  corporate  and  private  practice  experience 
acting  for  mining,  commercial  and  government  clients  across  a  broad 
range of sectors.  
 
5,413,038 ordinary shares; 
3,500,000  performance  rights  expiring  20  August  2018,  conversion 
subject to vesting conditions.
Special responsibilities  Managing the daily operations of the Group.
Directorships  held 
other listed entities
in
Mr Alfred Gillman
Qualifications
Experience
Interest  in  securities  at 
31 December 2015
Previously  a  director  of  Sprint  Energy  Ltd,  Mr  Boyle  has  held  no other 
directorships of ASX listed entities in the past three years.
Non-Executive Director from 27 September 2012 
Technical Director from 23 August 2014 to 22 July 2016 
 
Bachelor  of  Science  (Honours),  Fellow  of  the  Australian  Institute  of 
Mining and Metallurgy (CP Geology) 
 
Mr Gillman has over 30 years of experience as a geologist in gold, base 
metals  and  uranium.  He  has  extensive  experience  in  exploration  and 
project development in various parts of the world including Australia and 
Africa. 
 
4,100,000 ordinary shares 
3,500,000  performance  rights  expiring  20  August  2018,  conversion 
subject to vesting conditions.
Special responsibilities  Member  of  Audit  and  Governance  Committee,  Nomination  and
Directorships  held 
other listed entities
in
Remuneration Committees. 
 
Previously  the  Technical  Director  of  Peninsula  Energy  Ltd,  Mr  Gillman 
has  held  no  other  directorships  of  ASX  listed  entities  in  the  past  three 
years.
49
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
Ms Paula Ferreira
Experience
Interest  in  securities  at 
31 December 2015
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Non-Executive Director from 24 August 2015. 
 
Ms.  Ferreira  is  a  Mozambican  citizen  and  a  Chartered  Accountant 
certified  by  Ordem  dos  Contabilistas  e  Auditores  do  Mocambique 
(OCAM) with over 44 years of experience.  
 
Ms. Ferreira is a highly qualified professional having spent over 15 years 
of her early career in the construction industry as an accountant, Chief 
Financial Officer and senior executive. She was one of the founders of 
the major Mozambican construction company CETA, having a strategic 
role in the merger of the 6 construction companies that formed CETA. 
 
Subsequently, Ms. Ferreira spent the next 27 years devoted to financial 
audit,  consulting  and  advisory  roles.  Ms.  Ferreira  was  the  managing 
director and a partner of Deloitte & Touche in Mozambique from 2000 to 
2013. Trained as an auditor, she was previously with Ernst & Young in 
Maputo,  Mozambique  and  owned  and  managed  her  own  audit  firm 
Sisteconta from 1987 to 1992. During these 27 years and whilst dealing 
with  an  extensive  client  portfolio,  Ms.  Ferreira  developed  a  strong 
knowledge  of  the  business  environment  in  Mozambique  including  the 
public sector and international funding agencies. 
 
Formally retired since January 2014, Ms. Ferreira is currently a member 
of the Fiscal Council of Mozabanco, Fellow of Aspen Global Leadership 
Network  and 
in  entrepreneurship 
development. 
 
Ms. Ferreira is co-author of “Accounting System for the Private Sector in 
Mozambique” a didactic book published in 2014 providing guidance for 
application of IFRS in Mozambique. She is also co-author of five e-books 
on the Mozambican Tax System. 
 
3,500,000  performance  rights  expiring  20  August  2018,  conversion 
subject to vesting conditions.
in  some  projects
is  engaged
Special responsibilities  Member  of  Audit  and  Governance  Committee,  Nomination  and
Directorships  held 
other listed entities
in
Remuneration Committees.  
 
Ms Ferreira has held no directorships of ASX listed entities  in the  past 
three years.
50
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
11.  Directors’ Meetings
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
The number of Directors’ meetings and meetings of Committees of Directors held in the year and the 
number of meetings attended by each of the Directors of the Company during the financial year are:
Board of Directors’
Audit and Governance
Remuneration and
Meetings
Committee 
Meetings
Name
Number 
attended
Number 
eligible 
to attend
Number 
attended
Number 
eligible to
attend
Nomination
Committee Meetings 
Number 
eligible 
to attend
Number 
attended
Mr Christopher Catlow (i)
Mr Alan Jenks
Mr Bradley Boyle(ii)
Mr Alfred Gillman
Ms Paula Ferreira(iii)
9
13
12
13
7
(i)  Mr Catlow appointed 5 June 2015 
(ii)  Mr Boyle resigned 1 December 2015 
(iii)  Ms Ferreira appointed 23 August 2015
9
13
12
13
8
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
-
1
1
1
-
-
1
1
1
-
51
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
This  report  for  the  year  ended  31  December  2015  outlines  the  remuneration  arrangements  for  the 
Group in accordance with the requirements of the Corporations Act 2001 (the Act) and its regulations. 
This information has been audited in accordance with section 308(3C) of the Act. 
 
The remuneration report details the remuneration arrangements of key management personnel (KMP) 
who are defined as those persons having the authority and responsibility for planning, directing and 
controlling  the  major  activities  of  the  Group,  directly  or  indirectly,  including  any  Director  (whether 
executive or otherwise) of the Parent company. 
 
For the purposes of this report, the term ‘Executive’ includes the executive directors, senior executives 
and general managers of the Group, whilst the term ‘NED’ refers to Non-Executive Directors only. 
 
Details of Key Management Personnel
Details of the KMP of the Group who held office during the year are as follows:
Directors
Position
Appointment
Resignation
Mr Christopher Catlow
Non-Executive Chairman
5 June 2015
22 July 2016
Mr Bradley Boyle
Mr Alfred Gillman
Mr Alan Jenks
Managing Director  
& Chief Executive Officer 
Company Secretary 
Non-Executive Director 
Technical Director 
Non-Executive Chairman 
Non-Executive Director
27 April 2012 
 
1 September 2009 
27 September 2012 
23 August 2014 
28 January 2014 
5 June 2015
1 December 2015 
 
11 July 2014
22 July 2016
5 June 2015
Ms Paula Ferreira
Non-Executive Director
24 August 2015
-
Other  Key  Management 
Personnel
Position
Appointment
Resignation
Mr Garth Higgo (i)
Chief Executive Officer
4 December 2015
-
Mr Michael Brady
Ms Paige Exley
General Counsel & Joint 
Company Secretary
5 May 2014
2 October 2015
Chief Financial Officer & 
Joint Company Secretary
1 August 2013 
11 July 2014
-
(i)
Mr Higgo was subsequently appointed Managing Director on 28 January 2016.
(a)  Principles Used to Determine the Nature and Amount of Remuneration 
 
Remuneration Policy 
The remuneration policy of Triton Minerals Limited has been designed to align director and executive 
objectives  with  shareholder  and  business  objectives  by  providing  a  fixed  remuneration  component 
which is assessed on an annual basis in line with market rates and offering specific short-term and 
long-term incentives based on key performance areas affecting the entity’s operational and financial 
results.  The  following  report  details  the  principles  used  to  determine  the  nature  and  amount  of 
remuneration. 
 
Remuneration Governance, Structure and Approvals 
The  Nomination  and  Remuneration  Committee  (Committee)  is  responsible  for  determining  and 
reviewing compensation arrangements for the Directors, Key Management Personnel and Executives. 
The role of the Committee also includes responsibility for employee share, option, performance rights 
and  bonus  schemes,  superannuation  entitlements,  retirement  and  termination  entitlements,  fringe 
benefit policies, liability insurance policies and other terms of employment.
52
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
The  Committee  will  review  the  arrangements  having  regard  to  performance,  relevant  comparative 
information  and  at  its  discretion  may  obtain  independent  expert  advice  on  the  appropriateness  of 
remuneration packages. Remuneration packages are set at levels intended to attract and retain Key 
Management Personnel capable of managing the Company’s activities. No remuneration consultants 
were employed during the financial year. 
 
The  practices  of  negotiation  and  annual  review  of  Executives’  performance  and  remuneration  are 
carried  out  by  the  Chief  Executive  Officer  who  makes  recommendations  to  the  Committee.  The 
Chairman of the Board who makes recommendations to the full Board undertakes the review of the 
Chief Executive Officer’s performance and remuneration. 
 
The  Committee  will  meet  at  least  annually  or  as  required,  usually  on  the  anniversary  date  of  each 
service agreement for the particular Director and/or Key Management Personnel. At these meetings, 
the particular Director and/or Key Management Personnel will declare his/her interest and not vote, 
and he/she will depart from the meeting, so as not to be present whilst the issue is being discussed. 
 
Non-Executive Director Remuneration 
The Company’s policy is to remunerate Non-Executive Directors at market rates for time, commitment 
and  responsibilities.  The  Committee  determines  payments  to  Non-Executive  Directors  and  reviews 
their remuneration regularly and at least annually.  
 
Non-Executive  Directors  may  be  paid  fees  for  their  services  as  directors  of  the  Company,  or  other 
amounts  as  determined  by  the  Committee  where  the  director  performs  special  duties  or  otherwise 
performs  services  outside  the  scope  of  the  ordinary  duties  of  a  director.  A  director  may  also  be 
reimbursed for out of pocket expenses incurred as a result of their directorship or any special duties. 
 
In accordance with the Company’s Constitution and the ASX Listing Rules, the maximum aggregate 
amount  of  directors’  fees  that  can  be  paid  to  Non-Executive  Directors  is  subject  to  approval  by 
shareholders at a general meeting. The current aggregate remuneration pool is $250,000 per year. 
 
Executive Remuneration 
The  Company  aims  to reward  Executives  and  Key  Management  Personnel  with  a level  and mix  of 
remuneration  commensurate  with  their  position  and  responsibilities  within  the  Company  and  are 
aligned with market practice. Executive contracts are reviewed annually by the Committee. 
 
The Executive pay and reward framework has four components:
  base pay and benefits; 
 
 
  other remuneration such as superannuation.
short-term incentives; 
long-term incentives (refer Notes 22 and 26); and
The combination of these components comprises the total remuneration. 
 
Company performance, shareholder wealth and directors’ and executive remuneration 
The remuneration policy  has been tailored to increase goal congruence between shareholders  and 
directors and executives. In 2013 this was facilitated through the issue of options to directors and in 
2014 through the issue of shares and performance rights to directors and executives to encourage the 
alignment  of  personal  and  shareholders’  interests.  For  details  of  movements  in  directors’  and 
executives’  interests  in  shares,  options  and  performance  rights,  refer  to  Note  26  of  the  financial 
statements. 
 
The following table shows the gross revenue, losses and share price of the Company at the end of the 
respective financial year.
Revenue 
Net Loss 
Share price
31 Dec 2015 
749 
12,784,684 
8.8 cents
31 Dec 2014 
5,328 
4,997,855 
18.5 cents
31 Dec 2013 
5,801 
1,843,860 
6.3 cents
31 Dec 2012 
5,500 
998,635 
6.4 cents
31 Dec 2011 
45,069 
7,189,593 
3.5 cents
53
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Short term incentives 
Short term incentives such as cash bonuses may be awarded by the Committee from time to time and 
are determined by consideration of the following criteria:
 
 

the Company’s performance; 
the individual employee’s performance; and 
the individual employee’s contribution to the Company’s performance.
Cash Bonuses of $52,500 were paid to Key Management Personnel during 2015. Cash bonuses of 
$63,368  were  awarded  to the  Key  Management  Personnel  in  the  previous  financial  year  ended  31 
December 2014. 
 
Long term incentives 
At the Company’s general meeting held 22 October 2015, shareholders approved the adoption of a 
new  employee  share  plan,  new  employee  performance  rights  plan  and  new  employee  option  plan, 
together the Employee Incentive Scheme. 
 
The Employee Incentive Scheme is designed to:
(a)  align employee incentives with shareholder interests; 
(b)  encourage broad-based share ownership by employees; and 
(c)  assist employee attraction and retention.
For further information regarding the long term incentives granted to Directors and Key Management 
Personnel refer to the Share-based Compensation section of the Remuneration Report. 
 
Voting and comments made at the Company’s 2014 Annual General Meeting 
The Company received more than 82% of votes, of those shareholders who exercised their right to 
vote, in favour of the remuneration report for the 2014 financial  year. The Company did not receive 
any specific feedback at the AGM or throughout the year on its remuneration practices.  
 
Details of Remuneration 
Details of the nature and amount of each element of the emoluments of each of the key management 
personnel of the Company and the consolidated Group for the year ended 31 December 2015 are set 
out in the following tables.  Details of job titles of other key management personnel can be found in 
the Key Management Personnel section of the Directors’ report.
Year 2015
Short-term
Post-employment
Share-
based
Termination 
Payments
benefits
Superannuation
Payment
benefits 
Cash
Salary, Bonus
and Fees
$
40,056
50,379
411,029
326,250
17,820
30,108
152,266
237,375
Name
Directors
Mr Christopher Catlow(i)
Mr Alan Jenks
Mr Bradley Boyle (ii)
Mr Alfred Gillman
Ms Paula Ferreira (iii)
Executives
Mr Garth Higgo (iv)
Mr Michael Brady (v)
Ms Paige Exley
$
52,060
187,756
$
3,805
7,505
20,821
30,994
1,693
2,860
12,237
22,551
-
503,700
935,550
187,756
36,240
13,876
-
-
-
545,000
55,753
46,844
-
155,329
319,832
121,556
-
381,482
Total
$
Percent of
Remuneration
that is
Performance
Based
%
$
-
-
95,921
245,640
54
76
-
34
65
30
-
32
23
54
Total
1,265,283
102,466
599,244
659,029
2,626,022
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
(i)  Appointed Chairman 5 June 2015 
(ii)  Ceased employment 1 December 2015 and forfeited his performance rights granted in 2014 and 2015.  Any share
based payment expense previously recognised in respect of these rights has been reversed.  Total Termination 
payments will include an additional payment of $87,450 for unused annual leave.
(iii)  Appointed 28 August 2015. 
(iv)  Appointed 4 December 2015. 
(v)  Ceased employment 2 October 2015 and forfeited his performance rights granted in 2014.  Any share based payment
expense previously recognised in respect of these rights has been reversed.
Year 2014
Short-term
Post-employment
benefits
Share-
based
Termination 
Payments
benefits 
Cash
Salary, Bonus
and Fees
$
4,500
49,500
365,705
201,231
2,500
2,500
150,386
144,956
921,278
Name
Directors
Mr Malcolm James (i)
Mr Alan Jenks (ii)
Mr Bradley Boyle
Mr Alfred Gillman
Mr Jason Macdonald (iii)
Mr Anthony Baillieu (iii)
Executives
Mr Michael Brady (iv)
Ms Paige Exley (v)
Total
$
Superannuation
Payment
$
416
$
-
-
431,439
34,398
1,161,439
10,481
796,439
-
-
-
-
14,221
65,234
9,923
119,293
69,439
2,573,844
Total
$
Percent of
Remuneration
that is
Performance
Based
%
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4,916
480,939
1,561,542
1,008,151
2,500
2,500
229,841
274,172
3,564,561
-
90
74
79
-
-
45
52
74
(i) 
Resigned 28 January 2014. 
(ii)  Appointed 28 January 2014. 
(iii)  Appointed 28 January 2014 and resigned 28 February 2014. 
(iv)  Commenced employment on 5 May 2014. 
(v)  Engaged as a consultant on 1 August 2013 and became a full time employee on 1 July 2014.
(b)  Contractual Arrangements 
 
Mr Alfred Gillman 
Mr Gillman was appointed as an Executive Director on 23 August 2014. 
-  Role: Technical Director 
-  Appointment Date: 23 August 2014 to 30 April 2016. 
-  Base Salary: $300,000 plus superannuation. Which was subsequently increased to $345,000 per 
annum plus superannuation, effective 1 June 2015 following the review of the responsibilities and 
activities of the Company.
-  Term: Mr Gillman’s contract will continue until the agreement is validly terminated. 
-  Termination: Mr Gillman (Executive) may terminate the contract by giving three months written 
notice.  Except  in  the  event  of  a  change  of  control  or  material  change  where  the  contract  may 
terminate by giving one month’s written notice, the Executive will, subject to the ASX Listing Rules 
and the Corporations Act 2001, be entitled to payment of an amount 2 times the Base Salary and 
the maximum Bonus payable. 
 
The Company may terminate the contract by paying the Executive an amount equal to 12 months 
of salary except by termination for illness or summary termination, where the Company need not 
make any payment. In the event of the Executive’s redundancy, a change of control or a material
55
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
change, the Executive will, subject to the ASX Listing Rules and the Corporations Act 2001, be 
entitled to payment of an amount 2 times the Base Salary and the maximum Bonus payable.
-  Short Term Incentive: Each year the Company may pay the Executive a bonus up to the amount 
of 50% of the Salary (Bonus). The Company shall, when making the determination on whether to 
pay  the  Bonus  to  the  Executive  and  when  determining  the  amount  of  the  Bonus  to  be  paid, 
consider targeted bonus criteria. 
Long Term Incentive: The Executive will be entitled to participate in any Company’s Employee 
Incentive Scheme adopted by the Company from time to time.
-
Mr Bradley Boyle 
-  Role: Managing Director & Chief Executive Officer 
-  Appointment Date: 27 April 2012 to 1 December 2015. 
-  Base Salary: $438,000 per annum including superannuation which was subsequently increased 
to $503,700 per annum including superannuation, effective 1 June 2015 following the review of 
the responsibilities and activities of the Company.
-  Term: Mr Boyle’s contract will continue until the agreement is validly terminated. 
-  Termination:  Mr  Boyle  (Executive)  may  terminate  the  contract  by  giving  three  months  written 
notice.  Except  in  the  event  of  a  change  of  control  or  material  change  where  the  contract  may 
terminate by giving one month’s written notice, the Executive will, subject to the ASX Listing Rules 
and the Corporations Act 2001, be entitled to payment of an amount 2 times the Base Salary and 
the maximum Bonus payable. 
 
The Company may terminate the contract by paying the Executive an amount equal to 12 months 
of salary except by termination for illness or summary termination, where the Company need not 
make any payment. In the event of the Executive’s redundancy, a change of control or a material 
change, the Executive will, subject to the ASX Listing Rules and the Corporations Act 2001, be 
entitled to payment of an amount 2 times the Base Salary and the maximum Bonus payable.
-  Short Term Incentive: Each year the Company may pay the Executive a bonus up to the amount 
of 50% of the Salary (Bonus). The Company shall, when making the determination on whether to 
pay  the  Bonus  to  the  Executive  and  when  determining  the  amount  of  the  Bonus  to  be  paid, 
consider targeted bonus criteria. 
Long Term Incentive: The Executive will be entitled to participate in any Company’s Employee 
Incentive Scheme adopted by the Company from time to time.
-
Mr Alan Jenks 
-  Role: Non-Executive Chairman  
-  Appointment Date: 28 January 2014 to 5 June 2015 
-  Director’s Fees: $54,000 per annum plus superannuation. 
-  The remuneration levels of Non-Executive Directors are discussed further in Note 1 below.
-  Role: Non-Executive Director 
-  Appointment Date: 5 June 2015 to 10 February 2016 
-  Director’s  Fees:  $50,000  per  annum  plus  superannuation.  The  remuneration  levels  of  Non-
Executive Directors are discussed further in Note 1 below.
-  Term: See Note 2 below for details regarding re-appointment and termination.
Mr Christopher Catlow 
-  Role: Non-Executive Chairman 
-  Appointment Date: 5 June 2015 to 22 July 2016 
-  Director’s  Fees:  $70,000  per  annum  plus  superannuation.  The  remuneration  levels  of  Non-
Executive Directors are discussed further in Note 1 below.
56
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
-  Term: See Note 2 below for details regarding re-appointment and termination.
Ms Paula Ferreira 
-  Role: Non-Executive Director 
-  Appointment Date: 24 August 2015 
-  Director’s  Fees:  $50,000  per  annum  plus  superannuation.  The  remuneration  levels  of  Non-
Executive Directors are discussed further in Note 1 below.
-  Term: See Note 2 below for details regarding re-appointment and termination.
There are no other service agreements in place for Executive or Non-Executive Directors. 
 
Note 1: The remuneration of Non-Executive Directors is reviewed regularly, at least annually, by the 
Nomination and Remuneration Committee (Committee). The maximum aggregate amount of directors’ 
fees that can be paid to Non-Executive Directors is subject to approval by shareholders at the annual 
general meeting. The current aggregate remuneration is $250,000 per year. 
 
Note 2: The term of each Non-Executive Director is open to the extent that they hold office subject to 
retirement by rotation, as per the Company’s Constitution, at each annual general meeting and are 
eligible for re-election as a Director at that meeting. Appointment shall cease automatically in the event 
that the Director gives written notice to the Board, or the Director is not re-elected as a Director by the 
shareholders of the Company. There are no entitlements to termination or notice periods. 
 
Other Key Management Personnel service contracts: 
 
Mr Michael Brady 
-  Role: General Counsel & Company Secretary 
-  Appointment Date: 05 May 2014 to 2 October 2015. 
-  Base Salary: $170,000 per annum plus superannuation. 
-  Term: Mr Brady’s contract will continue until the agreement is validly terminated. 
-  Termination:  Mr  Brady  (Executive)  may  terminate  the  contract  by  giving  three  months  written 
notice.  Except  in  the  event  of  a  change  of  control  or  material  change  where  the  contract  may 
terminate by giving one month written notice, the Executive will, subject to the ASX Listing Rules 
and the Corporations Act 2001, be entitled to payment of an amount 2 times the Base Salary and 
the maximum Bonus payable.
-  The Company may terminate the contract by paying the Executive an amount equal to 12 month’s 
salary  except  by termination for illness or summary termination, where the Company  need  not 
make any payment. In the event of the Executive’s redundancy, a change of control or a material 
change the Executive will, subject to the ASX Listing Rules and the Corporations Act 2001, be 
entitled to payment of an amount 2 times the Base Salary and the maximum Bonus payable.
-  Short Term Incentive: Each year the Company may pay the Executive a bonus up to the amount 
of 50% of the Salary (Bonus). The Company shall, when making the determination on whether to 
pay  the  Bonus  to  the  Executive  and  when  determining  the  amount  of  the  Bonus  to  be  paid, 
consider targeted bonus criteria. 
Long Term Incentive: The Executive will be entitled to participate in any Company’s Employee 
Incentive Scheme adopted by the Company from time to time.
-
Ms Paige Exley 
-  Role: Chief Financial Officer & Company Secretary 
-  Appointment Date: 01 July 2014 
-  Base Salary:  $170,000  per  annum  plus  superannuation,  which  was  subsequently  increased to 
$195,500  per  annum  plus  superannuation,  effective  1  June  2015  following  the  review  of  the 
responsibilities and activities of the Company.
-  Term: Ms Exley’s contract will continue until the agreement is validly terminated.
57
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
-  Termination:  Ms  Exley  (Executive)  may  terminate  the  contract  by  giving  three  months  written 
notice.  Except  in  the  event  of  a  change  of  control  or  material  change  where  the  contract  may 
terminate by giving one month written notice, the Executive will, subject to the ASX Listing Rules 
and the Corporations Act 2001, be entitled to payment of an amount 2 times the Base Salary and 
the maximum Bonus payable.
-  The Company may terminate the contract by paying the Executive an amount equal to 12 months 
of salary except by termination for illness or summary termination, where the Company need not 
make any payment. In the event of the Executive’s redundancy, a change of control or a material 
change the Executive will, subject to the ASX Listing Rules and the Corporations Act 2001, be 
entitled to payment of an amount 2 times the Base Salary and the maximum Bonus payable.
-  Short Term Incentive: Each year the Company may pay the Executive a bonus up to the amount 
of 50% of the Salary (Bonus). The Company shall, when making the determination on whether to 
pay  the  Bonus  to  the  Executive  and  when  determining  the  amount  of  the  Bonus  to  be  paid, 
consider targeted bonus criteria. 
Long Term Incentive: The Executive will be entitled to participate in any Company’s Employee 
Incentive Scheme adopted by the Company from time to time.
-
Mr Garth Higgo 
-  Role: Chief Executive Officer 
-  Appointment Date: 4 December 2015. 
-  Base Salary: $400,000 per annum plus superannuation. 
-  Term: Mr Higgo’s contract will continue until the agreement is terminated.
(c)  Share-based Compensation  
 
The Company rewards Directors and Executives for their performance and aligns their remuneration 
with the creation of shareholder wealth by issuing shares, options or performance rights. Share-based 
compensation is at the discretion of the Board and no individual has a contractual right to participate 
in any share-based plan or receive any guarantees benefits. 
 
At the Company’s general meeting held 22 October 2015, shareholders approved the adoption of a 
new employee equity incentive plan.
(i)
Unlisted Options
During the 2015 financial year, no options were granted to Directors or Key Management Personnel 
as  remuneration.  Mr  Christopher  Catlow  was  issued  on  20  January  2015,  23,810  free  attaching 
unlisted options exercisable at $0.15 expiring 16 March 2017, following his participation in a placement 
prior to his appointment as a Director of the Company. Mr Alfred Gillman was issued on 20 January 
2015, 75,000 free attaching unlisted options exercisable at $0.15 expiring 16 March 2017, following 
his participation in a placement whilst a Director of the Company. 
 
During the previous financial year, no options were granted to Directors or Key Management Personnel 
as  remuneration.  Mr  Alan  Jenks  was  issued  on  7  January  2014,  2,442,500  free  attaching  unlisted 
options  exercisable at $0.10 expiring  31  December  2016,  following  his  participation  in a placement 
prior to his appointment as a Director of the Company.
(ii)
Shares
During the 2015 financial year, no shares were granted to Directors or Key Management Personnel 
as remuneration. 
 
On 29 May 2014, the Directors resolved to grant  450,000 shares to Key Management Personnel in 
recognition of the significant achievements of the Company in the previous eighteen months. On 29 
May 2014, the closing share price of the Company’s shares was $0.135, therefore the valuation of the 
grant of shares to Key Management Personnel was $60,750.
58
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
At  the  Company’s  general  meeting  held  20  August  2014,  shareholders  unanimously  approved  the 
grant  of  6 million  shares  to  the  Directors  and the  shares  were  issued  to  Directors  on  1  September 
2014. On that date the Directors also resolved to grant a further 150,000 shares to Key Management 
Personnel  pursuant  to  the  approved  Employee Incentive  Scheme. On 20  August  2014,  the  closing 
shares price of the Company’s shares was $0.365, therefore the grant of shares to Directors and Key 
Management Personnel was valued at $2,244,750. 
The trading of the shares issued pursuant to the Company’s employee equity incentive plan are subject 
to the Company’s Securities Trading Policy; further, Directors and employees are encouraged not to 
trade shares granted in order to align Directors and employees interests with those of all shareholders. 
 
Refer  to  Table  2  for  information  regarding  the  valuation  of  shares  granted  to  Directors  and  Key 
Management Personnel as remuneration in 2014.
(iii)
Performance Rights
At the Company’s  general  meeting held 22 October 2015, shareholders  unanimously  approved the 
grant of 7.5 million performance rights to the Directors. 
 
On 1 November 2015, the Company issued 7.5 million performance rights with various vesting hurdles 
as follows: 
 
(a)  The Performance Rights will vest on 20 August 2017 (minimum vesting period). The number of
Performance Rights that will vest will be dependent upon the following:  
(i)
the Company’s share price reaching a 5 day VWAP of at least $0.40 per share - 1,600,000 
Performance Rights will vest;  
the Company’s share price reaching a 5 day VWAP of at least $0.60 per share - 1,700,000 
Performance Rights will vest;   
the Company’s share price reaching a 5 day VWAP of at least $0.75 per share - 1,700,000 
Performance Rights will vest;   
the Company’s share price reaching a 5 day VWAP of at least $1.00 per share – 2,500,000 
Performance Rights will vest;
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(collectively the Vesting Conditions)
the Performance Rights will expire on 20 August 2018;
(b)  
 
The valuation of the grant of performance rights to Directors is $997,916. Please refer to Table 1 below 
for more details of the valuation of these performance rights. 
 
On  3  December  2015,  the  Company  granted  Mr  Garth  Higgo  3.5  million  performance  rights.  The 
performance  rights,  upon  vesting,  entitle  the  holder  to  acquire  one  fully  paid  ordinary  share  for  nil 
consideration. The performance rights will expire, if unvested, on 20 August 2017, and are subject to 
the following vesting conditions;
  Continuous employment or engagement by the company up to the satisfaction of the vesting
conditions;
  Tranche A – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.20 per share – 1,000,000 rights will vest.
  Tranche  B-  the  rights  will  vest  upon  the  share  process  reaching  a  5-day  VWAP  of  at  least
$0.30 per share- 1,000,000 rights will vest.
  Tranche C – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.40 per share- 1,000,000 rights will vest.
  Tranche D – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.50 per share- 500,000 rights will vest.
The issue of these performance rights is subject to shareholder approval at the AGM, at the date of 
this report these rights have not yet been issued. The valuation of the grant of performance rights to
59
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Mr  Higgo  is  $362,350.  Please  refer  to  Table  1  below  for  more  details  of  the  valuation  of  these 
performance rights. 
 
On 29 May 2014, the Directors approved the grant of 2 million performance rights to Mr Michael Brady 
following shareholder approval of the new employee performance rights plan. On 29 May 2014, the 
fair value of each performance right was $0.0675, therefore the valuation of the grant of performance 
rights to Mr Brady was $135,000. 
 
At  the  Company’s  general  meeting  held  20  August  2014,  shareholders  unanimously  approved  the 
grant of 9 million performance rights to the Directors. On that date the Directors also resolved to grant 
a  further  2  million  performance  rights  to  Key  Management  Personnel  pursuant  to  the  approved 
Employee Incentive Scheme.  
 
On 20 August 2014, the fair value of each performance right was $0.1825, therefore the valuation of 
the grant of performance rights to Directors and Key Management Personnel was $2,007,500. 
 
On 1 September 2014, the Company made the following issues:
  9 million performance rights to Directors as approved by shareholders at the general meeting 
held  20  August  2014  pursuant  to  the  Company’s  Employee  Performance  Rights  Plan 
approved at the same meeting; and
  4  million  performance  rights  to  Key  Management  Personnel  pursuant  to  the  Company’s
Employee Performance Rights Plan approved at the general meeting held 20 August 2014.
Each performance right, upon vesting, entitles the holder to acquire one fully paid ordinary  share for 
nil consideration. The performance rights will expire, if unvested, on 20 August 2018. The performance 
rights vesting conditions are as follows:
  minimum vesting term of 36 months from grant date, being 20 August 2017 (Minimum Vesting
Period);


if  an  announcement  is  made  to  the  market  by  the  Company  confirming  a  minimum  of  an 
inferred resource or higher at the Company’s Balama North project of at least 0.5b tonnes of 
graphite  bearing  ore  –  5,000,000  performance  rights  will  vest,  upon  satisfaction  of  the 
Minimum Vesting Period; and
if an announcement is made to the market by the Company confirming that a pre–feasibility 
or  other  feasibility  study  will  be  undertaken  within  the  Company’s  Balama  North  project  – 
6,000,000  director  performance  rights  will  vest  and  2,000,000  key  management  personnel 
performance rights will vest, upon satisfaction of the Minimum Vesting Period
Refer to Table 3 for information regarding the valuation of performance rights granted to Directors and 
Key Management Personnel as remuneration in 2014. 
 
In November  2015,  following  the  cessation  of  Mr  Brady’s  employment  with  the  Company,  2 million 
performance rights lapsed without conversion to shares.
60
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Table 1. Valuation of Performance Rights granted to Key Management Personnel as remuneration 2015
Key
Performance
Management
Personnel
Rights 
Granted
Grant Date
Issue Date
Amortisation
Date
Expiry 
Date
Share 
Price at 
Grant 
Date
Vesting
5 Day 
VWAP
Fair Value
Total value
per
of
Performance
Performance
Right
Rights
Share-Based Payments
During the
Not yet
year
recognised
Vested 
Number 
of Rights
%
Rights 
Vested
Bradley Boyle
500,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
Alfred Gillman
500,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
Alan Jenks
500,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
1,000,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
$1.00
$1.00
$1.00
$0.40
$0.1035
$0.1035
$0.1035
$0.1746
$51,755
$51,755
$51,755
-
$5,423
$5,423
-
$46,332
$46,332
$174,610
$18,297
$156,313
1,000,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
$0.60
$0.1441
$144,120
$15,102
$129,018
1,000,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
$0.75
$0.1263
$126,330
$13,238
$113,092
500,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
$1.00
$0.1035
$51,755
$5,423
$46,332
Christopher 
Catlow 
Christopher 
Catlow 
Christopher 
Catlow 
Christopher 
Catlow 
Paula Ferreira
Garth Higgo 
Garth Higgo 
Garth Higgo 
Garth Higgo 
Total
600,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
Paula Ferreira
700,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
Paula Ferreira
700,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
Paula Ferreira
500,000
22-Oct-15
01-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
1,000,000  3-Dec-2015
13-Jan-16
03-Dec-17
20-Aug-18
$0.13
1,000,000  3-Dec-2015
13-Jan-16
03-Dec-17
20-Aug-18
$0.13
1,000,000  3-Dec-2015
13-Jan-16
03-Dec-17
20-Aug-18
$0.13
500,000  3-Dec-2015
13-Jan-16
03-Dec-17
20-Aug-18
$0.13
$0.40
$0.60
$0.75
$1.00
$0.20
$0.30
$0.40
$0.50
$0.1746
$0.1441
$0.1263
$0.1035
$0.1248
$0.1063
$0.0914
$0.0795
$104,766
$10,978
$100,884
$10,572
$88,431
$51,755
$124,800
$106,300
$91,400
$39,750
$9,267
$5,423
$4,780
$4,072
$3,501
$1,523
$93,788
$90,312
$79,164
$46,332
$120,020
$102,228
$87,899
$38,227 
$1,195,389
11,000,000
$1,360,166
$113,022
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
61
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Table 2. Valuation of Shares granted to Key Management Personnel as remuneration 2014
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Key Management
No. of granted
Personnel
shares
Grant 
Date
Issue Date
Share-Based Payments
Total value 
of Shares
During 
 the year
Not yet
recognised
Share 
Price
on
Grant 
Date 
$0.365
Bradley Boyle
Alfred Gillman
Alan Jenks
Michael Brady
Paige Exley
3,000,000
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
$1,095,000
$1,095,000
2,000,000
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
$0.365
$730,000
$730,000
1,000,000
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
$0.365
$365,000
$365,000
300,000
29-May-14
01-Sep-14
$0.135
150,000
29-May-14
01-Sep-14
150,000
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
$0.135
$0.365
$40,500
$20,250
$54,750
$40,500
$20,250
$54,750
Total
6,600,000
$2,305,500
$2,305,500
Table 3. Valuation of Performance Rights granted to Key Management Personnel as remuneration 2014
Vested 
Number  
of Shares
%
Shares 
Vested
3,000,000
100%
2,000,000
100%
1,000,000
100%
300,000
100%
150,000
100%
150,000
100%
6,600,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Key
Performance
Management
Personnel
Rights 
Granted
Grant Date
Issue Date
Amortisation
3 year
Date
Expiry 
Date
Share 
Price at 
Grant 
Date
Fair Value
Total value
Vesting
per
of
Probability
Performance
Performance
Right
Rights
Share-Based Payments
During the
Not yet
year
recognised
Vested 
Number 
of Rights
%
Rights 
Vested
Bradley Boyle
3,000,000
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.365
Alfred Gillman
3,000,000
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.365
Alan Jenks
3,000,000
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.365
Michael Brady
2,000,000
29-May-14
01-Sep-14
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.135
Paige Exley
2,000,000
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.365
50%
50%
50%
50%
50%
$0.1825
$0.1825
$0.1825
$0.0675
$0.1825
$547,500
$66,439
$481,061
$547,500
$66,439
$481,061
$547,500
$66,439
$481,061
$135,000
$24,734
$110,266
$365,000
$44,293
$320,707
Total
13,000,000
$2,142,500
$268,344
$1,874,156
-
-
-
-
-
-
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
62
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
12.  REMUNERATION REPORT (Audited)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
(d)  Equity Instruments Issued on Exercise of Remuneration Options 
 
During  the  2015  financial  year,  2,965,000  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  were  issued  to  Directors  upon 
conversion  of  unlisted  options,  of  which  2,400,000  had  been  granted  to  Directors  during  2013  as 
remuneration. 
 
During  the  2014  financial  year  1,600,000  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  were  issued  to  Directors  upon 
conversion of unlisted options granted to Directors during 2013. 
 
(e)  Loans to Directors and Key Management Personnel 
 
No  loans  have  been  made  to  Directors  of  the  Company  or  the  Key  Management  Personnel  of  the 
consolidated Group, including their personally-related entities. 
 
This concludes the audited Remuneration Report.  
 
 
13.  Environmental Regulation
The Group holds various exploration licenses which regulate its exploration activities in Australia and 
Mozambique. These licenses include conditions and regulations with respect to  the rehabilitation of 
areas disturbed during the  course of exploration activities.  The Board believes that it has adequate 
systems in place for the management of its environmental requirements and is not aware of any breach 
of environmental requirements as they apply to the Group.  
 
14.  Shares under Option
Unissued  ordinary  shares  of  Triton  Minerals  Limited  under  option  at  the  date  of  this  report  are  as 
follows:
Expiry date
31/12/2016
23/07/2017
25/08/2017
23/01/2018
16/03/2017
16/03/2017
Exercise Price
Number under option
$0.10
$1.00
$0.70
$0.2748
$0.20
$0.15
7,918,957
5,000,000
5,000,000
4,548,763
696,426
22,222,306
45,386,452
No option holder has any right under the options to participate in any other share issue of the Company 
or of any other entities. 
 
15.  Shares Issued on the Exercise of Options
During the financial year ended 31 December 2015 a total of 6,159,636 (2014: 23,082,113) fully paid 
ordinary shares were issued on exercise of options.  
 
16.  Non–Audit Services
The  Board  of  Directors,  in  accordance  with  advice  from  the  Audit  and  Governance  Committee,  is 
satisfied that the provision of non-audit services during the year is compatible with the general standard 
of independence for auditors imposed by the  Corporations Act 2001. Nexia Perth provided $25,045 
(2014: $3,780) of accounting and taxation services for the year ended 31 December 2015.
63
DIRECTORS’ REPORT
17.  Auditors’ Independence Declaration
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
The auditor’s independence declaration for the year ended 31 December 2015 has been received and 
can be found on page 121 of the annual report. 
 
Signed in accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________ 
Garth Higgo 
Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer 
 
Dated at Perth this 2 September 2016
64
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Revenue
Administration expense 
Directors and employee benefits expense 
Share based payment expenses
Depreciation
Borrowing costs
Business development expense
Exploration and evaluation expenditure not capitalised 
Insurance 
Occupancy expenses 
Professional services expense 
Public and investor relations expense 
Travel expenses 
Impairment on exploration & evaluation assets 
Impairment on investment in listed entity 
Investment in associate not capitalised 
Loss on disposal of assets 
Foreign currency gain/(loss) 
Other expenses
Results from operating activities
Financial income 
Financial expense
Net financing income
Loss before income tax
Income tax expense
Net loss for the year
Other comprehensive income
Items that may subsequently be reclassified to 
profit or loss
Movement in fair value of available-for-sale assets
Total other comprehensive income 
 
Total comprehensive loss for the year attributed to 
the equity holders of Triton Minerals Limited
Loss per share attributable to ordinary 
equity holders – basic and diluted
Note
4
22
9
10
10 
8 
11
4
16
21
2015 
$
2014 
$
749
5,328
(159,592) 
(2,159,369) 
(1,336,752)
(29,834)
(708,609)
-
- 
(56,292) 
(164,567) 
(690,019) 
(279,534) 
(497,202) 
(68,743) 
(27,778) 
(6,732,662) 
3,880 
115,647 
(9,689)
(91,986) 
(1,103,284) 
(2,694,762)
(41,296)
-
(52,548)
(102,143) 
(35,175) 
(79,090) 
(265,228) 
(363,327) 
(314,619) 
- 
- 
- 
(4,399) 
99,588 
(18,163)
(12,800,366)
(5,061,104)
51,682 
-
51,682
63,249 
-
63,249
(12,748,684)
(4,997,855)
-
-
(12,748,684)
(4,997,855)
(24,344)
(24,344)
(12,773,028)
Cents 
 
(3.59)
30,085
30,085 
 
(4,967,770) 
 
 
Cents 
 
(1.86)
The above consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income should be read 
in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
65
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
ASSETS 
 
Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables
Prepayments 
Total Current Assets
Non-Current Assets 
Financial assets 
Property, plant and equipment 
Exploration and evaluation assets
Equity-accounted investees
Total Non-Current Assets
TOTAL ASSETS 
 
LIABILITIES 
 
Current Liabilities 
Trade and other payables 
Provisions
Total Current Liabilities
Non-Current Liabilities
Provisions
Total Non-Current Liabilities
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS 
 
 
EQUITY 
Issued capital 
Reserves 
Accumulated losses
TOTAL EQUITY
Note
5 
6
7
8 
9 
10
11
12 
13
13
14 
15
2015 
$
343,938 
544,592
57,709
946,239
86,996 
94,726 
16,522,452
22,929,494
39,633,668
40,579,907
3,589,127 
6,798,704
10,387,831
-
-
10,387,831
30,192,076
59,250,029 
6,184,425 
(35,242,378)
30,192,076
2014 
$
1,497,435 
50,762
29,312
1,577,509
39,118 
91,676 
7,231,528
15,823,331
23,185,653
24,763,162
467,142 
208,850
675,992
3,343
3,343
679,335
24,083,827
41,941,390 
5,039,568 
(22,897,131)
24,083,827
The  above  consolidated  statement  of  financial  position  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the 
accompanying notes.
66
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Ordinary
Share 
Capital
Available- 
For-Sale 
Reserve
Foreign 
Currency
Translation
CONSOLIDATED
$
$
Balance at 1 January 2014
21,035,012
Comprehensive Income:
Loss for the year
Other Comprehensive 
Income
Unrealised loss on available-
for-sale financial assets, net of 
deferred tax liability
Total Comprehensive Income 
for the year
Transactions with owners 
recorded directly in equity
Cost of share based payments
Issue of shares
Share issue costs
Options issued or converted 
during the year
-
-
-
-
21,677,932
(771,554)
-
-
-
30,085
30,085
-
-
-
-
Balance at 31 December 2014  41,941,390
30,085
Balance at 1 January 2015
41,941,390
30,085
Accumulated
Total
Losses
$
$
Share-
based
Payment 
Reserve
$
772,452
(18,583,296)
3,224,168
-
-
-
312,637
-
(2,991,297)
(4,997,855)
(4,997,855)
-
30,085
(4,997,855)
(4,967,770)
-
-
-
312,637
21,677,932
(3,762,851)
6,915,691
684,020
7,599,711
5,009,483
(22,897,131)
24,083,827
5,009,483
(22,897,131)
24,083,827
-
-
(12,748,684)
(12,748,684)
-
(24,344)
-
(12,748,684)
(12,773,028)
-
1,238,236
-
334,402
-
-
-
-
-
1,238,236
18,233,789
(590,748)
(403,437)
403,437
-
6,178,684
(35,242,378)
30,192,076
Reserve
$
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Comprehensive Income:
Loss for the year
Other Comprehensive 
Income
Unrealised loss on available-
for-sale financial assets, net of 
deferred tax liability
Total Comprehensive Income 
for the year
Transactions with owners 
recorded directly in equity
Cost of share based payments
-
-
-
(24,344)
-
-
-
(24,344)
-
-
-
-
-
Issue of shares
Share issue costs
Options issued or converted 
during the year
18,233,789
(925,150)
-
Balance at 31 December 2015  59,250,029
5,741
The  above  consolidated  statement  of  changes  in  equity  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with  the 
accompanying notes.
67
CASH FLOWS FROM 
OPERATING ACTIVITIES 
Payments to suppliers and employees  
Receipts from customers 
Interest received
Net Cash Outflow 
From Operating Activities 
 
CASH FLOWS FROM 
INVESTING ACTIVITIES 
Proceeds for sale of fixed assets 
Payments for acquisition of plant and equipment 
Payments for exploration and evaluation expenditure 
Payments for financial assets held for sale 
Payment for joint venture investment 
Net Cash Outflow 
From Investing Activities 
 
CASH FLOWS FROM 
FINANCING ACTIVITIES 
Proceeds from issue of share capital 
Payment of capital raising costs 
Net Cash Inflow 
From Financing Activities 
 
Net Increase/(Decrease) in  
Cash and Cash Equivalents 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the 
financial year 
Net foreign exchange differences 
 
Cash  and  Cash  Equivalents  at  the  end  of  the 
financial year
23
2015 
$
2014 
$
(4,477,017) 
749 
51,682
(2,267,180) 
5,328 
63,249
(4,424,586)
(2,198,603)
18,125 
(47,129) 
(7,527,417) 
(100,000) 
(2,880,543)
- 
(72,615) 
(5,353,237) 
- 
(6,039,081)
(10,536,964)
(11,464,933)
14,617,556 
(925,150)
13,692,406
14,187,327 
(771,554)
13,415,773
(1,269,144)
(247,763)
1,497,435 
115,647
1,645,610 
99,588
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Note
5
343,938
1,497,435
The above consolidated statement of cash flows should be read in conjunction with the accompanying 
notes.
68
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 1. REPORTING ENTITY 
 
The consolidated financial statements represent Triton Minerals Limited and its controlled entities (the 
“Consolidated Group” or “Group”). Triton Minerals Limited is a company limited by shares, incorporated 
and domiciled in Australia. 
 
The  separate  financial  statements  of  the  parent  entity,  Triton  Minerals  Limited,  have  not  been 
presented within this financial report, as permitted by the Corporations Act 2001. 
 
The Group is a for-profit entity and is primarily involved in mineral exploration and evaluation. 
 
The following is a summary of the material accounting policies adopted by the consolidated group in 
the preparation of the financial report. The accounting policies have been consistently applied, unless 
otherwise stated. 
 
NOTE: 2.   STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES 
 
(a)  Basis of Preparation
The  financial  statements  are  general  purpose  financial  statements  that  have  been  prepared  in 
accordance with Australian Accounting Standards and the Corporations Act 2001. 
 
Australian Accounting Standards set out accounting policies that the AASB has concluded would result 
in  financial  statements  containing  relevant  and  reliable  information  about  transactions,  events  and 
conditions.  Compliance  with Australian Accounting Standards  ensures  that  the financial  statements 
and notes also comply with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International 
Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB).  The  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  on  an  accruals 
basis and are based on historical costs, modified, where applicable, by the measurement at fair value 
of selected non-current assets, financial assets and financial liabilities.  
 
The financial statements were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 2 September 2016. 
 
Functional and Presentation Currency 
The functional and presentation currency for the Group is in Australian Dollars.  
 
Going Concern 
The  31  December  2015  financial  report  has  been  prepared  on  the  going  concern  basis  that 
contemplates  the  continuity  of  normal  business  activities  and  the  realisation  of  assets  and 
extinguishment of liabilities in the ordinary course of business.  For the year ended 31 December 2015, 
the Group recorded a loss after tax of $12,748,684 (2014: $4,997,885) and had a net working capital 
deficit of $9,441,592 (31 December 2014: surplus $901,517). 
 
During January 2016, the Company completed a pro rata non-renounceable entitlement offer of one 
(1)  fully  paid  ordinary  share  for  every  three  (3)  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  (Shares)  held  by  eligible 
shareholders on 30 December 2015 at an issue price of $0.09 per share to raise up to $11,296,483 
(before costs),  with one (1) free attaching  option for every  two (2) Shares subscribed for under  the 
offer (Options) (Entitlement Offer). The Entitlement Offer was partially underwritten up to $4 million by 
GMP Securities Australia Pty Limited. 
 
Triton  raised  $4  million  via  the  Entitlement  Offer  through  the  issue  of  44,444,444  Shares  and 
22,222,306 Options. 
 
On  25  July  2016,  the  DOCA  was  executed  by  the  Company  and  Administrator,  whereupon  the 
Company entered deed administration and the Administrators became the Deed Administrators of the 
Company. The DOCA will complete and be fully effectuated upon each of the following being satisfied:  
  a shareholders’ meeting approves the issue to Minjar Gold Pty Ltd or nominees of 105,248,400 
fully paid ordinary shares at $0.06 per share to raise $6,314,904 (“the Placement”) together 
with 25,000,000 free options to acquire shares in the Company;
69
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
(a)  Basis of Preparation (continued)



the Placement occurs in accordance with the Subscription Agreement (described below);
the Creditors’ Trust Deed is executed;
the Company transfers $5 million together with any chose in action or claim that the Company 
may have against third parties (“Company Causes of Action”) and the benefit of such Company 
Causes of Action to the trustees of the Creditors Trust; and
  all creditors’ claims against the Company (except any excluded claims) are extinguished and
all creditors whose claims have been so extinguished are taken to have a claim against the 
Creditors Trust, equal in amount to their released claim.
Immediately following the execution of the DOCA, the Underwriting Agreement (proposed as part of 
the DOCA) was executed by the Company and Somers & Partners on Monday, 25 July 2016. 
 
Pursuant  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Underwriting  Agreement,  Somers  &  Partners  will 
underwrite  a  non-renounceable  pro-rata  entitlement  issue  of  not  less  than  131,560,567  fully  paid 
ordinary shares at $0.06 per share on the basis of 1 Entitlement Issue Share for every  4 shares to 
raise not less than $7,893,634. 
 
Immediately following the execution of the Underwriting Agreement (proposed as part of the DOCA), 
the Subscription Agreement was executed by the Company and Minjar Gold Pty Ltd on Monday, 25 
July 2016.  
 
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Subscription Agreement, including shareholder approval, 
Minjar Gold Pty Ltd or nominees will subscribe for 105,248,400 fully paid ordinary shares at $0.06 per 
share to raise $6,314,904 and 25,000,000 free options, exercisable at $0.10, expiring 30 June 2018. 
 
Due to the Group being an exploration and development entity, ongoing exploration and development 
activities are reliant on future capital raisings. Based on these facts above, the Directors consider the 
going concern basis of preparation to be appropriate for this financial report.  
 
Until and unless the DOCA is completed and effectuated there is a material uncertainty that may cast 
significant doubt on the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern. 
 
Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgments 
The  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  AASBs  requires  management  to  make 
judgments,  estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect  the  application  of  accounting  policies  and  the 
reported  amounts  of  assets,  liabilities,  income and  expenses.    Actual  results  may  differ  from  these 
estimates.   
 
Estimates  and  underlying  assumptions  are  reviewed  on  an  ongoing  basis.  Revisions  to  accounting 
estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised and in any future periods 
affected. 
 
Information about assumptions and estimation uncertainties that have a significant risk of resulting in 
a material adjustment within the next financial year are included in the following notes: 
 
Note 10 – Capitalisation of Exploration and Evaluation Assets 
Note 11 – Carrying value of equity-accounted investees 
Note 13 - Provisions 
Note 16 – Income Tax Expense 
Note 22 – Valuation of Share-based Payments
70
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
(b)  New Accounting Standards
The  Group  has  adopted  all  of  the  new  and  revised  Standards  and  Interpretations  issued  by  the 
Australian Accounting Standards Board (the AASB) that are relevant to their operations and effective 
for the current year.  New and revised Standards and amendments thereof and Interpretations effective 
for the current year that are relevant to the Group include:
(i) 
(ii)
(iii)
(iv) 
(v)
AASB 1031 ‘Materiality’ (2013) 
AASB 2012-3 ‘Amendments to Australian Accounting Standards – Offsetting Financial Assets 
and Financial Liabilities’ 
AASB  2013-3  ‘Amendments  to  AASB  136  –  Recoverable  Amount  Disclosures  for  Non-
Financial Assets’  
AASB 2013-9 ‘Amendments to Australian Accounting Standards’ – Part B: ‘Materiality’ 
AASB 2014-1 ‘Amendments to Australian Accounting Standards’:
Part A: ‘Annual Improvements 2010-2012 and 2011-2013 Cycles’  
Part C: ‘Materiality’
The nature and effects of the changes are explained below.
(i)
Impact of the application of AASB 1031 ‘Materiality’ (2013)
The revised AASB 1031 is an interim standard that cross-references to other Standards and 
the  Framework  for  the  Preparation  and  Presentation  of  Financial  Statements  (issued 
December 2013) that contain guidance on materiality. The AASB is progressively removing 
references to AASB 1031 in all Standards and Interpretations, and once all these references 
have  been  removed,  AASB  1031  will  be  withdrawn.  The  adoption  of  AASB  1031  does  not 
have  any  material  impact  on  the  disclosures  or  the  amounts  recognised  in  the  Group's 
condensed consolidated financial statements.
(ii)
Impact of the application of AASB 2012-3 ‘Amendments to Australian Accounting Standards 
– Offsetting Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities’
The Group has applied the amendments to AASB 132 for the first time in the current year. The 
amendments to AASB 132 clarify the requirements relating to the offset of financial assets and 
financial liabilities. Specifically, the amendments clarify the meaning of ‘currently has a legally 
enforceable right of set-off’ and ‘simultaneous realisation and settlement’.
The amendments have been applied retrospectively. As the Group does not have any financial 
assets  and financial  liabilities  that  qualify  for  offset,  the  application of  the  amendments  has 
had no impact on the disclosures or on the amounts recognised in the Group's consolidated 
financial  statements.  The  Group  has  assessed  whether  certain  of  its  financial  assets  and 
financial  liabilities  qualify  for  offset  based  on  the  criteria  set  out  in  the  amendments  and 
concluded that the application of the amendments does not have any material impact on the 
amounts recognised in the Group's condensed consolidated financial statements.
(iii)
Impact of the application of AASB 2013-3 ‘Amendments to AASB 136 – Recoverable Amount 
Disclosures for Non-Financial Assets’
The Group has applied the amendments to AASB 136 for the first time in the current year. The 
amendments to AASB 136 remove the requirement to disclose the recoverable amount of a 
cash-generating unit (CGU) to which goodwill or other intangible assets with indefinite useful 
lives had been allocated when there has been no impairment or reversal of impairment of the 
related  CGU.  Furthermore,  the  amendments  introduce  additional  disclosure  requirements 
applicable to when the recoverable amount of an asset or a CGU is measured at fair value 
less  costs  of  disposal.  These  new  disclosures  include  the  fair  value  hierarchy,  key 
assumptions and valuation techniques used which are in line with the disclosure required by 
AASB 13 ‘Fair Value Measurements’.
71
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued)
(b)  New Accounting Standards (continued)
The application of these amendments does not have any material impact on the disclosures 
in the Group's condensed consolidated financial statements. 
 
Impact of the application of AASB 2013-9 ‘Amendments to Australian Accounting Standards’– 
Part B: ‘Materiality’
(iv)
This amending standard makes amendments to particular Australian Accounting Standards to 
delete references to AASB 1031, at the same time it  makes various  editorial corrections  to 
Australian Accounting Standards as well. The adoption of amending standard does not have 
any material impact on the disclosures or the amounts recognised in the Group's condensed 
consolidated financial statements.
(v)
Impact of the application of AASB 2014-1 ‘Amendments to Australian Accounting Standards’
Part A: ‘Annual Improvements 2010-2012 and 2011-2013 Cycle’
The  Annual  Improvements  2010-2012  Cycle  include  a  number  of  amendments  to  various 
AASBs, which are summarised below.
The  amendments  to  AASB  2  (i)  change  the  definitions  of  ‘vesting  condition’  and  ‘market 
condition’;  and  (ii)  add  definitions  for  ‘performance  condition’  and  ‘service  condition’  which 
were previously included within the definition of ‘vesting condition’. The amendments to AASB 
2 are effective for share-based payment transactions for which the grant date is on or after 1 
July 2014.
The amendments to AASB 3 clarify that contingent consideration that is classified as an asset 
or a liability should be measured at fair value at each reporting date, irrespective of whether 
the contingent consideration is a financial instrument within the scope of AASB 9 or AASB 139 
or  a  non-financial  asset  or  liability.  Changes  in  fair  value  (other  than  measurement  period 
adjustments) should be recognised in profit and loss.
The amendments to AASB 3 are effective for business combinations for which the acquisition 
date is on or after 1 July 2014.
The  amendments  to  AASB  8  (i)  require  an  entity  to  disclose  the  judgements  made  by 
management  in  applying  the  aggregation  criteria  to  operating  segments,  including  a 
description of the operating segments aggregated and the economic indicators assessed in 
determining whether the operating segments have ‘similar economic characteristics’; and (ii) 
clarify that a reconciliation of the total of the reportable segments’ assets to the entity’s assets 
should only be provided if the segment assets are regularly provided to the chief operating 
decision-maker.
The amendments to the basis for conclusions of AASB 13 clarify that the issue of AASB 13 
and  consequential  amendments  to  AASB  139  and  AASB  9  did  not  remove  the  ability  to 
measure  short-term  receivables  and  payables  with  no  stated  interest  rate  at  their  invoice 
amounts without discounting, if the effect of discounting is immaterial. As the amendments do 
not contain any effective date, they are considered to be immediately effective.
The  amendments  to  AASB  116  and  AASB  138  remove  perceived  inconsistencies  in  the 
accounting  for  accumulated  depreciation/amortisation  when  an  item  of  property,  plant  and 
equipment or an intangible asset is revalued. The amended standards clarify that the gross 
carrying amount is adjusted in a manner consistent with the revaluation of the carrying amount 
of  the  asset  and  that  accumulated  depreciation/amortisation  is  the  difference  between  the 
gross  carrying  amount  and  the  carrying  amount  after  taking  into  account  accumulated 
impairment losses.
72
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
(b)  New Accounting Standards (continued)
The amendments to AASB 124 clarify that a management entity providing key management 
personnel services to a reporting entity is a related party of the reporting entity. Consequently, 
the reporting entity should disclose as related party transactions the amounts incurred for the 
service  paid  or  payable  to  the  management  entity  for  the  provision  of  key  management 
personnel  services.  However,  disclosure  of  the  components  of  such  compensation  is  not 
required.
The  ‘Annual  Improvements  2011-2013  Cycle’  include  a  number  of  amendments  to  various 
AASBs, which are summarised below.
The amendments to AASB 3 clarify that the standard does not apply to the accounting for the 
formation of all types of joint arrangement in the financial statements of the joint arrangement 
itself.
The amendments to AASB 13 clarify that the scope of the portfolio exception for measuring 
the fair value of a group of financial assets and financial liabilities on a net basis includes all 
contracts that are  within the scope of, and accounted for in accordance  with, AASB  139 or 
AASB  9,  even  if  those  contracts  do  not  meet  the  definitions  of  financial  assets  or  financial 
liabilities within AASB 132.
The amendments to AASB 140 clarify that AASB 140 and AASB 3 are not mutually exclusive 
and  application  of  both  standards  may  be  required.  Consequently,  an  entity  acquiring 
investment property must determine whether:
(a) the property meets the definition of investment property in terms of AASB 140; and
(b) the transaction meets the definition of a business combination under AASB 3.
Part C ‘Materiality’
This amending standard makes amendments to particular Australian Accounting Standards to 
delete  their  references  to  AASB  1031,  which  historically  has  been  referenced  in  each 
Australian Accounting Standard.
Summary of quantitative impacts 
There is no quantitative impact arising from the changes to Group’s accounting policies. The 
Group has  adopted all the  new and revised Standards issued by the Australian  Accounting 
Standards Board (the AASB) that are relevant to its operations and effective for the current 
reporting period.
(vi)
73
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
STANDARDS AND INTERPRETATIONS ON ISSUE NOT YET ADOPTED 
 
At the date of authorisation of the financial statements, the Standards and Interpretations that were 
issued but not yet effective are listed below:
Standard/Interpretation
AASB  16  ‘Leases’  and  the  relevant    amending 
standards 
AASB 9 'Financial Instruments', and the relevant  
amending standards 
AASB 15 'Revenue from Contracts with Customers' 
and AASB 2014-5 'Amendments to Australian 
Accounting Standards arising from AASB 15' 
AASB 2014-3 'Amendments to Australian 
Accounting Standards- Accounting for Acquisitions 
of Interests in Joint Operations' 
AASB 2014-4 'Amendments to Australian 
Accounting Standards - Clarification of Acceptable 
Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation' 
AASB 2014-9 'Amendments to Australian 
Accounting Standards- Equity Method in Separate 
Financial Statements' 
AASB 2014-10 'Amendments to Australian 
Accounting Standards- Sale or Contribution of 
Assets between an Investor and its Associate or 
Joint Venture' 
AASB 2015-1 'Amendments to Australian 
Accounting Standards- Annual Improvements to 
Australian Accounting Standards 2012-2014 Cycle' 
AASB 2015-2 'Amendments to Australian 
Accounting Standards- Disclosure Initiative: 
Amendments to AASB 101' 
AASB 2015-5 'Amendments to Australian 
Accounting Standards -Investment Entities: 
Applying the  Consolidation Exception'
Effective for annual 
reporting periods 
beginning  on  or 
after
1 January 2019
Expected 
initially 
applied 
financial 
year ending 
-
to
be
in
the
1 January 2018
30 June 2019
1 January 2017
30 June 2018
1 January 2016
30 June 2017
1 January 2016
30 June 2017
1 January 2016
30 June 2017
1 January 2016
30 June 2017
1 January 2016
30 June 2017
1 January 2016
30 June 2017
1 January 2016
30 June 2017
The Group does not anticipate the early adoption of any of the above Australian Accounting Standards, 
and has not assessed the full impact of these amendments at the date of this report. 
 
(c)  Principles of Consolidation
Business Combinations 
For every business combination, the Group identifies the acquirer, which is the combining entity that 
obtains control over the other combining entities. An investor controls an investee when it is exposed 
to, or has rights to, variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect 
those  returns  through  its  power  over  the  investee.  In  assessing  control,  the  Group  takes  into 
consideration potential voting rights that are currently exercisable. The acquisition date is the date on 
which control is transferred from the acquirer. 
 
Subsidiaries 
Subsidiaries are all those entities (including special purpose entities) controlled by the Company.
74
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
(c) Principles of Consolidation (continued) 
 
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group. They are 
de-consolidated  from  the  date  that  control  ceases.  The  purchase  method  of  accounting  is  used  to 
account for the acquisition of subsidiaries by the Group.  
 
Intra-group transactions, balances and unrealised gains on transactions between Group companies 
are eliminated. Unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the transaction provides evidence of the 
impairment  of  the  asset  transferred.  Accounting  policies  of  subsidiaries  have  been  changed  where 
necessary to ensure consistency with the policies adopted by the Group. 
 
Investments in subsidiaries are carried at cost less impairment in the Company’s separate financial 
statements. 
 
Interests in equity-accounted investees 
The Group’s interests in equity-accounted investees comprise the interest in a joint venture. A joint 
venture is a joint arrangement, whereby the Group and other parties have joint control and have rights 
to the net assets of the arrangement. The interest in the joint venture is accounted for using the equity 
method.  It  is  recognised  initially  at  cost,  which  includes  transaction  costs.  Subsequent  to  initial 
recognition, the consolidated financial statements include the Group’s share of the profit or loss and 
OCI of equity-accounted investees, until the date on which significant influence or joint control ceases. 
 
(d)  Income Tax
The charge for current income tax expenses is based on the profit for the year adjusted for any non-
assessable  or  disallowed  items.  It  is  calculated  using  tax  rates  that  have  been  enacted  or  are 
substantively enacted by the balance sheet date. 
 
Deferred  tax  is  accounted  for  using  the  balance  sheet  method  in  respect  of  temporary  differences 
arising  between  the  tax  bases  of  assets  and  liabilities  and  their  carrying  amounts  in  the  financial 
statements. No deferred income tax will be recognised from the initial recognition of an asset or liability, 
excluding a business combination, where there is no effect on accounting or taxable profit or loss. 
 
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is 
realised or liability is settled. Deferred tax is credited in the income statement except where it relates 
to  items  that  may  be  credited  directly  to  equity,  in  which  case  the  deferred  tax  is  adjusted  directly 
against equity. 
 
Deferred income tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future tax profits will 
be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised. 
 
Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are offset only if a legally enforceable right exists to set 
off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and the deferred tax assets and liabilities relate to 
the same taxable entity and the same taxation authority. 
 
The  amount  of  benefits  brought  to  account  or  which  may  be  realised  in  the  future  is  based  on  the 
assumption that no adverse change will occur in income taxation legislation and the anticipation that 
the  consolidated  group  will  derive  sufficient  future  assessable  income  to  enable  the  benefit  to  be 
realised and comply with the conditions of deductibility imposed by the law.
75
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
Tax Consolidation 
 
Triton Minerals Limited and its Australian subsidiaries have formed an income tax consolidated group 
under tax consolidation legislation.  As a consequence, all members of the tax-consolidated group are 
taxed  as  a single entity  from  that  date.    The  head  entity  within the  tax-consolidated  group  is  Triton 
Minerals Limited.   
 
Each entity in the Group recognises its own current and deferred tax assets and liabilities.  Such taxes 
are  measured  using  the  stand-alone  taxpayer  approach  to  allocation.    Current  tax  liabilities  and 
deferred tax assets arising from unused tax losses and tax credits in the subsidiaries are immediately 
transferred to the head entity.  The Group notified the Australian Taxation Office that it had formed an 
income tax-consolidated group to apply from 1 July 2006.  The tax-consolidated group has entered 
into  a  tax  funding  agreement  whereby  each  company  in  the  group  contributes  to  the  income  tax 
payable by the group  in proportion to their contribution to the Group’s taxable income.  Differences 
between the  amounts of net tax assets and  liabilities derecognised and the net amount recognised 
pursuant to the funding arrangement are recognised as either a contribution by, or distribution to, the 
head entity. 
Cash and short-term deposits 
Cash and short-term deposits in the statement of financial position comprise cash at banks and on 
hand and short-term deposits with a maturity of three months or less. 
 
(e)  Property, Plant and Equipment
Items  of  property,  plant  and  equipment  are  measured  at  cost  less  accumulated  depreciation  and 
accumulated impairment losses.   
 
Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the asset.  The cost of self-
constructed assets includes the cost of materials and direct labour, any other costs directly attributable 
to  bringing  the  assets  to  a  working  condition  for  their  intended  use,  the  costs  of  dismantling  and 
removing the items and restoring the site on which they are located and capitalised borrowing costs. 
Cost also may include transfers from other comprehensive income of any gain or loss on qualifying 
cash flow hedges of foreign currency purchases of property, plant and equipment.  Purchased software 
that is integral to the functionality of the related equipment is capitalised as part of that equipment.  
 
When parts of an item of property, plant and equipment have different useful lives, they are accounted 
for  as  separate  items  (major  components)  of  property,  plant  and  equipment.    Gains  and  losses  on 
disposal of an item of property, plant and equipment are determined by comparing the proceeds from 
disposal with the carrying amount of property, plant and equipment and are recognised net within other 
income  in  the  statement  of  comprehensive  income.  When  revalued  assets  are  sold,  the  amounts 
included in the revaluation reserve are transferred to retained earnings.  The cost of replacing a part 
of  an  item  of property,  plant and  equipment  is  recognised  in the carrying amount of  the  item  if  it  is 
probable that the future economic benefits embodied within the part will flow to the Group, and its cost 
can be measured reliably.  The carrying amount of the replaced part is derecognised.   
 
The costs of the day-to-day servicing of property, plant and equipment are recognised in the statement 
of comprehensive income as incurred.
76
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2.   STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
(f)  Depreciation
Property, plant and equipment are depreciated on a straight-line basis at rates calculated to allocate 
the cost less the estimated residual value over the estimated useful life of each asset. 
 
Class of Fixed Asset 
Plant and Equipment  
 
The assets’ carrying values are reviewed for impairment  when events or changes in circumstances 
indicate  the  carrying  value  may  not  be  recoverable.  An  asset’s  carrying  amount  is  written  down 
immediately  to  its  recoverable  amount  if  the  asset’s  carrying  amount  is  greater  than  its  estimated 
recoverable amount. 
 
Profit and loss on disposal are determined by comparing proceeds with the carrying amount. These 
amounts are included in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income. 
 
(g)   Financial Instruments
Useful Life 
2 – 20 years
Non-Derivative Financial Instruments 
 
Recognition 
The Group initially recognises loans and receivables and deposits on the date that they are originated. 
All  other  financial  assets  (including  assets  designated  at  fair  value  through  profit  or  loss)  are 
recognised initially on the trade date at which the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions 
of the instrument. 
 
Non-Derivative Financial Instruments (continued) 
 
The Group derecognises a financial asset when the contractual rights to the cash flows from the asset 
expire,  or  it  transfers  the  rights  to  receive  the  contractual  cash  flows  on  the  financial  asset  in  a 
transaction  in  which  substantially  all  the  risks  and  rewards  of  ownership  of  the  financial  asset  are 
transferred.  Any  interest  in  transferred  financial  assets  that  is  created  or  retained  by  the  Group  is 
recognised as a separate asset or liability.  
 
Financial assets and liabilities are offset and the net amount presented in the statement of financial 
position when, and only when, the Group has a legal right to offset the amounts and intends either to 
settle on a net basis or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously. 
 
The Group has the following non-derivative financial assets: loans and receivables and available-for-
sale financial assets. 
 
Loans and Receivables 
Loans and receivables are financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in 
an  active  market.    Such  assets  are  recognised  initially  at  fair  value  plus  any  directly  attributable 
transaction costs. Subsequent to initial recognition loans and receivables are measured at amortised 
cost using the effective interest method, less any impairment losses. 
 
Available-for-Sale Financial Assets 
Available-for-sale financial assets are non-derivative financial assets that are designated as available-
for-sale and that are not classified in any of the other categories.  The Group’s investments in equity 
securities are classified as available-for-sale financial assets.  Subsequent to initial recognition, they 
are measured at fair value and changes therein, other than impairment losses, are recognised in other 
comprehensive income and presented within equity in the fair value reserve.  When an investment is 
derecognised, the cumulative gain or loss in equity is transferred to the statement of comprehensive 
income.
77
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2.  STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
Fair Value 
 
The fair values of quoted investments are based on current bid prices. If the market for financial assets 
is  not  active  (and  for  unlisted  securities),  the  Company  establishes  fair  value  by  using  valuation 
techniques. These include reference to the fair values of recent arm’s length transactions, involving 
the  same  instruments  or  other  instruments  that  are  substantially  the  same,  discounted  cash  flow 
analysis and option pricing models. 
 
(h)  Impairment 
 
Non-Financial Assets 
 
The carrying amounts of the Group’s non-financial assets, other than deferred tax assets, are reviewed 
at  each  reporting  date  to  determine  whether  there  is  any  indication  of  impairment.    If  any  such 
indication exists, then the asset’s recoverable amount is estimated.  For goodwill, and intangible assets 
that  have  indefinite  useful  lives  or  that  are  not  yet  available  for  use,  the  recoverable  amount  is 
estimated each year at the same time. 
 
The recoverable amount of an asset or cash-generating unit is the greater of its value in use and its 
fair value less costs to sell.  In assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted 
to their  present  value  using a pre-tax  discount  rate  that  reflects  current market assessments  of the 
time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.  For the purpose of impairment testing, assets 
that cannot be tested individually are grouped together into the smallest group of assets that generates 
cash inflows from continuing use that are largely independent of the cash inflows of other assets or 
groups of assets (the “cash-generating unit” or “CGU”). 
 
Subject to an operating segment ceiling test, for the purposes of goodwill impairment testing, CGUs to 
which  goodwill  has  been  allocated  are  aggregated  so  that  the  level  at  which  impairment  is  tested 
reflects  the  lowest  level  at  which  goodwill  is  monitored  for  internal  reporting  purposes.    Goodwill 
acquired in a business combination is allocated to groups of CGUs that are expected to benefit from 
the synergies of the combination. 
 
The Group’s corporate assets do not generate separate cash inflows. If there is an indication that a 
corporate asset may be impaired, then the recoverable amount is determined for the CGU to which 
the corporate asset belongs. 
 
An impairment loss is recognised if the carrying amount of an asset or its CGU exceeds its estimated 
recoverable amount.  Impairment losses are recognised in the statement of comprehensive income.  
Impairment losses recognised in respect of CGUs are allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of 
any goodwill allocated to the units, and then to reduce the carrying amounts of the other assets in the 
unit (group of units) on a pro rata basis.  
 
An impairment loss in respect of goodwill is not reversed.  In respect of other assets, impairment losses 
recognised in prior periods are assessed at each reporting date for any indications that the loss has 
decreased  or  no  longer  exists.    An  impairment  loss  is  reversed  if  there  has  been  a  change  in  the 
estimates  used  to  determine  the  recoverable  amount.    An  impairment  loss  is  reversed  only  to  the 
extent that the asset’s carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been 
determined, net of depreciation or amortisation, if no impairment loss had been recognised. 
 
Financial Assets (including Receivables) 
 
A financial asset not carried at fair value through profit or loss is assessed at each reporting date to 
determine  whether  there  is  objective  evidence  that  it  is  impaired.    A  financial  asset  is  impaired  if 
objective evidence indicates that a loss event has occurred after the initial recognition of the asset, 
and that the loss event had a negative effect on the estimated future cash flows of that asset that can 
be estimated reliably.
78
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2.  STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
(h)  Impairment (continued) 
 
Objective evidence that financial assets (including equity securities) are impaired can include default 
or delinquency by a debtor, restructuring of an amount due to the Group on terms that the Group would 
not consider otherwise, indications that a debtor or issuer will enter bankruptcy, the disappearance of 
an  active  market for  a  security.  In  addition,  for  an  investment  in  an  equity  security,  a  significant  or 
prolonged decline in its fair value below its cost is objective evidence of impairment.  
 
The  Group  considers  evidence  of  impairment  for  receivables  and  available-for-sale  investment 
securities at a specific asset level.  
 
An  impairment  loss  in  respect  of  a financial  asset measured  at  amortised  cost  is  calculated  as  the 
difference  between  its  carrying  amount  and  the  present  value  of  the  estimated  future  cash  flows 
discounted  at  the  asset’s  original  effective  interest  rate.  Losses  are  recognised  in  the  statement  of 
comprehensive  income  and  reflected  in  an  allowance  account  against  receivables.  Interest  on  the 
impaired asset continues to be recognised through the unwinding of the discount. When a subsequent 
event causes the amount of impairment loss to decrease, the decrease in impairment loss is reversed 
through profit or loss. 
 
Impairment  losses  on  available-for-sale  investment  securities  are  recognised  by  transferring  the 
cumulative loss that has been recognised in other comprehensive income, and presented in the fair 
value reserve in equity, to profit or loss.  
 
The cumulative loss that is removed from other comprehensive income and recognised in profit or loss 
is the difference between the acquisition cost, net of any principal repayment and amortisation, and 
the  current  fair  value,  less  any  impairment  loss  previously  recognised  in  profit  or  loss.  Changes  in 
impairment provisions attributable to time value are reflected as a component of interest income. 
 
(i)  Foreign Currency Translation - Transactions and Balances
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded in the functional currency at the exchange rate 
ruling at the date of the transaction. Monetary items denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated 
at the rate of exchange ruling at the reporting date. 
 
Non-monetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated 
using  the  exchange  rates  at  the  date  of  the  initial  transaction.  Translation  differences  on  monetary 
items are recognised in the income statement except when deferred in equity and qualifying cash flow 
hedges and qualifying net investment hedges. 
 
(j)  Employee Benefits
Short-Term Benefits 
Short-term employee benefit obligations are measured on an undiscounted basis and are expensed 
as the related service is provided. 
 
A  liability  is  recognised  for  the  amount  expected  to  be  paid  under  short-term  cash  bonus  or  profit-
sharing plans if the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation to pay this amount as a result 
of past service provided by the employee and the obligation can be estimated reliably. 
 
Other Long-Term Employee Benefits 
Provision  is  made  for  the  liability  due  to  employee  benefits  arising  from  services  rendered  by 
employees to the reporting date. Employee benefits expected to be settled within one year together 
with benefits arising out of wages and salaries, sick leave and annual leave which will be settled after 
one year, have been measured at their nominal amount. Other employee benefits payable later than 
one year have been measured at the present value of the estimated future cash outflows to be made 
for those benefits.
79
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
(j) Employee Benefits (continued)
Contributions  made  to  defined  employee  superannuation  funds  are  charged  as  expenses  when 
incurred.  
 
(k)  Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation (legal or constructive) as a result 
of  a  past  event,  it  is  probable  that  an  outflow  of  resources  embodying  economic  benefits  will  be 
required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. 
 
When the Group expects some or all of a provision to be reimbursed, for example under an insurance 
contract, the reimbursement is recognised as a separate asset but only when the reimbursement is 
virtually certain. The expense relating to any provision is presented in the statement of comprehensive 
income net of any reimbursement. 
 
Provisions  are  measured  at  the  present  value  of  management’s  best  estimate  of  the  expenditure 
required to settle the present obligation at the statement of financial position date. If the effect of the 
time value of money is material, provisions are discounted using a current pre-tax rate that reflects the 
time value of money and the risks specific to the liability. The increase in the provision resulting from 
the passage of time is recognised in finance costs. 
 
(l)  Revenue
Revenue is recognised and measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable to 
the  extent  it  is  probable  that  the  economic  benefits  will  flow  to  the  Group  and  the  revenue  can  be 
reliably measured. 
 
(m) Finance Income and Finance Costs
Finance  income  comprises  interest  income  on  funds  invested  (including  available-for-sale  financial 
assets), dividend income, gains on the disposal of available-for-sale financial assets, changes in the 
fair value of financial assets at fair value through profit or loss, and gains on hedging instruments that 
are recognised in profit or loss. Interest income is recognised as it accrues in profit or loss, using the 
effective interest method. Dividend income is recognised in profit or loss on the date that the Group’s 
right to receive payment is established, which in the case of quoted securities is the ex-dividend date. 
 
(n)  Goods and Services Tax (GST)
Revenues, expenses and assets are recognised net of the amount of goods and services tax, except:
(i)
(ii)
Where the amount of GST incurred is not recoverable from the relevant taxation authority, 
it is recognised as part of the cost of the acquisition of an asset or as part of an item of 
expenditure.
Receivables and payables are shown inclusive of GST.
Cash flows are presented in the consolidated statement of cash flows on a gross basis, except for the 
GST component of investing and financing activities, which are disclosed as operating cash flows.
80
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 2. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued) 
 
(o)  Comparative Figures
Comparative figures have been adjusted to conform to changes in presentation for the current financial 
year where required by Australian Accounting Standards or as a result in changes in accounting policy. 
 
(p)  Exploration and Evaluation Assets
Expenditure on exploration and evaluation is incurred either to maintain an interest or in earning an 
interest  and  is  accounted  for  in  accordance  with  the  ‘area  of  interest’  method.  Exploration  and 
evaluation expenditure is capitalised provided the rights to tenure of the area of interest is current and 
either:

the  exploration  and  evaluation  activities  are  expected  to  be  recouped  through  successful 
development and exploitation of the area of interest or, alternatively, by its sale; or
  exploration  and  evaluation  activities  in  the  area  of  interest  have  not  at  the  reporting  date 
reached  a  stage  that  permits  a  reasonable  assessment  of  the  existence  or  otherwise  of 
economically recoverable reserves, and active significant operations in, or relating to, the area 
of interest are continuing.
Expenditure which fails to meet the conditions outlined above is written off, furthermore, the Directors 
regularly review the carrying value of exploration and evaluation expenditure and make write downs if 
the values are not expected to be recoverable.  
 
Identifiable  exploration  assets  acquired  are  recognised  as  assets  at  their  cost  of  acquisition,  as 
determined  by  the  requirements  of  AASB  6  Exploration  for  and  Evaluation  of  Mineral  Resources. 
Exploration assets acquired are reassessed on a regular basis and these costs are carried forward 
provided that at least one of the conditions referred to in AASB 6 is met.  
 
Exploration and evaluation expenditure incurred subsequent to acquisition in respect of an exploration 
asset  acquired,  is  accounted  for  in  accordance  with  the  policy  outlined  above  for  exploration 
expenditure incurred by or on behalf of the entity.
  Acquired exploration assets are not written down below acquisition cost until such time as the
acquisition cost is not expected to be recovered.
  When an area of interest is abandoned, any expenditure carried forward in respect of that area
is written off.
Expenditure  is  not  carried  forward  in  respect  of  any  area  of  interest/mineral  resource  unless  the 
Group’s rights of tenure to that area of interest are current.  
The  recoverability  of  the  carrying  amount of  the  deferred  exploration  and  evaluation  expenditure  is 
dependent on the successful development and commercial  exploitation,  or alternatively  the sale, of 
the respective areas of interest. 
 
When  the  technical  feasibility  and  commercial  viability  of  extracting  a  mineral  resource  have  been 
demonstrated then any capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure is reclassified as capitalised 
development expenditure. Prior to reclassification, capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure 
is  assessed  for  impairment.  Costs  related  to  the  acquisition  of  properties  that  contain  mineral 
resources are allocated separately to specific areas of interest.   These costs are capitalised until the 
viability of the area of interest is determined.
81
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(p)  Exploration and Evaluation Assets (continued)
Impairment 
 
The carrying value of capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure is assessed for impairment 
at the cash generating unit level whenever facts and circumstances suggest that the carrying amount 
of the asset may exceed its recoverable amount. Impairment exists when the carrying amount of an 
asset or cash-generating unit exceeds its estimated recoverable amount. The asset or cash-generating 
unit  is  then  written  down  to  its  recoverable  amount.    Any  impairment  losses  are  recognised  in  the 
statement of comprehensive income. 
 
(q)  Ordinary Shares
Ordinary shares are classified as equity. Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of ordinary 
shares and share options are recognised as a deduction from equity, net of any tax effects. 
 
(r)  Share-based Payment Transactions
The grant-date fair value of share-based payment awards granted to employees is recognised as an 
employee  expense,  with  a  corresponding  increase  in  equity,  over  the  period  that  the  employees 
unconditionally become entitled to the awards. The amount recognised as an expense is adjusted to 
reflect  the  number  of  awards  for  which  the  related  service  and  non-market  vesting  conditions  are 
expected to be met, such that the amount ultimately recognised as an expense is based on the number 
of awards that meet the related service and non-market performance conditions at the vesting date. 
For share based-payment awards with market-based conditions, the grant-date fair value of the share-
based payment is measured to reflect such conditions and there is no true-up for differences between 
expected and actual outcomes. 
 
(s)  Segment Reporting
Determination and Presentation of Operating Segments 
An operating segment is a component of the Group that engages in business activities from which it 
may earn revenues and incur expenses, including revenues and expense that relate to transactions 
with  any  of  the  Group’s  other  components.  All  operating  segments’  operating  results  are  reviewed 
regularly by the Board of Directors to make decisions about resources to be allocated to the segment 
and to assess its performance, and for which discrete financial information is available. 
 
Segment  results  that  are  reported  to  the  Board  of  Directors  include  items  directly  attributable  to  a 
segment as well as those that can be allocated  on a reasonable basis. Unallocated items comprise 
mainly corporate assets, head office expenses, and income tax assets and liabilities. 
 
Segment capital expenditure is the total cost incurred during the year to acquire property, plant and 
equipment, and intangible assets other than goodwill. 
 
(t) Earnings per Share (EPS) 
 
Basic Earnings per Share 
Basic earnings per share are calculated by dividing the net profit/(loss) attributable to equity holders 
of the Group by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the financial year, 
adjusted for any bonus elements. 
 
Diluted Earnings per Share 
Diluted earnings per share adjusts the figures used in the determination of basic earnings per share 
to take into account the after income tax effect of interest and other financing costs associated with 
the dilutive potential ordinary shares and the weighted average number of shares assumed to have 
been issued for no consideration in relation to dilutive potential ordinary shares.
82
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 3. DETERMINATION OF FAIR VALUES 
 
Equity Instruments 
The fair value of available-for-sale financial assets is determined by reference to their quoted closing 
bid price at the reporting date. 
 
Trade and Other Receivables 
The fair value of trade and other receivables is estimated as the present value of future cash flows, 
discounted  at  the  market  rate  of  interest  at  the  reporting  date.    This  fair  value  is  determined  for 
disclosure purposes. 
 
Non-Derivative Financial Liabilities 
Fair value, which is determined for disclosure purposes, is calculated based on the present value of 
future principal and interest cash flows, discounted at the market rate of interest at the reporting date. 
 
Share-Based Payment Transactions 
The  fair  value  of  the  employees’  shares  is  measured  using  an  appropriate  valuation  model. 
Measurement  inputs  include  the  share  price  on  the  measurement  date,  the  exercise  price  of  the 
instrument, expected volatility (based on an evaluation of the Company’s historic volatility, particularly 
over  the  historic  period  commensurate  with  the  expected  term),  expected  term  of  the  instruments 
(based  on  historical  experience and  general  option  holder  behaviour),  expected  dividends,  and  the 
risk-free interest rate (based on government bonds). Service and non-market performance conditions 
attached to the transactions are not taken into account in determining fair value.
NOTE: 4.   REVENUE AND FINANCIAL INCOME
2015 
$
2014 
$
Operating Activities 
Revenue
Total Revenue
Other Activities 
Interest income
Total Financial Income
NOTE: 5.   CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
Cash at bank and on hand  
Short-term bank deposits
Total Cash and Cash Equivalents
NOTE: 6.  TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES
Current
Trade Debtors 
Advances 
GST receivable 
Other receivable
Total Current Trade and Other Receivables
(a)  Allowance for impairment loss
749
749
51,682
51,682
5,328
5,328
63,249
63,249
202,966 
140,972
343,938
1,430,454 
66,981
1,497,435
- 
2,436 
81,874 
460,282
544,592
- 
7,804 
42,958 
-
50,762
Current trade receivables are non-interest bearing and generally on 30-day terms.
(b)  Fair value and credit risk
Due  to  the  short  term  nature  of  the  other  receivables,  their  carrying  value  is  assumed  to 
approximate their fair value.
83
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTE: 7.  PREPAYMENTS
Current
Prepayment
Total Prepayments
NOTE: 8.   FINANCIAL ASSETS
Available-for-sale financial assets  
Balance at beginning of the year 
Additions 
Revaluation 
income 
Impairment loss through profit or loss 
Total available-for-sale financial assets
loss
through  other  comprehensive
Total Financial Assets
2015 
$
2014 
$
57,709
57,709
29,312
29,312
39,118 
100,000
(24,344)
(27,778) 
86,996
86,996
9,033 
-
30,085
- 
39,118
39,118
Available-for-sale investments consist of investments in ordinary shares and therefore have no fixed 
maturity date or coupon rate. The fair value of listed available-for-sale investments is based on quoted 
prices  in  active  markets.    During  the  year  the  Company  purchased  shares  in  RBR  Group  Limited 
(formerly  Rubicon Resources  Limited),  a company  listed  on  the  Australian  Securities  Exchange.  At 
reporting date, the shares were revalued and the resulting impairment loss was recognised in the profit 
and loss. The revaluation loss recognised in comprehensive income refers to shares that are held in 
Pure Mining Gold Limited (formerly Laurentian Goldfields Limited), a company listed on the Canadian 
Securities Exchange. At reporting date, the fair value of the shareholding was less than its cost base, 
resulting  in  the  Group  recognising  a  revaluation  loss  of  $24,344.  This  was  offset  against  a  prior 
revaluation gain in comprehensive income. 
 
NOTE: 9.   PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Plant and equipment
At cost 
Less: Accumulated depreciation
Total Plant and Equipment
Movements in carrying amounts
Balance at beginning of year 
Additions 
Write offs/ Disposals 
Depreciation expense
Carrying amount at end of year
183,707 
(88,981)
94,726
91,676 
47,129 
(14,245) 
(29,834)
94,726
199,570 
(107,894)
91,676
64,756 
72,615 
(4,399) 
(41,296)
91,676
84
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 10.  EXPLORATION & EVALUATION ASSETS
Exploration at cost:
Balance at the beginning of the year 
Expenditure during the year 
Expenditure not capitalised 
Impairment of exploration and evaluation assets
Balance at the end of the financial year
7,231,528 
9,359,667 
- 
(68,743)
16,522,452
1,615,822 
5,717,849 
(102,143) 
-
7,231,528
Recoverability  of  the  carrying  amount  of  exploration  assets  is  dependent  on  the  successful 
development and commercial exploitation or sale of the areas of interest.  Management reassesses 
the carrying value of the Group’s tenements at each half year, or at a period other than that, should 
there be any indication of impairment.  
 
On 30 June 2015, the gold exploration project, Frazer Range North, located in Western Australia with 
a carrying value of  $68,743 was  written off  as  the  Company  does  not intend to  commit  any  further 
significant  expenditure  towards  the  project  and  the  tenements  in  relation  to  the  project  were 
surrendered in September 2015.
At the date of signing this report, six of the eight licences included in the joint venture agreement with 
Grafex had been officially granted by the Mozambique government, with the two additional licences in 
application.  In accordance  with the Group’s  accounting policy,  the  exploration  costs  of  the  licences 
have been grouped into their respective areas of interest and capitalised.
NOTE: 11. EQUITY-ACCOUNTED INVESTEES
Balance at the beginning of the year
Investment in joint venture during the year
Investment in joint venture not capitalised
Net assets of Grafex Lda
2015 
$
2014 
$
15,823,331
1,617,155
13,242,722
14,206,176
(6,732,662)
596,103
-
Balance at the end of the year
22,929,494
15,823,331
Joint Venture 
At 31 December 2015, the Company  owned 80%  of the issued share capital  of Grafex Lda via its 
100% owned subsidiary, Triton United Ltd. Under the terms of the Shareholders’ Agreement entered 
into by the shareholders of Grafex, even though Triton has the majority of the directors’ voting rights, 
the Shareholders’ Agreement requires the minority shareholder’s consent to all significant decisions 
and therefore Triton cannot direct the relevant activities of Grafex unilaterally. 
 
Accordingly,  the  investment  in  Grafex  has  been  treated  as  a  joint  arrangement.  As  the  joint 
arrangement is structured through a separate company, Grafex, and the Shareholders’ Agreement 
gives the companies rights to the net profit rather than rights to Grafex’s assets and obligations for 
its liabilities, the joint arrangement has been treated as a joint venture and equity accounted for. 
 
When,  the  Project  moves  into  the  development  and  production  phases,  Triton  will  consider  the 
exercise of its rights under the Shareholders’ Agreements and its implications on control if it has not 
acquired the remaining minority interest by that time. 
 
Grafex is structured as a separate vehicle and the Group has a residual interest in the net assets of 
Grafex.  The  licenses  of  interest  in  Mozambique,  i.e.  L5304,  L5305,  L5336,  L5365,  L5357,  L5934, 
L5380 and L5966, are held in the name of Grafex, not the joint venturers.
85
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 11. EQUITY-ACCOUNTED INVESTEES (continued) 
 
Grafex Limitada is the only joint arrangement in which the Group participates. 
 
The  Group’s  interest  in  Grafex  Lda  is  accounted  for  using  the  equity  method  in  the  consolidated 
financial statements. Summarised financial information of the joint venture and reconciliation with the 
carry amount of the investment in the consolidated financial statements is set out below: 
 
Management  had  its  interests  in  Mozambique  valued  by  a  third  party  as  at  31  December  2015  to 
determine whether the recoverable value of these interests exceeded their carrying value. The valuer 
used the resource multiple methodology and the resulting fair value less costs to sell exceeded the 
carrying values of Mozambique exploration assets and investments in Grafex.  
 
Summarised statement of financial position of Grafex Lda:
Current assets
Non-current assets
Current liabilities
Non-current liabilities
Equity
2015 
$
2014 
$
711
622,961
(27,569)
-
596,103
-
-
-
-
-
During  the  year  ended  31  December  2015,  a  tax  provision  of  US$4,751,457  (AU$6,510,628) 
increased the investment in Grafex, due to the recognition of a capital gains tax contingent liability, 
for transfer of mining assets, imposed by the Mozambique Government. Refer to Note 19 for further 
details. 
 
During  the  year  ended  31  December  2015,  Triton  made  payments  of  US$2.2  million  and  issued 
16,109,734 shares to the  minority shareholders of Grafex for consideration totalling US$5,200,000 
(AU$6,732,662)  to  acquire  an  additional  10%  equity  interest  in  Grafex,  to  increase  the  Group’s 
interest  in  the Mozambique graphite  projects  to  a 90%  interest.  Triton  did not remit  the  remaining 
tranche of US$1,000,000 in consideration to secure the 90% interest by the payment deadline, 24 
February  2016.  In  accordance  with  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  share  purchase  agreements 
Triton’s equity interest remains at 80% and the Company forfeits the consideration paid to earn the 
90%  equity  interest.  At  the  reporting  date,  31  December  2015  the  amount  of  $6,732,662  was 
expensed.
86
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTE: 12. TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES
Current 
Creditors  
Accruals 
Other payables
Total Trade and Other Payables
2015 
$
2,446,403 
532,460 
610,264
3,589,127
2014 
$
407,571 
22,000 
37,571
467,142
Trade payables are non-interest bearing and usually settled within 45 days, as at 31 December 2015 
payment arrangements had been agreed with major suppliers for the extension of payment terms to 
31 January 2016.  On the completion and effectuation of the DOCA, any unpaid liabilities at the date 
of the appointment of the Administrators, will be transferred to a Creditors Trust and will no longer be 
a liability of the Company. 
 
NOTE: 13. PROVISIONS
Current
Provision for annual leave 
Provision for foreign tax 
Provision for rehabilitation
Total Current Provisions
Non-current 
Provision for long service leave
Total Provisions
Movement in provisions: 
Opening balance 
Provisions made during the year 
Provisions used during the year 
Closing balance
151,052 
6,510,628 
137,024
6,798,704
-
6,798,704
212,193 
6,601,126 
(14,615) 
6,798,704
72,352 
36,498 
100,000
208,850
3,343
212,193
50,521 
229,479 
(67,807) 
212,193
The provision for foreign tax relates to a provision raised to meet a capital gains tax (CGT) contingent 
liability  in  the  event  that  the  joint  and  several  liability  crystallises  on  the  transfer  of  mining  assets, 
imposed  by  the  Mozambique  Government.  The  provision  recognised  as  at  31  December  2015  is 
US$4.75 million (AU$6,510,628). Refer to Note 19 for further details.  
 
 
NOTE: 14. ISSUED CAPITAL
(a)  Ordinary shares
Number of Shares
$
2015
2014
2015
2014
Ordinary shares, issued and fully paid
376,549,422  310,101,731
59,250,029
41,941,390
Fully paid ordinary shares carry one vote per share and carry the rights to dividends.
87
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTE: 14. ISSUED CAPITAL (continued)
(b)  Movements in ordinary shares issued
Balance 1 January 2014
07 Jan 2014
Private Placement
09 Jan 2014
Issue of Shares - Grafex
20 Feb 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
26 Feb 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
27 Mar 2014
Private Placement
29 Apr 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
30 Apr 2014
Private Placement – Tranche 1
21 May 2014  Private Placement – Tranche 2
04 Jun 2014
Issue of shares – employees
05 Jun 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
05 Jun 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
16 Jun 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
16 Jun 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
18 Jun 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
18 Jun 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
23 Jun 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
27 Jun 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
02 Jul 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
08 Jul 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
09 Jul 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
24 Jul 2014
Private Placement
28 Jul 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
28 Jul 2014
Issue of Shares - Grafex
28 Jul 2014
Issue of Shares - Grafex
25 Aug 2014
Issue of Shares - Grafex
01 Sep 2014
Issue of shares to Directors
01 Sep 2014
Issue of shares to Consultants
01 Sep 2014
Issue of shares to employees
03 Sep 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
30 Sep 2014
Shares issued on exercise of options
Capital raising costs
Balance 31 December 2014
Note
(a)
Number 
of Shares
Issue Price
$
185,240,023
Total 
$ 
21,035,012
28,571,426
0.056
1,600,000
2,000,000
0.075
150,000
(b)
(c)
(c)
1,500,000
700,000
27,665,454
2,000,000
5,288,032
3,341,191
0.05
0.05
0.11
0.10
0.11
0.11
950,000
0.135
500,000
100,000
1,500,000
1,339,257
4,753,125
1,339,357
892,857
3,446,875
700,000
900,000
133,929
17,000,000
1,330,286
2,000,000
6,112,665
2,575,825
0.05
0.10
0.05
0.10
0.05
0.10
0.10
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.10
0.50
0.10
0.55
0.61
0.61
6,000,000
0.365
100,000
0.365
175,000
0.365
1,500,000
446,429
0.10
0.10
75,000
35,000
3,043,200
200,000
581,683
367,531
128,250
25,000
10,000
75,000
133,926
237,656
133,936
89,286
172,344
35,000
45,000
13,393
8,500,000
133,028
1,100,000
3,728,726
1,571,253
2,190,000
36,500
63,875
150,000
44,643
-
310,101,731
(3,762,852)
41,941,390
88
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 14. ISSUED CAPITAL (continued) 
(b)  Movements in ordinary shares issued (continued)
Balance 1 January 2015
19 Jan 2015
Shares issued on exercise of options
30 Jan 2015
Shares issued on Equity Facility
19 Feb 2015
Issue of Shares - Grafex
16 Mar 2015
Private Placement
24 Mar 2015
Issue of Shares - Grafex
25 Mar 2015
Issue of Shares to Directors
26 Mar 2015
Issue of Shares to Directors
26 Mar 2015
Shares issued on exercise of options
26 Mar 2015
Issue of Shares to Consultants
27 Mar 2015
Shares issued on exercise of options
7 Apr 2015
Shares issued on exercise of options
8 Apr 2015
Shares issued on exercise of options
15 Apr 2015
Shares issued on exercise of options
28 Apr 2015
Shares issued on exercise of options
28 Apr 2015
Issue of Shares to Consultants
28 Apr 2015
Issue of Shares - Grafex
6 May 2015
Shares issued on exercise of options
18 May 2015  Private Placement
25 May 2015
Issue of Shares - Grafex
18 Jun 2015
Shares issued on exercise of options
18 Jun 2015
Issue of Shares to Directors
18 Jun 2015
Issue of Shares to Consultants
23 Jun 2015
Issue of Shares – Grafex
Capital raising costs
Balance 31 December 2015
Note
(f)
(d)
(e)
(e)
(e)
(e)
Total 
$
Number  
of Shares
Issue 
Price 
$
310,101,731
41,941,390
319,643
541,125
7,661,877
7,142,857
1,671,009
2,565,000
100,000
60,070
192,957
940,710
799,738
735,192
196,427
17,857
1,000,000
826,626
107,142
34,301,382
0.10
0.185
0.167
0.14
0.192
0.10
0.10
0.20
0.192
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.355
0.386
0.20
0.35
31,964
100,000
1,281,066
665,598
321,502
256,500
10,000
12,014
37,125
188,142
159,948
147,038
39,285
3,571
355,000
319,326
21,428
12,005,484
917,692
0.348
319,816
17,857
300,000
1,000,000
5,032,530
-
0.20
0.10
0.315
0.32
3,571
30,000
315,000
1,610,410
(925,149)
376,549,422
59,250,029
(a)  During January  2014, the  Company  issued 2 million shares to  the minority shareholders  of
Grafex as part consideration to earn a 60% interest in the Mozambique Graphite Project.
(b)  On 28 July 2014, the Company issued 2 million shares to the minority shareholders of Grafex
as final consideration to earn a 60% interest in the Mozambique Graphite Project.
(c)  During July and August 2014, the Company issued a total of 8,688,490 shares and 5 million 
unlisted  options  to  the  minority  shareholders  of  Grafex  as  consideration  to  earn  an  80% 
interest in the Mozambique Graphite Project.
(d)  On 19 Feb 2015 the Company issued a total of 7,661,877 shares to the minority shareholders
as first payment as consideration to earn 90% interest in the Mozambique Graphite Project.
(e)  The Company issued shares to the minority shareholders of Grafex, as consideration to earn
90% interest in the Mozambique Graphite Project, in March, April, May and June 2015.
(f)  The  Company  issued  541,125  shares  in  January  2015  and  4,528,763  options  in  February 
2015 to Long State Investments Limited (LSI) as consideration  for the establishment fee on 
an Equity placement facility.
89
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTE: 14. ISSUED CAPITAL (continued)
(c)  Movements in options
Total 1 January 2014
07 Jan 2014
Issue of options – Free attaching
24 Jul 2014
Issue of options – Broker
25 Aug 2014
Issue of options – Grafex
Various
Various
Various
Various
Conversion of options – Grafex
Conversion of options – Grafex
Conversion of options – Directors
Conversion of options – Free attaching
Total 31 December 2014
23 Feb 2015
Issue of options – LSI
16 Mar 2015
Issue of options – Free attaching
Various
Various
Various
Conversion of options- Director
Conversion of options – Free attaching
Conversion of options – Free attaching
Total 31 December 2015
Note
(c)
(f)
Number  
of Options
20,000,000
14,285,713
5,000,000
5,000,000
(10,000,000)
(4,000,000)
(3,600,000)
(5,482,113)
21,203,600
Exercise
Price
$
Expiry 
Date
13 Dec 2016
23 Jul 2017
25 Aug 2017
18 Dec 2015
07 Mar 2016
18 Jun 2015
31 Dec 2016
0.10
1.00
0.70
0.05
0.05
0.10
0.10
4,548,763
0.275
23 Jan 2018
3,571,428
(2,400,000)
(884,643)
(2,875,002)
0.20
0.10
0.10
0.20
16 Mar 2017
18 Jun 2015
13 Dec 2016
16 Mar 2017
23,164,146
(a)  During January  2014, the  Company  issued 2 million shares to the minority shareholders  of
Grafex as part consideration to earn a 60% interest in the Mozambique Graphite Project.
(b)  On 28 July 2014, the Company issued 2 million shares to the minority shareholders of Grafex
as final consideration to earn a 60% interest in the Mozambique Graphite Project.
(c)  During July and August 2014, the Company issued a total of 8,688,490 shares and 5 million 
unlisted  options  to  the  minority  shareholders  of  Grafex  as  consideration  to  earn  an  80% 
interest in the Mozambique Graphite Project.
(d)  On 19 Feb 2015 the Company issued a total of 7,661,877 shares to the minority shareholders
as first payment as consideration to earn 90% interest in the Mozambique Graphite Project.
(e)  The Company issued shares to the minority shareholders of Grafex, as consideration to earn
90% interest in the Mozambique Graphite Project, in March, April, May and June 2015.
(f)  The  Company  issued  541,125  shares  in  January  2015  and  4,528,763  options  in  February 
2015 to Long State Investments Limited (LSI) as consideration for the establishment fee on 
an Equity placement facility.
90
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTE: 14. ISSUED CAPITAL (continued) 
(c)  Movement in performance rights
Total 1 January 2015
22 Oct 2015  Grant of performance rights – Directors
12 Nov 2015  Lapsed performance rights – Employee
03 Dec 2015  Grant of performance rights – CEO
31 Dec 2015  Lapsed performance rights – Director
Total 31 December 2015
Number
of Performance
Expiry 
Date
Rights
15,000,000
7,500,000
20 Aug 2018
(2,000,000)
20 Aug 2018
3,500,000
20 Aug 2018
(3,500,000)
20 Aug 2018
20,500,000
  On the 22 October 2015, the Company granted 7.5 million performance rights to Directors as 
approved  by  shareholders  at  the  general  meeting  held  22  October  2015  pursuant  to  the 
Company’s new Employee Equity Plan approved at the same meeting. The performance rights 
were subsequently issued on 12 November 2015.
  On  12  November  2015,  2  million  performance  rights  issued  to  employees  lapsed  without
converting to shares.
  On the 3 December 2015 the Company  granted 3.5  million performance rights to  the Chief 
Executive  Officer  as  part  of  his  appointment.  As  at  the  date  of  this  report  the  performance 
rights have not been issued.
  At  31  December  2015,  3.5  million  performance  rights  issued  to  a  Director  lapsed  without
converting to shares following his resignation as a Director of the Company.
(d)  Capital Management 
 
The Directors’ objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Group’s ability to continue as a 
going concern, so that they may continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other 
stakeholders.  
 
The focus of the Group’s capital risk management is the current working capital position against the 
requirements of the Group to meet exploration programmes and corporate overheads. The Group’s 
strategy  is to ensure appropriate liquidity  is maintained to meet anticipated operating requirements, 
with a view to initiating appropriate capital raisings as required. In January 2015, the Company entered 
into an equity placement facility of $20 million with Long State Investments Limited.
The  working  capital  positions  of  the  Group at  31  December  2014  and  31  December  2015  were  as 
follows:
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables 
Prepayments 
Trade and other payables 
Provisions (current)
Working Capital Position
2015 
$
343,938 
544,592 
57,709 
(3,589,127) 
(6,798,704)
(9,441,592)
2014 
$
1,497,435 
50,762 
29,312 
(467,142) 
(208,850)
901,517
The Group is not subject to any externally imposed capital requirements.  As explained in Note 3(b) 
the Directors resolved to place the Company into voluntary administration and on 25 July 2016 a DOCA 
was executed by the Company and Administrators.
91
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTE: 15. RESERVES
Available for sale reserve 
Share based payments reserve
Total Reserves
2015 
$
5,742 
6,178,683
6,184,425
2014 
$
30,085 
5,009,483
5,039,568
The share based payment reserve comprises of the cost of shares and options. Refer to Note 22. 
 
NOTE: 16. INCOME TAX EXPENSE
Income tax expense 
Current income tax expense 
Under/(over) provision of prior year’s tax 
Deferred tax expense  
Total income tax expense
Reconciliation between tax expense and pre-tax 
loss: 
Accounting loss before income tax  
At the domestic income tax rate of 30% 
 
- Expenditure not allowed for income tax purposes 
- Change in unrecognised temporary differences 
- Current year losses for which no deferred tax asset
was recognised
Income tax expense reported in the statement of 
comprehensive income
- 
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
- 
-
(12,748,684) 
(3,824,605) 
 
2,148,572 
808,043
867,990
(4,997,855) 
(1,499,357) 
 
934,624 
(118,193)
682,926
-
-
Unrecognised deferred tax assets at 31 December 
Unused tax losses  
Potential tax benefit @ 30% 
Tax losses offset against tax liabilities  
Unrecognised tax benefit
17,610,571 
5,283,171 
(1,302) 
5,281,869
16,414,461 
4,924,338 
(276) 
4,924,062
Potential  deferred  tax  assets  net  of  deferred  tax  liabilities  attributable  to  tax  losses  have  not  been 
brought to account because the Directors do not believe it is appropriate to regard realisation of the 
future income tax benefits as probable as at the date of this report. 
 
The benefits of these tax losses will only be obtained if:
(i)  Future  assessable  income  is  derived  of  a nature  and  of  an  amount sufficient  to  enable  the
benefit to be realised;
(ii)  The conditions for deductibility imposed by tax legislation continue to be complied with; and  
(iii)  No changes in tax legislation adversely affect the Group in realising the benefit.
92
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 16. INCOME TAX EXPENSE (continued)
Deferred income tax  
Statement of financial position  
Deferred income tax relates to the following:
Deferred Tax Liabilities  
Exploration and evaluation assets 
Available-for-sale financial assets  
Foreign exchange reserve
Deferred Tax Assets  
Deferred tax assets used to offset  
deferred tax liabilities
NOTE: 17. CONTROLLED ENTITIES
2015 
$
2014 
$
1,302 
- 
-
(1,302)
-
276 
- 
-
(276)
-
Subsidiaries of Triton 
Minerals Limited:
Country of
Incorporation
Percentage Owned (%)
2015
2014
Triton Gold (Operations) Pty Ltd
Triton Gold (Project A) Pty Ltd*
Triton Gold (Grenville) Pty Ltd*
Australia
Australia
Australia
Triton United Limited
United Arab Emirates
Triton Asia Pte LTD
Grafex Limitada
Hong Kong
Mozambique
100
100
100
100
100
80
100
100
100
100
-
60
*Triton  Gold  (Project  A)  Pty  Ltd  and  Triton  Gold  (Grenville)  Pty  Ltd  are  subsidiaries  of  Triton  Gold 
(Operations) Pty Ltd. 
 
Joint venture in which the Group is a venturer 
 
On 21 November 2013, the Company moved from a 49% holding in the Projects to a majority 60% 
interest,  by  taking  a  direct  60%  equity  interest  in  Grafex,  Triton  became  a  joint  venture  investor  in 
Grafex. 
 
Pursuant to the Share Purchase Agreement with the shareholders of Grafex dated 21 November 2013, 
Triton paid US$100,000 in cash and issued 1 million shares to  the shareholders of Grafex following 
the execution of the Agreement. 
 
Triton has paid a further US$250,000 and issue 2 million shares within one (1) month of a successful 
completion of a capital placement of a minimum raising of $1 million or within 6 months of the date of 
execution. The payment of US$250,000 and issue of 2 million shares was made by 8 January 2014. 
 
Within  12  months  of  that  payment  being  made,  Triton  has  paid  a  further  US$200,000  and  issue  2 
million shares under the Agreement. The payment of US$200,000 and issue of 2 million shares was 
made on 28 July 2014.  In addition, in order to include exploration licenses 5934 and 5966 into the 
Joint Venture, an addendum was executed between Triton and Grafex on 1 February 2013, that in the 
event of Triton confirming, by drilling, that graphite mineralisation exists on either of the two exploration 
licenses, Triton shall pay the shareholders of Grafex US$200,000 within six months of confirming the 
mineralisation.
93
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 17. CONTROLLED ENTITIES (continued)
On  22  January  2014,  the  Company  announced  assayed  results  which  confirmed  graphite 
mineralisation on the Nicanda Hill prospect on exploration license 5966. 
 
On 16 July 2014, the Company executed an agreement to acquire the remaining 40% equity interest 
in Grafex through payment in cash and shares totalling US$20 million. The payment is structured in 
two tranches, each for a 20% equity interest, through the cash payment of US$5 million and the issue 
of fully paid ordinary shares for the equivalent of US$5 million per tranche. As further consideration 
the shareholders of Grafex was issued with 5 million unlisted options exercisable at $0.70, expiring 25 
August 2017. During July and August 2014, the Company made payment of US$5 million and issued 
8,688,490  shares  and  5  million  options  to  the  shareholders  of  Grafex  and  earned  an  80%  equity 
interest  in  Grafex.  Pursuant  to  the  agreement,  Triton  was  able  to  provide  the  second  tranche 
consideration within 6 months to earn a 100% equity interest. 
 
Subsequent  to  the  reporting  date,  on  27  January  2015,  the  Company  announced  that  following 
discussions  with  its  joint  venture  partner  Grafex  Lda,  new  terms  had  been  agreed  to  extend,  for  a 
further 12 months, the timeline for the second Tranche payment of US$5 million in cash and US$5 
million equivalent in Triton shares, to acquire the remaining 20% equity interest in Grafex Lda and all 
of  the  Mozambique  graphite  projects  known  as  Balama  North,  Balama  South  and  Ancuabe  (the 
Projects). 
 
During  the  year  ended  31  December  2015,  Triton  made  payments  of  US$2.2  million  and  issued 
16,109,734  shares  to  the  minority  shareholders  of  Grafex  for  consideration  totalling  US$5,200,000 
(AU$6,732,662) to acquire an additional 10% equity interest in Grafex, to increase the Group’s interest 
in the Mozambique graphite projects to a 90% interest. Triton did not remit the remaining tranche of 
US$1,000,000 in consideration to secure the 90% interest by the payment deadline, 24 February 2016. 
In accordance with the terms and conditions of the share purchase agreements Triton’s equity interest 
remains at 80% and the Company forfeits the consideration paid to earn the 90% equity interest.
94
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 18. OPERATING SEGMENTS
Triton has identified its operating segments based on the internal reports that are used by the chief 
operating decision maker (“CODM”) in order to allocate resources to the segment and to assess its 
performance. The CODM of the Group is the Board of Directors. The Group has identified its operating 
segments based on internal reports that are provided to the CODM on a regular basis. 
 
Triton now operates in one principal location, Africa.  During the year the company surrendered the 
one exploration project, Fraser Range North located in Western Australia. The Graphite projects are 
located in Mozambique, Africa.  
 
Segment assets include the cost to acquire the tenement and the capitalised exploration costs of those 
tenements. 
 
The accounting policies applied for internal reporting purposes are consistent with those applied in the 
preparation of these financial statements.
Australia
Africa
Treasury
Total
31 December 2015
$
$
$
$
Reconciliation of segment 
revenue to total revenue:
Interest revenue
Other revenue
Segment Revenue
-
-
-
Total Revenue per Statement of 
Comprehensive Income
Reconciliation of segment loss 
to net loss before tax:
-
2,538
2,538
51,682
749
52,431
51,682
3,287
54,969
54,969
Segment result
Corporate charges
Depreciation
Net Loss before Tax from 
Continuing Operations
(68,743)
(24,948)
52,431
(41,261)
(12,677,589)
(29,834)
(12,748,684)
Segment assets
Total group assets
Segment liabilities
Total group liabilities
-  39,492,626
1,087,280  40,579,907
-
40,579,907
9,190,672
1,197160  10,387,832
10,387,832
95
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 18. OPERATING SEGMENTS (continued)
Australia
Africa
Treasury
Total
31 December 2014
$
$
$
$
Reconciliation of segment  
revenue to total revenue:
Interest revenue
Other revenue
Segment Revenue
-
-
-
Total Revenue per Statement of 
Comprehensive Income
Reconciliation of segment loss 
to net loss before tax:
-
-
-
63,249
63,249
5,328
5,328
68,577
68,577
68,577
Segment result
Corporate charges
Depreciation
Net Loss before Tax from 
Continuing Operations
-
(102,143)
68,577
(33,566)
(4,922,993)
(41,296)
(4,997,855)
Segment assets
146,331  23,000,204
1,616,627  24,763,162
Total group assets
Segment liabilities
Total group liabilities
-
24,763,162
430,139
249,196
679,335
679,335
NOTE: 19. CONTINGENT ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
Mozambique Capital Gains Tax Contingent Liability 
On 1 January 2015, a Mozambique capital gains tax regime applicable to the mining sector came into 
force.  According  to  this  regime,  the  tax  in  relation  to  a  capital  gain  on  the  transfer  of  mining  rights 
located  in  the  Mozambique  territory  by  non-residents  is  payable  by  the  seller.  In  relation  to  this 
payment, the seller, the buyer or the entity holding the mining rights have joint and several liability for 
the payment of the tax in Mozambique.  
 
There is some uncertainty as to whether the capital gains tax regime is applicable prior to 1 January 
2015 and whether the buyer is joint and severally liable where the seller is an individual rather than a 
legal  entity.  Management  are  working  with  the  Mozambique  government,  tax  and  legal  advisers  to 
determine the extent of the joint and several liability in relation to consideration paid for an interest in 
the Mozambique Graphite project prior to 2015. A tax provision of US$4.75 million (AU$6.5 million) 
has been recognised at 31 December 2015 for the consideration paid to earn an 80% interest Grafex 
Lda and the Mozambique Graphite project. 
 
The primary obligation to pay the capital gains tax is the seller’s, accordingly any capital gains tax paid 
by the minority shareholders of Grafex Lda (seller/s) will reduce the potential joint and several capital 
gains tax liability.
96
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 19. CONTINGENT ASSETS AND LIABILITIES (continued)
Hubei Xincheng Triton Graphite Technologies Co Ltd 
During the period, the Group considered it had a commitment to open and deposit US$1 million into a 
joint venture bank account of Hubei Xincheng Triton Graphite Technologies Co Ltd by 13 November 
2015  pursuant  to  the  joint  venture  agreement  with  Chinese  graphite  products  specialist  Yichang 
Xincheng Graphite Co., Ltd (YXGC) to develop and produce graphite enhanced products in China, as 
announced on 14 May 2015. To date, Triton has not remitted the payment of US$1 million. 
 
The joint venture entity, Hubei Xincheng Triton Graphite Technologies Co Ltd, was incorporated on 28 
September  2015  and  with  registered  capital  of  RMB  110  million  (approx.  AU$23  million)  of  which, 
representing  a  49%  equity  interest  in  the  joint  venture  entity,  Triton  may  provide  RMB  53,900,000 
(approx. AU$11.4 million) by monetary capital, tangible or intangible assets, land use rights. The period 
and number of payments in relation  to the  49% registered capital contribution is determined by the 
registered  joint  venture  contract  and  Articles  of  Association  of  the  entity.  To  date  a  registered  joint 
venture contract and Articles of Association of the entity has not been agreed or provided to Triton. A 
provision for to the registered capital for the joint venture entity has not been recognised as the joint 
venture parties did not meet their commitments to contribute capital during the period .The Company 
expects that the 49% equity interest will be cancelled or transferred to another party. 
 
Following the appointment of the Administrators on 2 March 2016, the Administrators formed the view 
that the arrangements with YXGC are not sufficiently certain on a number of terms to be legally binding 
on the Company, including any claim for damages that may arise following termination. On 21 March 
2016,  YXGC wrote to the  Company  terminating both the agreements and making a claim for US$1 
million. The Administrators have not accepted their claim for damages in the amount of US$1 million 
as each agreement excludes liability for “consequential, incidental…or indirect damages”. YXGC have 
been  advised  of  the  rejection  of  any  claim  against  the  Company.  The  Administrators  consider  that 
YXGC has no valid claim against the Company. In the event that a liability or claim does crystallise all 
creditors’ claims against the Company (except any excluded claims) are extinguished and the claim is 
transferred to the Creditors Trust.
NOTE: 20. COMMITMENTS FOR EXPENDITURE
(a)
Operating Lease Commitments
Payable – minimum lease payments:
Not longer than one year
Longer than one year, but not longer than five years
Longer than five years
Total
2015 
$
2014 
$
166,417
186,319
-
74,645
39,188
-
352,736
186,293
97
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(b)
Exploration Expenditure Commitments
In order to maintain the current rights of tenure to mining tenements, the Company has the following 
exploration expenditure requirements up until the expiry of the leases. These obligations, which are 
subject to renegotiation upon expiry of the leases, are not provided for in the financial statements and 
are payable as follows.
Not longer than one year
Longer than one year,  
but not longer than five years (i)
Longer than five years
Total
2015 
$
-
363,667
-
2014 
$
363,000
1,029,917
-
363,667
1,392,917
(i)  The minimum exploration expenditure commitment of US$280,000 (AU$363,667) relates to 
the Mozambique Graphite Project for which Triton has a joint venture agreement, under which 
Triton  is  responsible  for  meeting  the  minimum  exploration  expenditure  commitment  of 
US$140,000 per license. 2 licenses had not yet met the minimum expenditure at Reporting 
date.
If  the  Company  decides  to  relinquish  certain  leases  and/or  does  not  meet  the  obligations,  assets 
recognised  in  the  balance  sheet  may  require  review  to  determine  the  appropriateness  of  carrying 
values. The sale, transfer or farm-out of exploration rights to third parties will reduce or extinguish the 
above obligations. 
 
(c)
Other Commitments
During the period, the Group had a commitment to open and deposit US$1 million into a joint venture 
bank account of Hubei Xincheng Triton Graphite Technologies Co Ltd by 13 November 2015 pursuant 
to the joint venture agreement with Chinese graphite products specialist Yichang Xincheng Graphite 
Co., Ltd (YXGC) to develop and produce graphite enhanced products in China, as announced on 14 
May 2015. To date, Triton has not remitted the payment of US$1 million. Following the appointment of 
the  Administrators,  on  21  March  2016,  YXGC  wrote  to  the  Company  terminating  the  joint  venture 
agreement. 
 
NOTE: 21. EARNINGS PER SHARE (EPS)
(a) Basic and Diluted loss per share
2015 
Cents
2014 
Cents
Loss attributable to ordinary equity holders of the Group
(3.59)
(1.86)
(b) Reconciliation of earnings to loss
2015
$
2014
$
Net loss attributable to ordinary equity holders
(12,748,684)
(4,997,855)
Earnings used to calculate basic EPS
(12,748,684)
(4,997,855)
(c) Weighted average number of ordinary shares 
outstanding during the year used to calculate basic 
EPS
2015
2014
355,254,604
269,049,660
98
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTE: 22. SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS
(a)  Share-based payments
Share-based payments expense
Share-based payments capitalised
2015 
$
1,336,752
2,950,316
2014 
$
2,694,762
11,194,892
Total share-based payments
4,287,068
13,889,654
Schedule of share-based payments 
Shares 
 
9 Jan 2014 – 2 million shares issued as part 
consideration of acquisition costs in accordance with joint 
venture agreement with Grafex Limitada 
4 Jun 2014 – 950,000 shares issued to employees & 
consultants 
28 Jul 2014 – 2 million shares issued as part 
consideration of acquisition costs in accordance with joint 
venture agreement with Grafex Limitada 
28 Jul 2014 – 6,112,665 shares issued as part 
consideration of acquisition costs in accordance with joint 
venture agreement with Grafex Limitada 
25 Aug 2014 – 2,575,825 shares issued as part 
consideration of acquisition costs in accordance with joint 
venture agreement with Grafex Limitada 
1 Sep 2014 – 6 million shares issued to Directors as 
approved by shareholders on 20 August 2014. 
1 Sep 2014 – 100,000 shares issued to a consultant for 
geological services 
1 Sep 2014 – 75,000 shares issued to employees 
pursuant to the Company’s Incentive Plan 
30 Jan 2015 – 541,125 shares issued as part 
consideration to Long State Investments Ltd in 
consideration for Equity placement facility 
19 Feb 2015 – 7,661,877 shares issued as part 
consideration of acquisition costs in accordance with joint 
venture agreement with Grafex Limitada 
24 Mar 2015 – 1,671,009 shares issued as part 
consideration of acquisition costs in accordance with joint 
venture agreement with Grafex Limitada 
26 Mar 2015 – 100,000 shares issued to a consultant for 
services 
28 Apr 2015 – 1,000,000 shares issued to a consultant 
for services 
28 Apr 2015 – 826,626 shares issued as part 
consideration of acquisition costs in accordance with joint 
venture agreement with Grafex Limitada
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
100,000
1,281,065
321,502
37,125
355,000
319,325
150,000
128,250
1,100,000
3,728,726
1,571,253
2,190,000
36,500
63,875
-
-
-
-
-
-
99
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTE: 22. SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS (continued)
25 May 2015 – 917,692 shares issued as part 
consideration of acquisition costs in accordance with joint 
venture agreement with Grafex Limitada 
18 Jun 2015– 1,000,000 shares issued to a consultant for 
services 
Total allocated against Issued Capital 
 
 
Options 
7 Jan 2014 – 14,285,713 unlisted options granted to 
participants who were entitled to one free attaching 
option for every two shares acquired in a placement 
24 Jul 2014 – 5 million unlisted options issued to 
GMP securities for broking and capital raising 
management services 
25 Aug 2014 – 5 million unlisted options issued as 
part consideration of acquisition costs in accordance 
with joint venture agreement with Grafex Limitada 
23 Feb 2015 – 4,548,763 options issued to Long 
State Investments Ltd as consideration for Equity 
placement facility.
Subtotal allocated against Share Based Payment 
Reserve
Performance Rights
1 Sep 2014 – 9 million performance rights issued to 
Directors as approved by shareholders on 20 August 
2014
1 Sep 2014 – 6 million performance rights issued to 
employees pursuant to the Company’s Incentive Plan
22 Oct  2015  – 7.5 million  performance rights issued 
to  Directors  as  approved  by  shareholders  on  22 
October 2015
3 Dec 2015 – 3.5 million performance rights issued to 
CEO on appointment
Subtotal allocated against Share Based Payment 
Reserve
Closing balance
2015 
$
319,825
315,000
2014 
$
-
-
3,048,832
8,968,604
-
-
-
-
2,991,297
1,617,116
608,609
-
608,609
4,608,413
298,227
199,317
218,378
113,320
99,146
13,876
-
-
629,627
312,637
4,287,068
13,889,654
100
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 22. SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS (continued)
(b)  Options
The following table details the number, weighted average exercise prices (WAEP) and movements in 
share  options  issued  as  capital  raising  purposes,  employment  incentives  or  as  payments  to  third 
parties for services during the year.
2015 
Number 
 
21,203,600
2015 
WAEP 
 
$0.454
8,120,191
(6,159,645)
23,164,146
$0.085
$0.147
$0.461
2015 
Number 
 
7,918,957 
5,000,000 
5,000,000 
4,548,763 
696,426
Exercise 
price 
 
$0.10 
$1.00 
$0.70 
$0.28 
$0.20
23,164,146
Outstanding at the beginning of the year
Granted during the year
Converted/expired during the year
Outstanding at the end of the year
(c)  Options exercisable at reporting date
Unlisted options expiring 31 Dec 2016 
Unlisted options expiring 23 Jul 2017 
Unlisted options expiring 25 Aug 2017 
Unlisted options expiring 23 Jan 2018 
Unlisted options expiring 16 Mar 2017
Exercisable at reporting date
(d) Options issued during 2015 
 
The maximum terms of options granted for services during the year are as follows:
  4,548,763  Unlisted  options  granted  to  Long  State  Investments  Ltd  as  consideration  for 
entering into the Equity Placement Facility for up to A$20 million. The options were issued on 
the  23  January  2015  expiring  23 January  2018  and  exercisable  at  $0.2748  and  no  vesting 
conditions.
  3,571,428 Unlisted options granted to participants who were entitled to one option for every 
two shares acquired in a placement that raised $1 million (excluding costs) – issued on the 16 
March 2015 expiring 16 March 2017 and exercisable at $0.20 and no vesting conditions.
The options must be exercised on or before the expiry date in cash.
101
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 22. SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS (continued) 
 
Unlisted Options 
The fair value of the 8,120,191 equity settled share options granted is estimated as at the date of grant 
using  a  Black-Scholes  model  taking  into  account  the  terms  and  conditions  upon  which  the  options 
were granted.  The following table lists the inputs to the model used for the year ended 31 December 
2015.
Long State
16 March 2015
Investments Ltd
Options
Placement
Options
Fair value at grant date 
Share price at grant date 
Exercise price 
Expected volatility 
Expected life 
Expected dividends 
Risk-free interest rate 
Number of options issued 
Valuation
$0.134 
$0.175 
$0.2748 
149% 
3 years 
Nil 
2.09% 
4,548,763 
$608,609
$0.094 
$0.140 
$0.200 
152% 
2 years 
Nil 
1.83% 
3,571,428 
$334,402
The total value of these options was $943,011 at the date that they were granted. 
 
Listed Options 
No listed options were issued during the year ended 31 December 2015. 
 
(e) Options lapsed during 2015 
 
During 2015, 9 unlisted options expired. 
 
(f) Performance rights 
 
The following table details the number and movements of performance rights issued as employment 
incentives during the year.
Outstanding at the beginning of the year
Granted during the year
Converted/expired during the year
Outstanding at the end of the year
During 2015 the Company made the following issues:
2015
Number
15,000,000
2014
Number
-
11,000,000
15,000,000
(5,500,000)
20,500,000
-
15,000,000
  7.5 million performance rights issued to Directors as approved by shareholders at the general 
meeting  held  22  October  2015  pursuant  to  the  Company’s  New  Employee  Equity  Plan 
approved at the same meeting; and
  3.5  million  performance  rights  were  granted  on  the  3  December  2015  to  the  CEO  on  his
appointment to the Company.
  5.5 million performance rights have lapsed during the year due to  cessation of employment
with the Company.
102
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 22. SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS (continued) 
 
(g)  Performance rights valuation 2015
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
The fair value of the 11,000,000 performance rights granted are valued on the date of grant using a model taking into account the terms and conditions upon 
which the performance rights were granted. The following table lists the inputs to the model used for the year ended 31 December 2015 and the category of the 
lapsed Performance rights.
Key
Performance
Management
Personnel
Rights 
Granted
Grant Date
Issue Date
Amortisation 
Date
Expiry 
Date
Share 
Price
at
Grant 
Date
Vesting
Condition
5 Day 
VWAP
Fair Value
Total value
per
of
Performance
Performance
Right
Rights
Share-Based Payments
During the
Not yet
year
recognised
Vested 
Number 
of Rights
%
Rights 
Vested
Director  Rights- 
Tranche A 
Director  Rights 
Tranche B 
Director  Rights  – 
Tranche C 
Director  Rights  
Tranche D 
Employee  Rights  
Tranche A 
Employee  Rights  
Tranche B 
Employee  Rights  
Tranche C 
Employee  Rights 
Tranche D 
Lapsed  Director 
Rights 2014 
Lapsed 
Employee  Rights 
2014 
Lapsed  Director 
Rights Tranche D 
Total
1,600,000
22-Oct-15
1-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
$0.40
$0.1746
$279,376
$29,275
$250,101
1,700,000
22-Oct-15
1-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
$0.60
$0.1441
$245,004
$25,674
$219,330
1,700,000
22-Oct-15
1-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
$0.75
$0.1263
$214,761
$22,505
$192,256
2,500,000
22-Oct-15
1-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
$1.00
$0.1035
$207,020
$21,692
$185,328
1,000,000
3-Dec-15
13-Jan-16
03-Dec-17
20-Aug-18
$0.088
$0.20
$0.1248
$124,800
$4,780
$120,020
1,000,000
3-Dec-15
13-Jan-16
03-Dec-17
20-Aug-18
$0.088
$0.30
$0.1063
$106,300
$4,072
$102,228
1,000,000
3-Dec-15
13-Jan-16
03-Dec-17
20-Aug-18
$0.088
$0.40
$0.0914
$91,400
$3,501
$87,899
500,000
3-Dec-15
13-Jan-16
03-Dec-17
20-Aug-18
$0.088
$0.50
$0.0795
$39,750
$1,523
$38,227
(3,000,000)
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.365
(2,000,000)
29-May-14
01-Sep-14
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.135
-
-
(500,000)
22-Oct-15
1-Nov-15
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.185
$1.00
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5,500,000
$1,308,411
$113,022
$1,195,389
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
103
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTE: 22. SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS (continued) 
 
The Director Performance Rights granted on the 22 October 2015, upon vesting, entitles the holder to acquire one fully paid ordinary share for nil consideration. 
The performance rights will expire, if unvested, on 20 August 2018. The performance rights vesting conditions are as follows:
  minimum vesting term of 22 months from grant date, being 20 August 2017 (Minimum Vesting Period);
  Tranche A - the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least $0.40 per share.
  Tranche B - the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least $0.60 per share.
  Tranche C - the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least $0.75 per share.
  Tranche D - the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least $1.00 per share.
The Employee Performance Rights granted on the 3 December 2015, upon vesting, entitles the holder to acquire one fully paid ordinary share for nil consideration. 
The performance rights will expire, if unvested, on 20 August 2018. The performance rights vesting conditions are as follows:
  minimum vesting term of 20 months from grant date, being 20 August 2017 (Minimum Vesting Period);
  Tranche A - the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least $0.20 per share.
  Tranche B - the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least $0.30 per share.
  Tranche C - the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least $0.40 per share.
  Tranche D - the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least $0.50 per share.
104
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 22. SHARE-BASED PAYMENTS (continued)
(h)  Performance rights valuation 2014
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
The fair value of the 15,000,000 performance rights granted are valued on the date of grant using a model taking into account the terms and conditions upon 
which the performance rights were granted. The following table lists the inputs to the model used for the year ended 31 December 2014.
Key
Performance
Management
Personnel
Rights 
Granted
Grant Date
Issue Date
Amortisation 
Date
Expiry 
Date
Share 
Price at 
Grant 
Date
Fair Value
Total value
Vesting
per
of
Probability
Performance
Performance
Right
Rights
Share-Based Payments
During 
the year
Not yet
recognised
Vested 
Number 
of Rights
% Rights
Vested
Director Rights
9,000,000
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.365
Employee Rights
2,000,000
29-May-14
01-Sep-14
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.135
Employee Rights
4,000,000
20-Aug-14
01-Sep-14
20-Aug-17
20-Aug-18
$0.365
50%
50%
50%
$0.1825
$0.0675
$0.1825
$1,642,500
$199,317
$1,443,183
$135,000
$24,734
$110,266
$730,000
$88,586
$641,414
Total
15,000,000
$2,507,500
$312,637
$2,194,863
-
-
-
-
0%
0%
0%
Each  performance  right,  upon  vesting,  entitles  the  holder  to  acquire  one  fully  paid  ordinary  share  for  nil  consideration.  The  performance  rights  will  expire,  if 
unvested, on 20 August 2018. The performance rights vesting conditions are as follows:
  minimum vesting term of 36 months from grant date, being 20 August 2017 (Minimum Vesting Period);
if an announcement is made to the market by the Company confirming a minimum of an inferred resource or higher at the Company’s  Balama North 
project of at least 0.5b tonnes of graphite bearing ore – 6,000,000 performance rights will vest, upon satisfaction of the Minimum Vesting Period; and
if  an  announcement  is  made  to  the  market  by  the  Company  confirming  that  a  pre–feasibility  or  other  feasibility  study  will  be  undertaken  within  the 
Company’s Balama North project – 6,000,000 director performance rights will vest and 3,000,000 employee performance rights will vest, upon satisfaction 
of the Minimum Vesting Period.


105
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 23. CASH FLOW INFORMATION
Reconciliation of Cash Flow from Operating 
Activities with Loss after Income Tax 
 
Loss after income tax
Non-cash flows in loss
- Net loss on disposal of fixed assets
- Revaluation of investment in listed entity
- Depreciation
- Share based payments expense
- Reclassification of cash flows from investing activities
- Impairment of exploration and evaluation expenditure
- Gain on foreign exchange
- Investment in associate expensed
Changes in assets & liabilities:
- (Increase)/decrease in trade and other receivables
- (Increase)/decrease in other current assets
- (Decrease)/increase in payables
- (Decrease)/increase in provisions
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
NOTE: 24.  RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS 
 
a)  Loans and investments in subsidiaries
Triton Minerals Ltd – Annual Report 
For the year ended 31 December 2015
2015 
$
2014 
$
(12,748,684)
(4,997,855)
(3,880)
75,656
29,834
4,399
30,085
41,296
1,336,752
2,694,762
(460,283)
68,743
(115,657)
6,732,662
(454,915)
(76,275)
1,116,093
75,358
2,143
-
(99,588)
-
9,531
(34,734)
(10,314)
161,672
(4,424,586)
(2,198,603)
Loans are made by the parent entity to wholly owned subsidiaries to fund exploration activities. Loans 
outstanding between the Company and its subsidiaries are non-interest bearing, unsecured, and are 
repayable upon notice having regard to the financial stability of the Company. The Company made the 
following provisions for non-recoverability of these loans and investments:
Investments in subsidiaries
Provision for loss on investments
Net recoverable investment
Loans to subsidiaries
Provision for loss on intercompany loans
Net recoverable loan
2015 
$
3,220
(100)
3,120
2014 
$
3,036
(100)
2,936
15,755,881
15,807,605
(15,741,978)
(15,645,045)
13,903
162,560
The  provisions  for  non-recovery  of  these  loans  and  investments  have  been  based  on  the 
subsidiaries’ net asset positions, where applicable.
106
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 24.  RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS (Continued)
b)  Transactions with other related parties
Geological services
2015 
$
-
-
2014 
$
67,250
67,250
During the previous year , prior to Mr Alfred Gillman’s appointment as Technical Director, Mr Gillman 
was  engaged  to  provide  professional  geological  services  to the  Company  through  his  consulting 
entity, Odessa Resources Pty Ltd, for which his entity received fees of $67,250.
NOTE: 25.  KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL DISCLOSURES
(a)  Directors 
 
Names and positions held of parent entity Directors in office at any time during the financial 
year are:
Directors
Position
Appointment
Resignation
Mr Christopher Catlow
Non-Executive Chairman  5 June 2015
22 July 2016
Mr Bradley Boyle
Mr Alfred Gillman
Mr Alan Jenks
Managing Director  
& Chief Executive Officer 
Company Secretary
27 April 2012 
 
1 September 2009
Non-Executive Director 
Technical Director
27 September 
2012 
23 August 2014
1 December 
2015 
 
11 July 2014
22 July 2016
Non- Executive Director 
Non-Executive Chairman
5 June 2015 
28 January 2014
10 February 
2016
(b)  Other Key management personnel
Names and positions held of Key Management Personnel (KMP) in office at any time during the 
financial year are: 
 
Other  Key  Management 
Personnel
Appointment
Resignation
Position
Mr Garth Higgo (i)
Chief Executive Officer
4 December 2015
Ms Paige Exley
Mr Michael Brady
Chief Financial Officer & 
Joint Company Secretary 
General Counsel &  
Joint Company Secretary
(i)  Mr Higgo was appointed Managing Director on 28 January 2016
(c)  Key management personnel compensation
Short term employee benefits
Share-based payments
Termination payments
Post-employment benefits
01 August 2013 
11 July 2014
-
-
05 May 2014
2 October 2015
2015
$
1,265,283
599,244
659,029
102,466
2014
$
921,278
2,573,844
-
69,439
2,626,022
3,564,561
107
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 25.  KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL DISCLOSURES (Continued)
(d)  Shareholdings of Key Management Personnel
The number of ordinary shares in Triton Minerals Ltd held by each KMP of the Group during the 
financial year is as follows:
Ordinary Shares
Balance at the
beginning of the
Received
during the year
as
Received 
during the 
year on the 
exercise of
Other
changes 
during the
year
compensation
options
year
Balance at 
the end of 
the year
Directors
Mr Christopher Catlow(i)
-
Mr Alan Jenks
Mr Bradley Boyle(ii)
Mr Alfred Gillman
Ms Paula Ferreira(iii)
35,825,072
5,413,038
2,100,000
-
Sub-total
43,338,110
Other Key Management Personnel 
Mr Garth Higgo (iv) 
Mr Michael Brady (v) 
Ms Paige Exley
- 
352,317 
300,000
Total
43,990,427
-
-
142,857
142,857
565,000
36,390,072
400,000
(5,813,038)
-
2,000,000
-
-
-
4,100,000
-
2,400,000
(5,105,181)
40,632,929
- 
- 
-
- 
- 
-
- 
352,317 
300,000
2,400,000
(5,105,181)
41,285,246
-
-
-
-
-
-
- 
- 
-
-
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v)
Mr Catlow was appointed Chairman on 5 June 2015. 
Mr Boyle ceased his role of Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer on 1 December 2015. 
Ms Ferreira was appointed as a Non-Executive Director on 24 August 2015.  
Mr Higgo was appointed Chief Executive Officer on 4 December 2015 
Mr Brady ceased his role as Joint Company Secretary on 2 October 2015
(e)  Option holdings of Key Management Personnel
Options
Balance at
Received
the
during the year
beginning of
as
the year
compensation
Exercised 
during the
Other changes
during the
year
year
Balance at 
the end of 
the year
Directors
Mr Christopher Catlow(i)
-
Mr Alan Jenks
Mr Bradley Boyle (ii)
Mr Alfred Gillman
Ms Paula Ferreira (iii)
2,442,500
400,000
2,000,000
-
Sub-total
4,842,500
Other Key Management Personnel
Mr Garth Higgo (iv)
Mr Michael Brady (v)
Ms Paige Exley
-
-
-
Total
4,842,500
-
(565,000)
(400,000)
(2,000,000)
-
(2,965,000)
-
-
-
(2,965,000)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1,877,500
-
-
-
1,877,500
-
-
-
1,877,500
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Mr Catlow was appointed Chairman on 5 June 2015. 
Mr Boyle ceased his role of Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer on 1 December 2015. 
Ms Ferreira was appointed as a Non-Executive Director on 24 August 2015. 
Mr Higgo was appointed Chief Executive Officer on 4 December 2015. 
Mr Brady ceased his role as Joint Company Secretary on 2 October 2015.
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v)
108
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 25.  KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL DISCLOSURES (Continued) 
(e) Performance rights holdings of Key Management Personnel
Performance rights
Balance at
Received
the
during the year
beginning of
as
the year
compensation
Converted to
shares
Other changes
during the
during the
year
year
Balance at 
the end of 
the year
Directors
Mr Christopher Catlow(i)
-
3,500,000
Mr Alan Jenks
Mr Bradley Boyle (ii)
Mr Alfred Gillman
Ms Paula Ferreira (iii)
3,000,000
3,000,000
3,000,000
-
Sub-total
9,000,000
Other Key Management Personnel
500,000
500,000
500,000
2,500,000
7,500,000
Mr Garth Higgo (iv)
Mr Michael Brady (v)
Ms Paige Exley
-
3,500,000
2,000,000
2,000,000
Total
13,000,000
11,000,000
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3,500,000
3,500,000
(3,500,000)
-
-
-
3,500,000
2,500,000
(3,500,000)
13,000,000
3,500,000
(2,000,000)
-
-
2,000,000
(5,500,000)
18,500,000
(i)  Mr Catlow was appointed Chairman on 5 June 2015. 
(ii)  Mr Boyle ceased his role of Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer on 1 December 2015. 
(iii) Ms Ferreira was appointed Non-Executive Director on 24 August 2015. 
(iv) Mr Higgo was appointed Chief Executive Officer on 4 December 2015. 
(v)  Mr Brady ceased his role as Joint Company Secretary on 2 October 2015.
109
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 26. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
 
(a)  Accounting classifications and fair values
Triton Minerals Ltd – Annual Report 
For the year ended 31 December 2015
The following table shows the carrying amounts and fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities, including their levels in the fair value hierarchy. It does 
not include fair value information for financial assets and financial liabilities not measured at fair value if the carrying amount is a reasonable approximation of fair 
value. Cash and cash equivalents, trade and other receivables, and trade and other payables are short-term in nature and their carrying values equate to their 
fair values.
31 December 2015
Financial assets measured at fair value 
Equity securities 
 
 
Financial assets not measured at fair value 
Trade and other receivables 
Cash and cash equivalents 
 
 
Financial liabilities measured at fair value 
 
 
Financial liabilities not measured at fair value 
Trade payables
Carrying amount
Fair value
Loans  and 
receivables
Available-
for-sale
- 
- 
 
 
544,592 
343,938 
888,530 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
-
86,996 
86,996 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
-
Other 
financial 
liabilities
- 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
 
 
3,589,127 
3,589,127
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
86,996 
86,996 
 
 
544,592 
343,938 
888,530 
 
 
- 
 
 
3,589,127 
3,589,127
86,996 
86,996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
86,996 
86,996 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
110
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 26. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (continued)
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
31 December 2014
Financial assets measured at fair value 
Equity securities 
 
 
Financial assets not measured at fair value 
Trade and other receivables 
Cash and cash equivalents 
 
 
Financial liabilities measured at fair value 
 
 
Financial liabilities not measured at fair value 
Trade payables
The different levels have been defined as follows:
Carrying amount
Fair value
Loans  and 
receivables
Available-
for-sale
Other 
financial 
liabilities
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
- 
- 
 
 
50,762 
1,497,435 
1,548,197 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
-
39,118 
39,118 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
 
 
- 
-
- 
- 
 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
- 
 
 
467,142 
467,142
39,118 
39,118 
 
 
50,762 
1,497,435 
1,548,197 
 
 
- 
 
 
467,142 
467,142
39,118 
39,118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
39,118 
39,118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-
  Level 1: quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. 
  Level 2: inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly (i.e. as prices) or indirectly (i.e.
derived from prices).
  Level 3: inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data (unobservable inputs).
111
Triton Minerals Ltd – Annual Report 
For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 26. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (continued) 
 
Financial Risk Management Policies 
 
Risk management has focused on limiting liabilities to a level which could be extinguished by sale of 
assets if necessary. 
 
The Group's activities expose it to a variety of financial risks; market risk (including interest rate risk, 
equity price risk, commodity price risk and foreign currency risk), credit risk and liquidity risk.  The 
Group's overall risk management program focuses on the unpredictability of financial markets and 
seeks to minimise potential adverse effects on the financial performance of the Group. The Group is 
engaged in mineral exploration and evaluation, and does not currently sell products and derives only 
limited revenue from interest earned. 
 
Risk  management  is  carried  out  by  the  Board  as  a  whole  and  the  Company  has  a  formal  risk 
management policy has been adopted.  
 
(a)  Market risk 
 
(i) 
Exposure to interest rate risk arises on financial assets and financial liabilities recognised at the end 
of the reporting period whereby a future change in interest rates will affect future cash flows or the 
fair  value  of  fixed  rate  financial  instruments.  The  Group  is  also  exposed  to  earnings  volatility  on 
floating rate instruments.
Interest rate risk
Financial Assets
Floating 
Interest
Rate
$
2015
Non-
interest 
bearing
$
Floating 
Interest
Rate
$
2014
Non-
interest 
bearing
$
2015
Total
$
2014
Total
$
Cash and cash equivalents
343,938
-
343,938
1,497,435
-
1,497,435
Trade and other 
receivables
Other financial assets
-
-
602,301
602,301
86,996
86,996
-
-
80,074
80,074
39,118
39,118
Total Financial Assets
343,938
689,297
1,033,235
1,497,435
119,192
1,616,627
Financial Liabilities
Financial liabilities at 
amortised cost
-Trade and other payables
-Other current liabilities
Total Financial Liabilities
-
-
-
3,589,127
3,589,127
-
-
3,589,127
3,589,127
-
-
-
467,142
467,142
-
-
467,142
467,142
Net Financial Assets
343,938
(2,899,830)
(2,555,892)
1,497,435
(347,950)
1,149,485
Interest rate risk is not material to the Group as no debt arrangements have been entered into.
112
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 26. FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (continued) 
 
(a)  Market risk (continued) 
 
Cash flow sensitivity analysis for variable rate instruments 
A  change  of  100  basis  points  in  interest  rates  at  the  reporting  date  would  have  increased  or 
decreased the Group’s equity and profit or loss by $3,439 (2014: $14,974). 
 
(ii) 
The Group is currently exposed to equity securities by way of shares held in listed companies.   
 
The price risk for listed securities is immaterial in terms of the possible impact on profit or loss or total 
equity as a result of a 10% increase/decrease in the price of traded securities.
Equity Price risk
Commodity Price risk
Foreign currency risk
(iii) 
The Group is not currently exposed to commodity price risk. 
 
(iv) 
Exposure  to  foreign  currency  risk  may  result  in  the  fair  value  of  future  cash  flows  of  a  financial 
instrument to fluctuate due to the movement in the foreign exchange rates of currencies in which the 
Group holds financial instruments which are other than Australian dollar. 
 
With instruments being held by overseas operations, fluctuations in currencies may impact on the 
Group’s financial results.  Since the Group has not yet commenced mining operations, the exposure 
is limited to short-term liabilities for expenses which are payable in foreign currencies.  The Group 
limits  its  foreign  currency  risk  by  limiting  funds  held  in  overseas  bank  accounts  and  paying  its 
creditors promptly.  However, the Board continues to review this exposure regularly. 
 
(b)   Credit risk 
 
Credit exposure represents the extent of credit related losses that the Group may be subject to on 
amounts to be received from financial assets.  Credit risk arises principally from bank balances and 
trade and other receivables.  The objective of the Group is to minimise the risk of loss from credit 
risk.  Although  revenue  from  operations  is  minimal,  the  Group  trades  only  with  creditworthy  third 
parties.  In addition, receivable balances are monitored on an ongoing basis with the result that the 
Group’s exposure to bad debts is insignificant.  The Group’s maximum credit risk exposure is limited 
to the carrying value of its financial assets as indicated on the statement of financial position. 
 
Exposure to credit risk  
 
The  carrying  amount  of  financial  assets  represents  the  maximum  credit  exposure.  The  maximum 
exposure to credit risk at the reporting date was:
Cash and cash equivalents 
Trade and other receivables
Carrying amount
2015
$
2014
$
343,938 
544,592
888,530
1,497,435 
50,762
1,548,197
All exposure to credit risk for loans and receivables at the reporting date by geographic region was 
limited to Australia.
113
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 26 FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT (continued) 
 
(b)  Credit risk (continued) 
 
Impairment losses
The ageing of loans and receivables at the reporting date was:
Not past due 
Past due 0 - 30 days 
 
Past due 31 - 120  days 
More than one year
Gross 
2015
$
Impairment
2015
$
Gross 
2014
$
Impairment
2014
$
- 
- 
- 
-
-
- 
- 
- 
-
-
- 
- 
- 
-
-
- 
- 
- 
-
-
During the year the Group did not impair loans and receivables (2014: Nil). 
 
(c)    Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk arises from the possibility that the Group might encounter difficulty in settling its debts 
or otherwise meeting its obligations related to financial liabilities. 
 
The  Group  manages  liquidity  risk  by  continuously  monitoring  forecast  and  actual  cash  flows  and 
ensuring  sufficient  cash  and  marketable  securities  are  available  to  meet  the  current  and  future 
commitments of the Group. Due to the nature of the Group’s activities, being mineral exploration, the 
Group does not have ready access to credit facilities, with the primary source of funding being equity 
raisings. The Board of Directors constantly monitor the state of  equity markets in conjunction with 
the  Group’s  current  and  future  funding  requirements,  with  a  view  to  initiating  appropriate  capital 
raisings as required.  Any surplus funds are invested with major financial institutions. Subsequent to 
the end of the period, the Company entered into a $20 million equity placement facility with LSI as 
per the terms and conditions of the ASX announcement on 27 January 2015. 
 
Subsequently following the appointment of the Administrators on 2 March 2016, the LSI Facility was 
terminated in accordance with the terms of the agreement. For further details refer to Note 2(a). 
 
The  financial  liabilities  of  the  Group  are  confined  to  trade  and  other  payables  as  disclosed  in  the 
statement of financial position. All trade and other payables are non-interest bearing and due within 
30 days of the reporting date. 
 
(f) 
 
Refer to Note 14(d) of this financial report for details regarding the Group’s capital risk management.
Capital risk management
114
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 27.  PARENT ENTITY DISCLOSURES
2015
$
343,458
462,719
57,709
863,886
72,222
636,404
3,120
90,436
16,522,451
22,333,391
39,658,024
2014
$
1,463,314
50,011
29,312
1,542,637
-
160,193
2,936
61,604
7,162,785
15,822,762
23,210,280
(a) Financial Position of Triton Minerals 
Limited 
 
ASSETS 
Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Trade and other receivables
Prepayments
Total Current Assets
Non-Current Assets
Financial assets
Loans to subsidiaries
Investment in subsidiaries
Property, plant and equipment
Exploration and evaluation assets
Equity-accounted investees
Total Non-Current Assets
TOTAL ASSETS
LIABILITIES 
Current Liabilities
Trade and other payables
Provisions
Total Current Liabilities
Non-Current Liabilities
Provisions
Total Non-Current Liabilities
TOTAL LIABILITIES
NET ASSETS 
 
 
EQUITY
Issued capital
Reserves
Accumulated losses
TOTAL EQUITY
(b)
(b)
40,521,910
24,752,917
3,507,254
6,798,704
10,305,958
-
-
10,305,958
30,215,952
59,250,029
6,178,683
467,141
208,850
675,991
3,343
3,343
679,334
24,073,583
41,941,390
5,009,483
(35,212,760)
(22,877,290)
30,215,952
24,073,583
The  reported  value  of  the  net  assets  of  the  Company  exceed  those  of  the  Group  by  $7,333,923.  
Based  on  the  valuation  of  the  Company’s  interests  in  Mozambique  referred  to  in  Note  11, 
Management have not impaired the carrying value of the Company’s assets.
115
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 27.  PARENT ENTITY DISCLOSURES (continued) 
 
(b)  Loans to Subsidiaries and Financial Assets
Loans are made by the parent entity to its wholly-owned subsidiaries to fund exploration activities. 
Loans outstanding between the Company and its subsidiaries are non-interest bearing, unsecured, 
and are repayable upon notice having regard to the financial stability of the Company.  
 
Investments in subsidiaries are accounted for at cost.
Loans to subsidiaries and associates
Provision for loss on intercompany loans
Net loans to subsidiaries
Investments in subsidiaries and associates
Provision for loss on investments
Financial assets
2015
$
16,378,383
(15,741,978)
636,404
3,220
(100)
3,120
2014
$
15,805,238
(15,645,045)
160,193
3,036
(100)
2,936
The provisions have been based on the subsidiaries’ net asset positions and reflect the recoverability 
of the investments and/or loans.
(c) Financial Performance of Triton Minerals Ltd
2015
$
2014
$
Loss for the year
Other comprehensive income
Total Comprehensive Income
(12,738,906)
(4,904,636)
-
-
(12,738,906)
(4,904,636)
(d) Guarantees entered into by Triton Minerals Ltd for the debts of its subsidiaries 
 
There were no guarantees entered into by Triton Minerals Ltd for the debts of its subsidiaries as at 
31 December 2015 (2014: Nil). 
 
(e) Contingent liabilities of Triton Minerals Ltd 
 
The contingent liabilities of the Group detailed in Note 19 are in the name of Triton Minerals Ltd. 
 
(f) Commitments of Triton Minerals Ltd 
 
The exploration expenditure commitments and operating lease commitments of the Group detailed 
in Note 20 are in the name of Triton Minerals Ltd.
116
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 28. AUDITOR’S REMUNERATION
Details of the amounts paid to the auditor of the Group, Nexia Perth Audit Services Pty Ltd, and its 
related practices for audit and non-audit services provided during the year are set out below.
Audit Services  
Audit and review of financial reports  
(Nexia Perth Audit Services Pty Ltd)
Other Services 
Accounting and taxation advice 
(Nexia Perth Pty Ltd)
Other Services
Accounting and taxation advice 
Overseas Practices of Nexia (Nexia TS Advisory Pte Ltd)
2015
$
2014
$
35,529
33,684
25,045
3,780
19,147
-
NOTE: 29. EVENTS AFTER THE BALANCE SHEET DATE 
 
During January 2016, the Company completed a pro rata non-renounceable entitlement offer of one 
(1) fully paid ordinary share for every three (3) fully paid ordinary shares  (Shares) held by eligible 
shareholders on 30 December 2015 at an issue price of $0.09 per share to raise up to $11,296,483 
(before costs), with one (1) free attaching option for every two (2) Shares subscribed for under the 
offer (Options) (Entitlement Offer). The Entitlement Offer was partially underwritten up to $4 million 
by GMP Securities Australia Pty Limited. 
 
Triton  raised  $4  million  via  the  Entitlement  Offer  through  the  issue  of  44,444,444  Shares  and 
22,222,306 Options. 
 
On 28 January 2016 Mr Rodney Baxter was appointed Non-Executive Director and Mr Garth Higgo 
was appointed Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer. 
 
On 1 February 2016 Mr Patrick Ellis was appointed Chief Operating Officer and Mr Richard Jarvis 
was appointed Chief Financial Officer. 
 
On 2 February 2016 Mr Garth Higgo’s Executive Service agreement was finalised.  A further 2 million 
performance rights  were  granted in addition to the 3.5 million  on his appointment on 4 December 
2015.  The total  5.5 million performance rights,  which vest  on 20 August 2017,  dependent on the 
following vesting conditions being met or waived by the Company on or prior to vesting date;
  Continuous employment or engagement by the company up to the satisfaction of the vesting
conditions;
  Tranche A – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.20 per share – 1,500,000 rights will vest
  Tranche B- the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.30 per share- 1,500,000 rights will vest
  Tranche C – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.40 per share- 1,500,000 rights will vest
  Tranche D – the rights will vest upon the share process reaching a 5-day VWAP of at least
$0.50 per share- 1,500,000 rights will vest
The issue of these reporting rights is subject to shareholder approval at the AGM, at the date of this 
report these rights have not yet been issued.
117
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 29. EVENTS AFTER THE BALANCE SHEET DATE (continued) 
 
On 10 February 2016 Mr Rodney Baxter and Mr Alan Jenks resigned as Non-Executive Directors of 
the Company. 
 
On 2 March 2016, the Directors resolved to place the Company  into voluntary  administration and 
appointed  Messrs  Martin Jones,  Andrew  Smith and  Dermott  McVeigh of  Ferrier  Hodgson as  joint 
and several administrators of the Company (together, the “Administrators”) pursuant to section 436A 
of the Corporations Act. 
 
On 3 March 2016, the Company’s securities were suspended from trading on the official list of ASX. 
Following  appointment  of  the  Administrators,  the  powers  of  the  Company’s  officers  (including 
Directors)  were  suspended  and  the  Administrators  assumed  control  of  the  Company’s  business, 
property and affairs. 
 
On 30 April 2016, the  Chief Financial Officer, Mr Richard Jarvis and Technical Director, Mr Alfred 
Gillman ceased their executive roles with the Company. 
 
On 17 May 2016, the Company announced maiden inferred mineral resources at Nicanda West and 
Ancuabe project sites. 
 
On  3  June  2016,  Mr  Garth  Higgo’s  Executive  Service  agreement  for  the  role  of  Chief  Executive 
Officer was terminated with one month of notice. 
 
On 1 July 2016, the Administrators provided their report to creditors pursuant to section 439A(4)(a) 
of the Corporations Act 2001. On 5 July 2016, the Administrators provided a supplementary report 
to creditors. The key matters of the reports were:
  The Administrators’ recommendation that the Joint Deed of Company Arrangement (DOCA)
Proposal be adopted by creditors. The proposal comprises:
o  Phase 1: Subscription to Minjar Gold Pty Ltd (or its nominee) of 105,248,400 fully 
paid ordinary shares at $0.06 per share to raise $6,314,904 (Placement) following 
shareholder approval, together with 25,000,000 free options to acquire shares in the 
Company  (each having  an  exercise price of  $0.10  each and an  expiry  date  of  30 
June 2018, with such options to be issued under the entitlement issue prospectus). 
o  Phase 2: As soon as practicable after completion of the Placement and termination 
of  the  DOCA,  the  Company  will  seek  to  raise  not  less  than  A$7,893,634  via  an 
underwritten  non-renounceable  pro-rata  entitlements  issue  of  not  less  than 
131,560,567 fully paid ordinary shares (Entitlement Issue Shares) in the capital of 
the Company at $0.06 per share (and on the basis of 1 Entitlement Issue Shares for 
every  4  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  held  in  the  capital  of  the  Company  as  at  the 
relevant  record  date)  (Entitlement  Issue).  Somers  &  Partners  Pty  Ltd  shall  be 
appointed as underwriter of this issue.
o  Deposit of $1 million which has been deposited into a Ferrier Hodgson Trust account 
by  Somers  as  an  interest  free  loan  to  the  Company,  subject  to  the  terms  and 
conditions of the DOCA.
o  Subject to conditions precedent, the formation of a Creditors Trust and payment of 
$5 million (or any shortfall  amount) to repay creditors 100 cents  in the dollar  plus 
statutory interest of 8%, excluding any claim or liability arising from or in connection 
with the Mozambique Government.
  The  Administrators,  through  their  investigations  did  not  identify  any  potential  voidable
transaction by directors that may have been committed under the provisions of the Act.
  Yichang  Xincheng  Graphite  Co.  Ltd  (YXGC)  -  On  21  March  2016,  YXGC  wrote  to  the 
Company  terminating  both  the  agreements  and  making  a  claim  for  US$1  million.  The 
Administrators have not accepted their claim for damages in the amount of US$1 million as 
each  agreement  excludes  liability  for  “consequential,  incidental…or  indirect  damages”. 
YXGC  have  been  advises  of  the  rejection  of  any  claim  against  the  Company.  The 
Administrators consider that YXGC has no valid claim against the Company.
118
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE: 29. EVENTS AFTER THE BALANCE SHEET DATE (continued) 
 
On 8 July 2016, the Company  announced that  at the  Second Meeting of Creditors held on 8 July 
2016,  the  creditors  resolved  unanimously  to  execute  a  Deed  of  Company  Arrangement  (DOCA) 
proposed  by  Somers  &  Partners  Pty  Ltd  and  Minjar  Gold  Pty  Ltd  in  the  form  set  out  in  the 
Administrators’ supplementary report dated 5 July 2016. 
 
On 22 July 2016, the Administrators removed Christopher James Catlow and Alfred John Gillman as 
directors of the Company; and appointed Xingmin (Max) Ji and Guanghui (Michael) Ji representing 
Minjar Gold Pty Ltd and Patrick Nicolas Burke representing Somers & Partners as directors of the 
Company. 
 
On  25  July  2016,  the  DOCA  was  executed  by  the  Company  and  Administrators,  whereupon  the 
Company entered deed administration and the Administrators became the Deed Administrators of 
the Company. The  DOCA  will complete and be fully  effectuated upon each of the following being 
satisfied:
  a  shareholders’  meeting  approves  the  issue  to  Minjar  Gold  Pty  Ltd  or  nominees  of 
105,248,400  fully  paid  ordinary  shares  at  $0.06  per  share  to  raise  $6,314,904  (“the 
Placement”) together with 25,000,000 free options to acquire shares in the Company;



the Placement occurs in accordance with the Subscription Agreement (described below);
the Creditors’ Trust Deed is executed;
the  Company  transfers  $5  million  together  with  any  chose  in  action  or  claim  that  the 
Company may have against third parties (“Company Causes of Action”) and the benefit of 
such Company Causes of Action to the trustees of the Creditors Trust; and
  all creditors’ claims against the Company (except any excluded claims) are extinguished and 
all creditors whose claims have been so extinguished are taken to have a claim against the 
Creditors Trust, equal in amount to their released claim.
Immediately following the execution of the DOCA, the Underwriting Agreement (proposed as part of 
the DOCA) was executed by the Company and Somers & Partners on Monday, 25 July 2016. 
 
Pursuant  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  Underwriting  Agreement,  Somers  &  Partners  will 
underwrite  a  non-renounceable  pro-rata  entitlement  issue  of  not  less  than  131,560,567  fully  paid 
ordinary shares at $0.06 per share on the basis of 1 Entitlement Issue Share for every 4 shares to 
raise not less than $7,893,634. 
 
Immediately following the execution of the Underwriting Agreement (proposed as part of the DOCA), 
the Subscription Agreement was executed by the Company and Minjar Gold Pty Ltd on Monday, 25 
July 2016.  
 
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Subscription Agreement, including shareholder approval, 
Minjar Gold Pty Ltd or nominees will subscribe for 105,248,400 fully paid ordinary shares at $0.06 
per share to raise $6,314,904 and 25,000,000 free options, exercisable at $0.10, expiring 30 June 
2018. 
 
On 27 July 2016, the Deed Administrators and Mr Garth Higgo entered into a short term agreement 
terminating  Mr  Higgo’s  previous  Executive Service  agreement. The  short  term  agreement  is  for  a 
term  of  3  months,  commencing  3  July  2016,  for  remuneration  of  $400,000  per  annum  plus 
superannuation. Whereby either party may terminate the agreement by one week’s notice in writing.  
 
Since the end of the financial year, the Directors are not aware of any other matter of circumstance 
not otherwise dealt with in this report or financial statements that has significantly or may significantly 
affect the operations of the consolidated Group, the results of those operations, or the state of affairs 
of the Group, in future financial years.
119
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
DIRECTORS’ DECLARATION
The Directors of the Company declare that: 
 
1.
the consolidated financial statements and notes, and the Remuneration Report contained in 
the Directors’ Report, are in accordance with the Corporations Act 2001, and:
2.
3.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
give a true and fair view of the Group’s financial position as at 31 December 2015 
and of its performance for the year ended on that date;
comply with Australian Accounting Standards, the Corporations Regulations 2001, 
professional reporting requirements and other mandatory requirements; and
the  financial  statements  and  notes  thereto  are  in  accordance  with  International 
Financial  Reporting  Standards  issued  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards 
Board.
The  Directors  have  been  given  the  declarations  required  by  Section  295A  of  the 
Corporations Act 2001 from the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer for the 
financial year ended 31 December 2015. 
 
In the Directors’ opinion there are reasonable grounds to believe that the Company will be 
able to pay its debts as and when they become due and payable.
Signed in accordance with a resolution of the Directors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________ 
Garth Higgo 
Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer 
 
Perth, 2 September 2016
120
nexia
australia
chartered accountants
a in business advisors
Lead auditor's independence declaration under section 307C of the Corporations Act 2001
To the directors of Triton Minerals Limited
I declare that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, in relation to the audit for the ﬁnancial
year ended 31 December 2015 there have been:
(i) no contraventions of the auditor’s independence requirements as set out in the
Corporations Act 2001 in relation to the audit; and
(ii) no contraventions of any applicable code of professional conduct in relation to the
audit.
Nexia Perth Audit Services Pty Ltd
W ’
Amar Nathwani B.Eng, CA
Director
Perth, 2 September 2016


Independent  auditor’s  report  to  the  members  of  Triton  Minerals  Limited  (Administrators 
Appointed) 
 
Report on the financial report 
 
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  financial  report  of  Triton  Minerals  Limited  (Administrators 
Appointed) which comprises  the consolidated statement  of  financial  position as  at  31 December 
2015,  and  the  consolidated  statement  of  profit  or  loss  and  other  comprehensive  income,  the 
consolidated statement of changes in equity and the consolidated statement of cash flows for the 
year ended on that date, a summary of significant accounting policies, other explanatory notes and 
the  directors’  declaration  of  the  consolidated  entity  comprising  the  company  and  the  entities  it 
controlled at the year’s end or from time to time during the financial year. 
 
Directors’ responsibility for the financial report 
 
The directors of the company are responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial 
report in accordance with the Australian Accounting Standards (including the Australian Accounting 
Interpretations)  and  the  Corporations  Act  2001.    This  responsibility  includes  establishing  and 
maintaining internal control relevant to the preparation and fair presentation of the financial report 
that  is  free  from  material  misstatement,  whether  due  to  fraud  or  error;  selecting  and  applying 
appropriate  accounting  policies;  and  making  accounting  estimates  that  are  reasonable  in  the 
circumstances. In Note 2(a), the directors also state that the financial report, comprising the financial 
statements and notes, complies with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the 
International Accounting Standards Board. 
 
Auditor’s responsibility 
 
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial report based on our audit. We conducted 
our audit in accordance with Australian Auditing Standards. Those standards require that we comply 
with relevant ethical requirements relating to audit engagements and plan and perform the audit to 
obtain reasonable assurance whether the financial report is free from material misstatement. 
 
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures 
in the financial report. The procedures selected depend on the auditor’s judgement, including the 
assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial report, whether due to fraud or error. 
In making those risk assessments, we consider internal controls relevant to the entity’s preparation 
and fair presentation of the financial report in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate 
in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the 
entity’s internal controls. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies 
used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates made by the directors, as well as evaluating 
the overall presentation of the financial report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis 
for our audit opinion. 
 
Independence 
 
In conducting our audit, we have complied with the independence requirements of the Corporations 
Act 2001. We confirm that the independence declaration required by the Corporations Act 2001, 
which has been given to the directors of Triton Minerals Ltd, would be in the same terms if given to 
the directors as at the time of this auditor’s report. 
 
Opinion 
 
In our opinion:
(a) the financial report of Triton Minerals Limited is in accordance with the Corporations Act
2001, including:
(i)  giving  a  true  and  fair  view  of  the  consolidated  entity’s  financial  position  as  at  31
December 2015 and of its performance for the year ended on that date; and
(ii) complying with Australian Accounting Standards (including the Australian Accounting
Interpretations) and the Corporations Regulations 2001.
(b) the  financial  report  also  complies  with  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  as
disclosed in Note 2(a).
Material Uncertainty Related to Going Concern 
 
We  draw  attention  to  Note  2(a)  in  the  financial  report,  which  indicates  that  the  Directors  of  the 
resolved  to  put  the  Company  into  voluntary  administration  and  appointed  Messrs  Martin  Jones, 
Andrew Smith and Dermott McVeigh of Ferrier Hodgson as joint and several administrators of the 
Company (together, the “Administrators”) pursuant to section 436A of the Corporations Act. 
 
On  25  July  2016,  the  DOCA  was  executed  by  the  Company  and  Administrator,  whereupon  the 
Company entered deed administration and the Administrators became the Deed Administrators of 
the Company. Until and unless the DOCA is completed and effectuated there is a material uncertainty 
that may cast significant doubt on the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern. 
 
 
Report on the remuneration report 
 
We have audited the remuneration report included of the directors’ report for the year ended 31 
December 2015. The directors of the company are responsible for the preparation and presentation 
of  the  remuneration  report  in  accordance  with  Section  300A  of  the  Corporations  Act  2001.  Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on the remuneration report, based on our audit conducted in 
accordance with Australian Auditing Standards. 
 
 
Opinion 
 
In our opinion, the remuneration report of Triton Minerals Limited for the year ended 31 December 
2015, complies with Section 300A of the Corporations Act 2001.
Nexia Perth Audit Services Pty Ltd
Amar Nathwani B.Eng, CA 
Director 
 
Perth, 2 September 2016
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
The following additional information was applicable as at 2 September 2016. 
 
1.  Fully paid ordinary shares
Listed Securities
No. of holders  No. of shares
% Held by top 20
Fully paid ordinary shares
4,506
420,993,866
36.46%
2.  Distribution of fully paid ordinary shareholders is as follows:
Spread of Holdings
Holders
Securities
1-1000
1,001-5,000
5,001-10,000
10,001-100,000
100,001-9,999,999,999
270
911
737
1,959
629
57,746
2,750,329
6,059,103
74,368,987
337,757,701
% of Issued
Capital
0.01%
0.65%
1.44%
17.67%
80.23%
Total
4,506
420,993,866
100%
3.  Holders of non-marketable parcels
Holders of non-marketable parcels are deemed to be those were the shareholding is valued at less 
than $500.
  There are 1,540 shareholders who hold less than a marketable parcel of shares. 
  The number of fully paid ordinary shares held in less than marketable parcels is 5,197,204.
4.  Substantial shareholders of ordinary fully paid ordinary shares
The Substantial shareholders of the Company are:
Rank
Holder Name
Securities
% of Issued Capital
1
Alan Gordon Jenks
34,879,780
8.29%
5.  Share buy-backs
There is no current on-market buy-back scheme.
125
SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
6.  Voting Rights
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
Subject to any rights or restrictions for the time being attached to any class or classes (at present 
there are none) at general meetings of shareholders or classes of shareholders:
a)  each shareholder is entitled to vote and may vote in person or by proxy, attorney or
representative;
b)  on a show of hands, every person present who is a shareholder or a proxy, attorney or
representative of a shareholder has one vote; and
c)  on a poll, every person present who is a shareholder or a proxy, attorney or representative
of a shareholder shall, in respect of each fully paid share held, or in respect of which 
he/she has appointed a proxy, attorney or representative, is entitled to one vote per share 
held.
7.  Top 20 shareholders of fully paid ordinary shares
As of 2 September 2016 the top 20 largest fully paid ordinary shareholders together held 36.46% of 
the securities in this class and are listed below:
Rank
Holder Name
Securities
%
CITICORP NOMINEES PTY LTD
70,711,153
16.80
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
J P MORGAN NOMINEES AUSTRALIA LIMITED
HSBC CUSTODY NOMINEES (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED
GMP SECURITIES AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED
MR CHRISTOPHER JOHN FONE
MR ALFRED GILLMAN + MS MARIA GILLMAN 
<GILLMAN FAMILY A/C>
MR ALAN GORDON JENKS
MR PETER CARMINE SACCHETTI
MR CRAIG ANDREW STUBBS
BNP PARIBAS NOMS PTY LTD <UOB KH P/L AC UOB 
KH DRP> 
RAMCO INVESTMENTS PTY LTD <RAMCO FAMILY 
A/C>
BLAIR METALS LTD
GOLDFIRE ENTERPRISES PTY LTD
GMP SECURITIES AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED 
<FACILITATION TRADING A/C>
12,906,055
11,751,535
8,614,397
4,600,000
4,150,000
4,050,000
3,983,963
3,834,545
3,380,000
3,348,000
3,341,191
2,780,000
2,778,710
2,615,797
2,572,589
2,279,817
2,100,000
2,028,313
1,685,481
3.07
2.79
2.05
1.09
0.99
0.96
0.95
0.91
0.80
0.80
0.79
0.66
0.66
0.62
0.61
0.54
0.50
0.48
0.40
153,511,546
36.46
126
15.
MR ANTOINE HALDEZOS
ALMERANKA SUPERANNUATION PTY LTD 
<ALMERANKA SUPER A/C> 
ABN AMRO CLEARING SYDNEY NOMINEES PTY LTD 
<CUSTODIAN A/C>
BLAKELEY & SON VIC PTY LTD
MR GLEN BULL
MISS ALECIA STOODLEY
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
8.  Top 20 holders of listed options, exercisable at $0.20 expiring 16 March 2017
As of 2 September 2016 the top 20 largest listed option holders together held 63.89% of the 
securities in this class and are listed below:
Rank
Holder Name
Securities
%
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
GMP SECURITIES AUSTRALIA PTY LIMITED
HSBC CUSTODY NOMINEES (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED
GOLDFIRE ENTERPRISES PTY LTD
CITICORP NOMINEES PTY LTD
RIVERVIEW CORPORATION PTY LTD
PURESTEEL HOLDINGS PTY LTD <RATTIGAN SUPER 
FUND A/C>
MR PETER CARMINE SACCHETTI
MR PHILLIP RICHARD PERRY
BUSHDAWN PTY LTD <KIREV SUPER FUND A/C>
MR DAVID KHOA TO
MR ANTOINE HALDEZOS
MR EDWARD BRIDGMAN
J P MORGAN NOMINEES AUSTRALIA LIMITED
M & K KORKIDAS PTY LTD <M&K KORKIDAS P/L 
S/FUND A/C> 
REINDEER INVESTMENTS PTY LIMITED 
<BRUEGGEMANN FAMILY A/C>
16.
MRS MARIE HEMMINGS
17.
MR VU QUANG MINH DANG + MRS THI KIM DAU 
NGUYEN <RISING SUPER FUND A/C>
18.
MRS GEMMA YI
19.
20.
MR SCOTT MARSHALL SIMPSON + MRS JEMIMA MAY 
SIMPSON <AQUAZZURI SUPER FUND A/C> 
LANEWAY INVESTMENTS PTY LTD <JOLA FAMILY 
A/C>
4,924,332
2,936,956
1,390,000
595,316
555,556
527,778
491,982
300,150
300,000
272,967
248,243
209,812
203,302
200,384
195,000
192,667
186,500
167,500
150,050
150,000
22.16
13.22
6.25
2.68
2.50
2.37
2.21
1.35
1.35
1.23
1.12
0.94
0.91
0.90
0.88
0.87
0.84
0.75
0.68
0.67
9.  Options
14,198,495
63.89
The following options over unissued ordinary shares are on issue:
Class
Date of Expiry
Exercise
Number of
Holders
Price
Options
Unlisted Options
31 December 2016
Unlisted Options
16 March 2017
Unlisted Options
23 July 2017
Unlisted Options
25 August 2017
$0.10
$0.20
$1.00
$0.70
7,918,957
696,426
5,000,000
5,000,000
Unlisted Options
23 January 2018
$0.2748
4,548,763
Listed Options
16 March 2017
$0.15
Total
22,222,306
45,386,452
9
8
1
2
1
540
127
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
The option holders that hold 20% or more of the options in an unquoted class:
Holder Name
Date of Expiry
Exercis
e Price
Number of
% of Class
Options
Mr Roderick Benjamin Blair  31 December 2016
$0.10
2,245,000
Mr Alan Gordon Jenks
31 December 2016
GMP Securities
23 July 2017
Mr Greg Sheffield
25 August 2017
IPS Nominees Limited
25 August 2017
$0.10
$1.00
$0.70
$0.70
1,877,500
5,000,000
3,225,000
1,775,000
LS Whitehall Group Inc
23 January 2018
$0.2748
4,548,763
Mr Gregory John Brown
16 March 2017
Mr Phillip Richard Perry
16 March 2017
$0.20
$0.20
250,000
178,571
28.3%
23.7%
100%
64.5%
35.5%
100%
35.9%
25.6%
10.  Performance rights
Class
Date of Expiry
Vesting Date
Vesting
Exercise
Number of
Holder
Condition
Price
rights
1
2
3
4
5
Performance rights
20 August 2018
20 August 2017  Milestones
Performance rights
20 August 2018
20 August 2017  5 Day VWAP
$1.00
Performance rights
20 August 2018
20 August 2017  5 Day VWAP
$0.75
Performance rights
20 August 2018
20 August 2017  5 Day VWAP
$0.60
Performance rights
20 August 2018
20 August 2017  5 Day VWAP
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
7,000,000
1,500,000
1,700,000
1,700,000
1,600,000
1.  Milestones
$0.40
Total
13,500,000
s
3
3
2
2
2
5
Each performance right, upon vesting, entitles the holder to acquire one fully paid ordinary share for 
nil  consideration.  The  performance  rights  will  expire,  if  unvested,  on  20  August  2018.  The 
performance rights vesting conditions are as follows:
  minimum  vesting  term  of  36  months  from  grant  date,  being  20  August  2017  (Minimum


Vesting Period); 
if  an  announcement  is  made  to  the  market  by  the  Company  confirming  a  minimum  of  an 
inferred resource or higher at the Company’s Balama North project of at least 0.5b tonnes 
of  graphite  bearing  ore  –  3,000,000  performance  rights  will  vest,  upon  satisfaction  of  the 
Minimum Vesting Period; and  
if an announcement is made to the market by the Company confirming that a pre–feasibility 
or  other  feasibility  study  will  be undertaken  within the  Company’s  Balama North  project  – 
2,000,000 director performance rights will vest and 2,000,000 employee performance rights 
will vest, upon satisfaction of the Minimum Vesting Period.
2. - 5.   Vesting Conditions 
The Company has on issue 6.5 million performance rights with various vesting hurdles as follows: 
 
(a)  The Performance Rights will vest on 20 August 2017 (minimum vesting period). The number of
Performance Rights that will vest will be dependent upon the following:
128
Triton Minerals Ltd (Subject to Deed of Company Arrangement) 
Annual Report - For the year ended 31 December 2015
SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
the Company’s share price reaching a 5 day VWAP of at least $0.40 per share - 1,600,000 
Performance Rights will vest;
the Company’s share price reaching a 5 day VWAP of at least $0.60 per share - 1,700,000 
Performance Rights will vest;   
the Company’s share price reaching a 5 day VWAP of at least $0.75 per share - 1,700,000 
Performance Rights will vest;   
the Company’s share price reaching a 5 day VWAP of at least $1.00 per share – 2,500,000 
Performance Rights will vest;
(collectively the Vesting Conditions)
the Performance Rights will expire on 20 August 2018;
(b)  
 
 
11.  Tenement schedule
Tenement
Project
JV Partner
Location
Status
Balama North 
Balama North 
Balama South 
Ancuabe 
Ancuabe 
Ancuabe 
Ancuabe 
Ancuabe 
Fraser Range North  Matsa Resources Ltd  Western Australia  Surrendered 
Fraser Range North  Matsa Resources Ltd  Western Australia  Surrendered
Mozambique 
Mozambique 
Mozambique 
Mozambique 
Mozambique 
Mozambique 
Mozambique 
Mozambique
Granted 
Granted 
Granted 
Granted 
Granted 
Granted 
Application 
Application
Grafex Ltd 
Grafex Ltd 
Grafex Ltd 
Grafex Ltd 
Grafex Ltd 
Grafex Ltd 
Grafex Ltd 
Grafex Ltd
EL5966 
EL5365 
EL5304 
EL5380 
EL5336 
EL5305 
EL6357 
EL5934 
E28/1663 
E28/1664
Intere
st
80% 
80% 
80% 
80% 
80% 
80% 
80% 
80% 
0% 
0%
129