
CORRESP 1 filename1.htm uree_corresp.htm
 
Via EDGAR
 
July 3, 2014
 
Larry Spirgel
Assistant Director
Division of Corporation Finance
United States Securities and Exchange Commission
Washington, D.C. 20549
 
Re:         U.S. Rare Earths, Inc.
Form 10-K for the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2013
Filed April 15, 2014
Form 10-Q for the Quarterly Period Ended March 31, 2014
Filed May 15, 2014
File No. 0-31199
Dear Mr. Spirgel:
 
On behalf of our client, U.S. Rare Earths, Inc., a Nevada corporation (the “Company”), we submit
this letter in response to comments from the staff (the “Staff”) of the Securities and Exchange
Commission (the “Commission”) contained in its letter dated June 10, 2014, relating to the above
referenced filings. We are concurrently submitting via EDGAR this letter and Amendment No. 1 to
the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013
(“Amendment No. 1”). For the Staff’s reference, we are providing to the Staff by overnight delivery
copies of this letter, as well as both a clean copy of the Registration Statement and a copy
marked to show all changes from the version submitted on May 14, 2014.
For your convenience, the below responses correspond to the numbered comments in the
Comment Letter.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements, page 3
1.We note your reference to the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Please delete all
reference to this safe harbor. It is inapplicable in this context, because the company is an issuer
of penny stock. See Section 21E(b)(1)(C) of the Exchange Act.
The Company acknowledges the Staff’s comment and has deleted reference to this safe harbor.
 
 
 
1
Business and Properties, page 6
Company History and Structure, page 6
2.Please revise to clarify the basis of the statement that the minerals claims held by Seaglass
Holding Corp are located “on, near, or adjacent to anomalous features believed to contain rare
earth elements.”
The Company has revised its disclosure on page 6 in Amendment No. 1 to clarify that this
statement is based on geological studies published by various government agencies and its
own exploration efforts.
Rare Earth Element Prices, page 11
3.Please revise to clarify the basis of the statement that “the results of our exploration to date and
prior exploration activity on our prospects cause us to believe that these opportunities are worth
pursuing.”
The Company has revised its disclosure on page 12 of Amendment No. 1 to clarify that this
statement is based on geological studies published by various government agencies, as well as
the Company’s own exploration efforts. The Company has expanded its disclosure in a new sub-
section entitled “Exploration Work - Future Exploration Work” for each of the Company’s main
projects on pages 19, 27, 32, and 37 to explain the basis of why it believes future exploration is
warranted.
Montana and Idaho, page 12
4.We note your statement that you hold 700 claims on 14,000 acres in this section and elsewhere
in your filing. However you only describe 612 mining claims related to 12,088 acres in your
filing. Please address this variance in your amended filing and reconcile to your Form 10-K.
The Company has revised this variance on page 13 of Amendment No. 1 and elsewhere. In
addition, the Company has included on page 13 of Amendment No. 1 a summary table of its
mining claims by state, project/prospect, claim count and covered acres.
 
 
 
 
2
5.Please insert a small-scale map showing the location and access to each material property, as
required by Instruction 3(b) to Item 102 of Regulation S-K. We believe the guidance in
Instruction 3(b) of Rule 102 of Regulation S-K would generally require maps and drawings to
comply with the following features:
● A legend or explanation showing, by means of pattern or symbol, every pattern or
symbol used on the map or drawing.
● A graphical bar scale should be included. Additional representations of scale such as
"one inch equals one mile" may be utilized provided the original scale of the map has
not been altered.
● A north arrow.
 ● An index map showing where the property is situated in relationship to the state or
province, etc., in which it was located.
● A title of the map or drawing, and the date on which it was drawn.
 ● In the event interpretive data is submitted in conjunction with any map, the identity of
the geologist or engineer that prepared such data.
Any drawing should be simple enough or of sufficiently large scale to clearly show all
features on the drawing.
The Company has revised its disclosure in Amendment No. 1 to insert such a small-scale map
for each of the following projects: Lemhi Pass and Last Chance (Figure 2 on page 16), Sheep
Creek and North Fork (Figure 3 on page 23), Diamond Creek (Figure 4 on page 34) and
Powderhorn (Figure 6 on page 39).
Last Chance, page 45
6.Please revise your filing and disclose the following information for each of your material
properties:
●  The nature of your ownership or interest in the property.
●  A  description  of  all  interests  in  your  properties,  including  the  terms  of  all  underlying
agreements and royalties.
●  Describe the process by which mineral rights are acquired at this location and the basis and
duration of your mineral rights, surface rights, mining claims or concessions.
●  An  indication  of  the  type  of  claim  or  concession  such  as  placer  or  lode,  exploration  or
exploitation,  whether  the  mining  claims  are  State  or  Federal  mining  claims,  patented  or
unpatented claims, mining leases, or mining concessions.
●  Please  include  certain  identifying  information,  such  as  the  property  names,  claim  numbers,
grant numbers, mining concession name or number, and dates of recording and expiration that
is sufficient to enable the claims to be distinguished from other claims that may exist in the
area of your properties.
●  The conditions that must be met to retain your claims or leases, including quantification and
timing of all necessary payments, annual maintenance fees, and disclose who is responsible
for paying these fees.
●  The area of your claims, either in hectares or in acres.
Please ensure that you fully discuss the material terms of the land or mineral rights securing
agreements, as required under paragraph (b)(2) of Industry Guide 7. In addition, for those
properties that are not material to your company, please include a statement to that effect in your
property description.
3
The Company has revised its disclosure to include a sub-section entitled “Mineral Rights
Ownership, Maintenance and Description” for each of its projects on pages 16, 21, 23, 29, 34 and
39 of Amendment No. 1.
7.We note your Last Chance mining claims average 21.36 acres in size, which is larger than the
maximum allowed for unpatented lode claims. Please revise your filing to addresses this
variance.
The Company has revised its disclosure in Amendment No. 1 to revise the acre size by including
the acre size for each of its material claims (which does not exceed 20.66 acres in size) within its
projects, which can be found within the sub-section entitled “Mineral Rights Ownership,
Maintenance and Description” on pages 16, 21, 23, 29, 34 and 39 of Amendment No. 1.
8.Please revise your filing and disclose the information required under paragraph (b) of Industry
Guide 7 for all your material properties listed under this heading. For any properties identified
that are not material, please include a statement to that effect, clarifying your intentions. For
each material property, include the following information:
●  The  location  and  means  of  access  to  your  property,  including  the  modes  of  transportation
utilized to and from the property.
●  Any conditions that must be met in order to obtain or retain title to the property, whether you
have surface and/or mineral rights.
●  A brief description of the rock formations and mineralization of existing or potential economic
significance on the property.
●  A description of any work completed on the property and its present condition.
●  The details as to modernization and physical condition of the plant and equipment, including
subsurface improvements and equipment.
●  A description of equipment, infrastructure, and other facilities.
●  The current state of exploration of the property.
●  The total costs incurred to date and all planned future costs.
●  The source of power and water that can be utilized at the property.
●  If applicable, provide a clear statement that the property is without known reserves and the
proposed program is exploratory in nature.
You may refer to Industry Guide 7, paragraphs (b) (1) through (5), for specific guidance pertaining
to the foregoing, available on our website at the following address:
www.sec.gov/about/forms/industryguides.pdf
The Company has revised its disclosure in Amendment No. 1 to include the following
subsections for each of its projects: “Location,” “Mineral Rights Ownership, Maintenance and
Description,” “History of the Project,” “Geological Setting,” “Exploration Work,” “Project
Mineralogy” and “Power, Water and Infrastructure.”
4
9.We note you disclose previous mining activities on your mineral properties. Please elaborate
on any surface disturbance or contamination issues found on the surface or in the groundwater
due to historical mining activities. The extent and significance of the disturbance/contamination,
as well as your plans to remediate the site, should be clear.
The Company has revised its disclosure in Amendment No. 1 to include a subsection entitled
“History of the Project” for each of its projects (pages 18, 21, 26, 31, 36 and 49 of Amendment No.
1) and in addition has included a subsection entitled “Environmental Concerns Related to
Historical Workings” on pages 15 and 38 of Amendment No. 1.
10.It appears you should also expand your disclosure concerning the exploration plans for the
properties to address the following points.
●  Disclose  a  brief  geological  justification  for  each  of  the  exploration  projects  written  in  non-
technical language.
●  Give a breakdown of the exploration timetable and budget, including estimated amounts that
will  be  required  for  each  exploration  activity,  such  as  geophysics,  geochemistry,  surface
sampling, drilling, etc. for each prospect.
●  If there is a phased program planned, briefly outline all phases.
●  If  there  are  no  current  detailed  plans  to  conduct  exploration  on  the  property,  disclose  this
prominently.
●  Disclose how the exploration program will be funded.
●  Identify  who  will  be  conducting  any  proposed  exploration  work,  and  discuss  what  their
qualifications are.
The Company has revised its disclosure in Amendment No. 1 to include a subsection entitled
“Exploration” for each of its projects on pages 18, 22, 27, 32, 37 and 50 of Amendment No. 1.
11.Detailed sampling provides the basis for the quality estimate or grade of your mineral
discovery. Please provide a brief description of your sample collection, sample preparation,
and the analytical procedures used to develop your analytical results. In addition, please
disclose any Quality Assurance/Quality Control (QA/QC) protocols you have developed for
your exploration program. These procedures would serve to inform potential investors
regarding your sample collection and preparation, assay controls, sample custody, assay
precision and accuracy procedures and protocols.
The Company has revised its disclosure in Amendment No. 1 to include a subsection entitled
“Sampling and Analysis” for each of its projects on pages 20, 22, 28, 33, 37 and 50 of
Amendment No. 1.
5
Risk Factors, page 20
12.Please disclose whether your officers and/or directors have visited your claims, and if so,
when and for how long. If they have not visited your claims, please add to your related risk
factor disclosure.
Certain of the Company’s officers and/or directors have made visits to certain of the Company’s
projects in the past, disclosure of which is made on page 59 of Amendment No. 1. Since these
visits did not cover all of the Company’s claims and only included a small number of the
Company’s current officers and directors, the Company has included risk factor disclosure on
page 59 of Amendment No. 1.
Our management has concluded that we have material weaknesses, page 21
13.Please revise, here or elsewhere, to clarify what steps are being taken to remedy these
weaknesses.
The Company has revised its disclosure on page 56 in Amendment No. 1 to clarify what steps
are being taken to remedy these weaknesses.
Estimates of mineralized material are based on interpretation and assumptions. . ., page 14
14.Please clarify what is meant by “current estimates” of mineralized material. Tell us in your
response what types of estimates you have previously made and where you have made them.
The Company advises the staff that it does not have current estimates and has not made
previous estimates of mineralized material. As such, the Company has removed this risk factor as
it is not yet applicable to the Company.
Risk Factors, page 20
15.Please disclose whether your officers and/or directors have visited your claims, and if so,
when and for how long. If they have not visited your claims, please add to your related risk
factor disclosure.
Please refer to the response to comment 12 above.
Estimates of mineralized material are based on interpretation and assumptions. . ., page 23
16.Please clarify what is meant by “current estimates” of mineralized material. Tell us in your
response what types of estimates you have previously made and where you have made them.
Please refer to the response to comment 14 above.
6
Our management has concluded that we have material weaknesses, page 24
17.Please revise, here or elsewhere, to clarify what steps are being taken to remedy these
weaknesses.
Please refer to the response to comment 13 above.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, page 57
18.Describe the reasons behind the dispute between the parties affiliated with Mr. Lattimore and
the parties affiliated with Mr. Cassidy.
The dispute arose out of an attempt, in August 2012, by a group of shareholders – Deworth
Williams, Edward Cowle and an affiliated entity – to take control of the Company by purportedly
removing Daniel McGroarty, Greg Schifrin and Kevin Cassidy from the board of directors. At the
time, Messrs. Williams and Cowle were members of the Company’s board and were affiliates of
the Company prior to the time that the Company began acquiring its rare earth mining claims in
2010.
It is noted that the dispute was not between parties affiliated with Mr. Lattimore and parties
affiliated with Mr. Cassidy rather it was between the Company and Messrs. Williams and Cowle.
19.Please state whether or not the board determined that the terms of each transaction were no
less favorable to the company than could be obtained from an unrelated party.
The Company has deleted this statement from Amendment No. 1 and intends to adopt a formal
policy with respect to related person transactions prior to commencement of this offering, which
will apply to all related person transactions going forward. The Company intends to update its
related person transaction disclosure further upon adoption of the related person transaction
policy.
Form 10-Q for the Quarterly Period Ended March 31, 2014
Consolidated Financial Statements for the Quarter Ended March 31, 2014
Notes to Financial Statements
Accrued Employee Taxes, page 12
20.Please disclose in future filings why the Company has not accrued potential interest or
penalties for unremitted FICA payroll taxes due to the IRS for years ended December 31,
2011 through 2013, and advise us.
The Company acknowledges the Staff’s comment and will make such disclosure in future filings.
7
21.If material, please disclose the amount of unrecorded stock-based compensation to officers,
employees and independent contractors for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012.
Further, please confirm that all stock-based compensation to Board members, officers,
employees, and independent contractors was recognized in your financial statements for
fiscal years 2012 and 2013.
The Company does not believe that the unreported amounts of stock-based compensation for
the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 are material.
Although the Company failed to report the awards for tax purposes, all stock-based
compensation to officers, employees and independent contractors were recorded in the financial
statements for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011.
Note 7. Other Current Liabilities, page 10, and
Note 8. Related Party Transactions, Repurchase Options, page 15
22.Please disclose in future filings how the Company intends to satisfy the remaining $924,000
balance due and payable for share repurchase agreements entered into with former
shareholders during the year ended December 31, 2013. We note the Company made
payments totaling $1,344,999 during the quarter ended March 31, 2014 and only has
remaining cash on hand of $115,825.
The Company acknowledges the Staff’s comment and will make such disclosure in future filings.
Should the Staff have any additional comments or questions, please direct such to me at (212)
930 9700 or in my absence to Gary Emmanuel at (646) 810-0601.
cc:           Kevin Cassidy
8
Very truly yours,
/s/ Jeff Fessler
Jeff Fessler