
EX-99.1 2 v386593_ex99-1.htm EXHIBIT 99.1
Exhibit 99.1
NEWS RELEASE
PYRAMID OIL COMPANY AND YUMA ENERGY, INC. ANNOUNCE RECORD 
DATES AND MEETING DATES FOR SPECIAL MEETINGS OF STOCKHOLDERS
BAKERSFIELD, CALIFORNIA and HOUSTON, TEXAS – August 12, 2014 – Pyramid Oil
Company (NYSE MKT: PDO) and privately held Yuma Energy, Inc. today announced that each
has set a record date and a meeting date for their special meetings of stockholders to consider
and act upon the previously announced Amended and Restated Agreement and Plan of Merger
and Reorganization, dated as of August 1, 2014, by and among Pyramid, Pyramid Delaware
Merger Subsidiary, Inc., Pyramid Merger Subsidiary, Inc., and Yuma.
Pyramid stockholders of record at the close of business on Monday, August 11, 2014, will be
entitled to receive the notice of, and to vote at, the Pyramid special meeting. The meeting will be
held on Wednesday, September 10, 2014, at 9:00 a.m., local time, at the Hotel Granduca, 1080
Uptown Park Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77056.
Yuma stockholders of record at the close of business on Monday, August 11, 2014, will be
entitled to receive the notice of, and to vote at, the Yuma special meeting. The Yuma special
meeting will be held on Wednesday, September 10, 2014, at 10:00 a.m., local time, also at the
Hotel Granduca.
About Yuma Energy, Inc.
Yuma is a U.S.-based oil and gas company focused on the exploration for, and development of,
conventional and unconventional oil and gas prospects. Yuma’s predecessor was established in
1983. Yuma has employed a 3-D seismic-based strategy to build a multi-year inventory of
development and exploration prospects. Yuma’s current operations are focused on onshore
central Louisiana, where Yuma is targeting the Austin Chalk, Tuscaloosa, Wilcox, Frio, Marg Tex
and Hackberry formations. In addition, Yuma has a non-operated position in the Bakken Shale in
North Dakota. Yuma’s core competencies in generating oil and gas prospects include:
unconventional oil plays; onshore liquids-rich projects; and high impact deep onshore prospects
located beneath known producing trends, identified through the use of 3-D seismic surveys.
About Pyramid Oil Company
Pyramid has been in the oil and gas business continuously since incorporating in 1909. Based in
Bakersfield, California, Pyramid’s exploration and production operations are focused primarily on
the prolific oil and gas fields of Kern County. Pyramid’s operational focus has been to establish
interests in land and producing properties through acquisition and lease, and then drill and
operate crude oil or natural gas wells on those properties.
Forward-Looking Statements
This release contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Statements that are not strictly historical statements
constitute forward-looking statements and may often, but not always, be identified by the use of
such words such as “expects,” “believes,” “intends,” “anticipates,” “plans,” “estimates,” “potential,”
“possible,” or “probable” or statements that certain actions, events or results “may,” “will,”
“should,” or “could” be taken occur or be achieved. The forward-looking statements include
statements about future operations, estimates of reserve and production volumes and the
anticipated timing for closing the proposed merger. Forward-looking statements are based on
current expectations and assumptions and analyses made by Yuma and Pyramid in light of
experience and perception of historical trends, current conditions and expected future
developments, as well
as other factors appropriate under the circumstances. However, whether actual results and
developments will conform with expectations is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties,
including but not limited to: the possibility that the companies may be unable to obtain
stockholder approval or satisfy the other conditions to closing; that problems may arise in the
integration of the businesses of the two companies; that the acquisition may involve unexpected
costs; the risks of the oil and gas industry (for example, operational risks in exploring for,
developing and producing crude oil and natural gas; risks and uncertainties involving geology of
oil and gas deposits); the uncertainty of reserve estimates; the uncertainty of estimates and
projections relating to future production, costs and expenses; potential delays or changes in
plans with respect to exploration or development projects or capital expenditures; health, safety
and environmental risks and risks related to weather; fluctuations in oil and gas prices; inability of
management to execute its plans to meet its goals, shortages of drilling equipment, oil field
personnel and services, unavailability of gathering systems, pipelines and processing facilities
and the possibility that government policies may change. Pyramid’s annual report on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2013, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, recent current reports on
Form 8-K, and other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings discuss some of the
important risk factors identified that may affect its business, results of operations, and financial
condition. Pyramid and Yuma undertake no obligation to revise or update publicly any forward-
looking statements for any reason.
Additional Information About the Transaction
In connection with the proposed transaction, Pyramid has filed with the SEC a registration
statement on Form S-4 that includes a proxy statement of Pyramid that also constitutes a
prospectus of Pyramid relating to Pyramid common stock to be issued to Yuma stockholders
pursuant to the merger. The definitive proxy statement/prospectus will include important
information about both Yuma and Pyramid. Pyramid also plans to file other relevant documents
with the SEC regarding the proposed transaction. INVESTORS AND SECURITY HOLDERS
ARE URGED TO CAREFULLY READ THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT, THE PROXY
STATEMENT/PROSPECTUS AND OTHER RELEVANT DOCUMENTS FILED WITH THE
SEC AS THEY BECOME AVAILABLE BECAUSE THEY CONTAIN IMPORTANT
INFORMATION ABOUT PYRAMID AND THE PROPOSED TRANSACTION. Investors and
security holders may obtain these documents when available free of charge at the SEC’s website
at www.sec.gov. In addition, the documents filed with the SEC by Pyramid can be obtained free
of charge from Pyramid’s website at www.pyramidoil.com.
Participants in Solicitation
Pyramid and its executive officers and directors may be deemed to be participants in the
solicitation of proxies from the stockholders of Pyramid in respect of the proposed transaction.
Information regarding Pyramid’s directors and executive officers is available in its annual report
on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013, which was filed with the SEC on March 31,
2014. Other information regarding the participants in the proxy solicitation and a description of
their direct and indirect interests, by security holdings or otherwise, are and will be contained in
the proxy statement/prospectus referred to above and other relevant materials filed with the SEC.
This release shall not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of any offer to buy any
securities, nor shall there be any sale of securities in any jurisdiction in which such offer,
solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to registration or qualification under the securities
laws of any such jurisdiction. No offering of securities shall be made except by means of a
prospectus meeting the requirements of Section 10 of the Securities Act.
Contact:
Geoff High
Principal
Pfeiffer High Investor Relations, Inc.
Telephone: (303) 393-7044