
424B5 1 d238177d424b5.htm 424B5 424B5
Table of Contents
Filed Pursuant to Rule 424(b)(5)
Registration No. 333-206172
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Title of Each
Class of
Securities
to be
Amount to be
Offering Price
Maximum
Aggregate
Amount of
Registered(1)
Per Share
Offering Price
Registration Fee(2)
10,350,000
$130.90
$1,354,815,000
$136,429.87
Registered      
Common
stock, par
value $0.001
per share
 
 
(1)
Includes 1,350,000 additional shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the underwriters’ option
to purchase additional shares in full.
(2) This filing fee, calculated in accordance with Rules 456(b) and Rule 457(r), has been transmitted to the
SEC in connection with the securities offered from Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-
206172) by means of this prospectus supplement.
Table of Contents
Prospectus Supplement
(To prospectus dated August 6, 2015)
9,000,000 Shares
Concho Resources Inc.
Common Stock
We are selling 9,000,000 shares of our common stock.
Our shares trade on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “CXO.” On August 15, 2016, the last
sale price of the shares as reported on the New York Stock Exchange was $136.44 per share.
Investing in our common stock involves risks that are described and incorporated by reference in the
“Risk Factors” section beginning on page S-5 of this prospectus supplement.
The underwriters have agreed to purchase the common stock from us at a price of $128.282 per share, which
will result in $1,154,538,000 of proceeds to us before expenses. The underwriters may offer the shares of
common stock from time to time for sale in one or more transactions on the New York Stock Exchange, in the
over-the-counter market, through negotiated transactions or otherwise at market prices prevailing at the time
of sale, at prices related to prevailing market prices or at negotiated prices.
The underwriters may exercise their option to purchase up to an additional 1,350,000 shares from us, at the
price per share set forth above within 30 days from the date of this prospectus supplement.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved
or disapproved of these securities or passed upon the adequacy or accuracy of this prospectus. Any
representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The shares will be ready for delivery on or about August 19, 2016 (with any additional shares issued upon
exercise of the underwriters’ option to be delivered on the same or a later date).
Joint Book-Running Managers
Credit Suisse
BofA Merrill Lynch
J.P. Morgan
Co-Managers
Barclays
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Wells Fargo Securities
BMO Capital Markets
Evercore ISI
Simmons & Company International
Energy Specialists of Piper Jaffray
Raymond James
RBC Capital Markets
Scotia Howard Weil
Tudor, Pickering, Holt & Co.
UBS Investment Bank
August 15, 2016
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Prospectus Supplement
Table of Contents
About This Prospectus Supplement
About This Prospectus Supplement
Where You Can Find More Information
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Summary
Risk Factors
Use of Proceeds
Capitalization
Price Range of Common Stock
Dividend Policy
Material U.S. Federal Income Tax Considerations for Non-U.S. Holders
Certain ERISA Considerations
Underwriting
Legal Matters
Experts
S-ii  
     S-ii  
     S-iv  
     S-1  
     S-5  
     S-7  
     S-8  
     S-9  
    S-10  
    S-11  
    S-15  
    S-16  
    S-23  
    S-23
Prospectus
1  
    
About This Prospectus
1  
    
The Company
2  
    
Where You Can Find More Information
3  
    
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
5  
Risk Factors
    
5  
Ratios of Earnings to Fixed Charges and Earnings to Fixed Charges and Preferred Stock Dividends     
6  
    
Use of Proceeds
    
Description of Debt Securities
7  
     20  
Description of Capital Stock
     25  
Description of Depositary Shares
     26  
Description of Warrants
     27  
Plan of Distribution
Legal Matters
     29  
     29  
Experts
Table of Contents
S-i
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT
This document is in two parts. The first part is this prospectus supplement, including the documents
incorporated by reference herein, which describes the specific terms of this offering of our common stock. The
second part is the accompanying base prospectus, including the documents incorporated by reference
therein, which gives more general information, some of which may not apply to our common stock or this
offering. Generally, when we refer to the “prospectus,” we are referring to this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying base prospectus combined. If the information relating to this offering varies between this
prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus, you should rely on the information included
or incorporated by reference in this prospectus supplement.
You should rely only on the information contained in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus
supplement, the accompanying base prospectus and any related free writing prospectus. We have not
authorized any dealer, salesman or other person to provide you with additional or different information. If
anyone provides you with different or inconsistent information, you should not rely on it. This prospectus
supplement and the accompanying base prospectus are not an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy
any securities other than the securities to which they relate and are not an offer to sell or the solicitation of an
offer to buy securities in any jurisdiction to any person to whom it is unlawful to make an offer or solicitation in
that jurisdiction. You should not assume that the information contained in this prospectus supplement is
accurate as of any date other than the date on the front cover of this prospectus supplement, or that the
information contained in any document incorporated by reference is accurate as of any date other than the
date of the document incorporated by reference, regardless of the time of delivery of this prospectus
supplement or any sale of a security.
Unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires, all references in this prospectus supplement to
“we,” “our,” “us,” “the Company” or “Concho” are to Concho Resources Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its
subsidiaries.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and current reports and other information with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (the “SEC”) (File No. 001-33615) pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the
“Exchange Act”). You may read and copy any documents that are filed at the SEC’s public reference room at
100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. You may also obtain copies of these documents at prescribed
rates from the public reference section of the SEC at its Washington address. Please call the SEC at 1-800-
SEC-0330 for further information.
Our filings are also available to the public through the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” information that we file with it, which means that we can
disclose important information to you by referring you to documents previously filed with the SEC. The
information incorporated by reference is an important part of this prospectus supplement, and the information
that we later file with the SEC will automatically update and, to the extent inconsistent, supersede this
information. The following documents that we filed with the SEC pursuant to the Exchange Act are
incorporated herein by reference:
•
•
our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, including information
specifically incorporated by reference into such Annual Report on Form 10-K from our Proxy
Statement for our 2016 Annual Meeting of Stockholders filed on April 19, 2016;
our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarterly periods ended March 31, 2016 and June 30,
2016;
Table of Contents
S-ii
•
•
our Current Reports on Form 8-K filed on January 5, 2016, January 19, 2016, May 19, 2016 and
June 2, 2016 (excluding any information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of any such
Current Report on Form 8-K); and
the description of our common stock contained in our Registration Statement on Form 8-A filed on
July 23, 2007, including any amendment to that form that we may file in the future for the purpose of
updating the description of our common stock.
These reports contain important information about us, our financial condition and our results of operations.
All documents filed pursuant to Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act (excluding any
information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 on any Current Report on Form 8-K) subsequent to
the date of this prospectus supplement and before the termination of the offering of common stock under this
prospectus supplement shall be deemed to be incorporated in this prospectus supplement by reference and
to be a part hereof from the date of filing of such documents. Any statement contained herein, or in a
document incorporated or deemed to be incorporated by reference herein, shall be deemed to be modified or
superseded for purposes of this prospectus supplement to the extent that a statement contained herein or in
any subsequently filed document that also is or is deemed to be incorporated by reference herein, modifies or
supersedes such statement. Any such statement so modified or superseded shall not be deemed, except as
so modified or superseded, to constitute a part of this prospectus supplement.
You may request a copy of these filings at no cost by writing or telephoning us at the following address and
telephone number:
Concho Resources Inc.
One Concho Center
600 W. Illinois Avenue
Midland, Texas 79701
Attention: General Counsel
(432) 683-7443
We also maintain a website at www.concho.com. However, the information on our website is not part of this
prospectus.
Table of Contents
S-iii
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Various statements and information contained in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus
supplement that express a belief, expectation, or intention, or that are not statements of historical fact, are
“forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 (the “Securities
Act”) and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. These forward-looking statements include statements,
projections and estimates concerning our future financial position, operations, performance, business
strategy, oil and natural gas reserves, drilling program, capital expenditures, liquidity and capital resources,
the timing and success of specific projects, outcomes and effects of litigation, claims and disputes, derivative
activities and potential financing. Forward-looking statements are generally accompanied by words such as
“estimate,” “project,” “predict,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “potential,” “could,” “may,” “foresee,” “plan,”
“goal” or other words that convey the uncertainty of future events or outcomes. Forward-looking statements
are not guarantees of performance. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current
expectations and assumptions about future events and their potential effect on us. These statements are
based on certain assumptions and analyses made by us in light of our experience and our perception of
historical trends, current conditions and expected future developments as well as other factors we believe are
appropriate under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from those implied or expressed by
any forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this
prospectus supplement, or if earlier, as of the date they were made. We disclaim any obligation to update or
revise these statements unless required by law, and we caution you not to rely on them unduly. While our
management considers these expectations and assumptions to be reasonable, they are inherently subject to
significant business, economic, competitive, regulatory and other risks, contingencies and uncertainties
relating to, among other matters, the risks discussed in “Part II, Item 1A, Risk Factors” in our Quarterly Report
on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2016 and in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2015, in the other documents incorporated by reference herein and in our subsequent SEC
filings, as well as those factors summarized below:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
declines in, or the sustained depression of, the prices we receive for our oil and natural gas;
uncertainties about the estimated quantities of oil and natural gas reserves;
drilling and operating risks;
the adequacy of our capital resources and liquidity including, but not limited to, access to additional
borrowing capacity under our credit facility;
the effects of government regulation, permitting and other legal requirements, including new
legislation or regulation of hydraulic fracturing and the export of oil and natural gas;
the impact of potential changes in our credit ratings;
environmental hazards, such as uncontrollable flows of oil, natural gas, brine, well fluids, toxic gas or
other pollution into the environment, including groundwater contamination;
difficult and adverse conditions in the domestic and global capital and credit markets;
risks related to the concentration of our operations in the Permian Basin of Southeast New Mexico
and West Texas;
disruptions to, capacity constraints in or other limitations on the pipeline systems that deliver our oil,
natural gas liquids and natural gas and other processing and transportation considerations;
the costs and availability of equipment, resources, services and qualified personnel required to
perform our drilling and operating activities;
potential financial losses or earnings reductions from our commodity price risk-management
program;
•
•
risks and liabilities associated with acquired properties or businesses, including the Acquisition (as
defined below);
uncertainties about our ability to successfully execute our business and financial plans and
strategies;
Table of Contents
S-iv
•
•
•
•
uncertainties about our ability to replace reserves and economically develop our current reserves;
general economic and business conditions, either internationally or domestically;
competition in the oil and natural gas industry; and
uncertainty concerning our assumed or possible future results of operations.
Reserve engineering is a process of estimating underground accumulations of oil and natural gas that cannot
be measured in an exact way. The accuracy of any reserve estimate depends on the quality of available data,
the interpretation of such data and the price and cost assumptions made by our reserve engineers. In
addition, the results of drilling, testing and production activities may justify revisions of estimates that were
made previously. If significant, such revisions would change the schedule of any further production and
development drilling. Accordingly, reserve estimates may differ from the quantities of oil and natural gas that
are ultimately recovered.
Table of Contents
S-v
SUMMARY
This summary highlights selected information contained elsewhere in this prospectus supplement, the
accompanying base prospectus and the documents we incorporate by reference. It does not contain all of the
information you should consider before making an investment decision. You should read the entire
prospectus supplement, the accompanying base prospectus, the documents incorporated by reference and
the other documents to which we refer for a more complete understanding of our business and this offering.
Please read the section entitled “Risk Factors” on page S-5 of this prospectus supplement, in “Part II, Item 1A,
Risk Factors” in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2016 and in our Annual
Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, which is incorporated by reference in this
prospectus supplement, for more information about important factors you should consider before investing in
our common stock in this offering.
Our Business
We are an independent oil and natural gas company engaged in the acquisition, development, exploration
and production of oil and natural gas properties. Our core operations are focused in the Permian Basin of
Southeast New Mexico and West Texas. Our legacy in the Permian Basin provides us a deep understanding
of operating and geological trends. We are also at the forefront of applying new technologies, such as
horizontal drilling and enhanced completion techniques, throughout our three core operating areas: the New
Mexico Shelf, the Delaware Basin and the Midland Basin. In the New Mexico Shelf, we primarily target the
Yeso formation with horizontal drilling; in the Delaware Basin, we use horizontal drilling to target the Bone
Spring formation (including the Avalon shale and the Bone Spring sands) and the Wolfcamp shale formation;
and in the Midland Basin, we target the Wolfcamp and Spraberry formations with horizontal drilling. Our
strategy remains focused on drilling and exploration activities on our multi-year project inventory and
pursuing acquisitions that meet our strategic and financial objectives.
Acquisition of Oil and Gas Properties
Recent Developments
We have entered into a purchase and sale agreement to acquire from Reliance Energy, a privately held,
Midland-based energy company, all of the seller’s interest in certain oil and natural gas properties and related
assets located in the Northern Midland Basin (the “Acquisition”). The purchase agreement provides for the
sale and transfer by the seller of its interests in approximately 40,000 net acres for an aggregate purchase
price of $1.625 billion. The properties have an average of 99% working interest (75% NRI) with minimal
leasehold obligations. The properties to be acquired have an estimated current net production of
approximately 10 MBoepd from 44 horizontal and 326 vertical producing wells. Based on the estimates of our
internal reserve engineers, we estimate that there were approximately 43 MMBoe of proved reserves
associated with these properties as of June 30, 2016, of which 69% were proved developed. These reserve
estimates were made in accordance with current SEC rules and regulations regarding oil and natural gas
reserve reporting, including using average first-day-of-the-month prices for the prior 12 months in accordance
with SEC guidelines. The consideration for the Acquisition will consist of $1,137.5 million in cash (which we
intend to fund from a portion of the net proceeds of this offering) and either an additional $487.5 million in
cash or 3.96 million shares of our common stock pursuant to an option exercisable by either us or the seller to
elect to require that a portion of the consideration be paid in our common stock (the “Stock Consideration”),
subject to customary purchase price adjustments. We anticipate exercising this option and paying a portion of
the Acquisition consideration in our common stock. If the election to pay a portion of the consideration as
Stock Consideration is made, we have agreed pursuant to the purchase agreement governing the Acquisition
to file a registration statement to register the resale from time to time of the Stock Consideration under the
Securities Act upon the closing of the Acquisition.
We expect to close the Acquisition in the second half of 2016. However, the completion of the Acquisition is
subject to a number of conditions, and we may not be able to consummate it if such conditions are not met.
Table of Contents
S-1
Furthermore, the closing of this offering is not conditioned upon the closing of the Acquisition. Accordingly,
we cannot assure you that even if we consummate this offering that we will consummate the Acquisition. If we
do not complete the Acquisition, we will use the net proceeds from this offering after the funding of a portion of
the redemption of our outstanding 7.0% Notes (as defined below) for general corporate purposes, including to
fund future capital expenditures associated with our acquisition, exploration and development activities. We
may seek to fund a portion of the purchase price through additional debt financing, including through
borrowings under our revolving credit facility. In addition, if we are not able to consummate the Acquisition,
we may be required to forfeit the $81.25 million deposit we made upon execution of the purchase agreement.
See “Use of Proceeds” and “Capitalization.”
Redemption of the 7.0% Notes
Following the closing of this offering, we intend to issue a notice to redeem in full the $600 million aggregate
principal amount of our outstanding 7.0% senior notes due 2021 (the “7.0% Notes”). The redemption price for
the 7.0% Notes is 103.500% of the principal amount of the 7.0% Notes to be redeemed plus accrued and
unpaid interest to the redemption date, or a total cost of approximately $621.0 million (excluding accrued but
unpaid interest to the redemption date). We expect to use a portion of the net proceeds to finance part of the
redemption of the 7.0% Notes and will use cash on hand to finance the balance of such redemption.
The redemption of the 7.0% Notes will result in an after-tax charge to our net earnings of approximately $17.6
million. See “Use of Proceeds” and “Capitalization.”
This prospectus supplement is not intended as a notice of any such redemption. Such notice will be given to
holders of the 7.0% Notes in a manner prescribed in the indenture governing the 7.0% Notes.
Corporate Information
We are a Delaware corporation formed in February 2006. Our principal executive offices are located at One
Concho Center, 600 W. Illinois Avenue, Midland, Texas 79701, and our telephone number at that address is
(432) 683-7443. Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”) under the symbol
“CXO.” We maintain a website at www.concho.com. However, the information on our website is not part of
this prospectus, and you should rely only on the information contained in this prospectus supplement, the
accompanying base prospectus, any related free writing prospectus and in the documents incorporated
herein by reference when making a decision as to whether to buy our common stock in this offering.
Table of Contents
Issuer
S-2
The Offering
Concho Resources Inc.
Shares of common stock offered
9,000,000 shares.
Option to purchase additional shares
The underwriters have the option to purchase up to an additional
1,350,000 shares from us, at the price per share set forth on the
cover page of this prospectus supplement within 30 days from the
date of this prospectus supplement.
Shares of common stock outstanding
following this offering(1)
140,788,277 shares (142,138,277 shares if the underwriters
exercise their option to purchase additional shares in full).
Use of proceeds
Table of Contents
Risk factors
We estimate that the net proceeds from this offering will be
approximately $1,154.2 million (or $1,327.4 million if the
underwriters exercise their option to purchase additional shares in
full), after deducting estimated fees and expenses. We intend to use
the estimated net proceeds from this offering to (i) finance part of the
cash portion of the purchase price for the Acquisition, subject to the
closing of the Acquisition, and (ii) fund part of the redemption of our
7.0% Notes, with any remaining balance to be used for general
corporate purposes, including funding future capital expenditures
associated with our acquisition, exploration and development
activities. Consummation of this offering, however, is not
conditioned upon the completion of the Acquisition. If the
Acquisition is not consummated, we intend to use the net proceeds
after the funding of a portion of the redemption of our 7.0% Notes for
general corporate purposes, including funding future capital
expenditures associated with our acquisition, exploration and
development activities. The underwriters or their affiliates may be
holders of the 7.0% Notes and, therefore, may receive a portion of
the net proceeds from this offering. For more information about our
use of proceeds from this offering, see “Use of Proceeds.”
S-3
Investing in our common stock involves substantial risk. You should
carefully consider the risk factors set forth in the section entitled
“Risk Factors” and the other information contained in this
prospectus supplement and the accompanying base prospectus
and the documents incorporated by reference herein and therein
prior to making an investment in our common stock. See “Risk
Factors” beginning on page S-5.
Exchange Listing
Our common stock is listed on the NYSE under the symbol “CXO.”
(1) Based on 131,788,277 shares outstanding as of August 12, 2016.
Unless we indicate otherwise or the context otherwise requires, all of the information in this prospectus
supplement:
assumes no exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares;
does not reflect as of August 12, 2016: (i) outstanding options to purchase 22,125 shares of our
common stock held by our directors, officers and employees or (ii) 1,174,016 shares available for
issuance under our 2015 Stock Incentive Plan; and
does not include any shares of our common stock that may be issued to the seller in connection with
the Acquisition.
•
•
•
Table of Contents
S-4
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our common stock involves substantial risk. In addition to the risk factors set forth below, you
should carefully consider the risk factors set forth in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in “Part II, Item 1A, Risk
Factors” in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2016 and in our Annual Report
on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, which is incorporated by reference in this prospectus,
and the other information included or incorporated by reference in this prospectus supplement and the
accompanying base prospectus prior to making an investment in our common stock. If any of the described
risks were actually to occur, our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be
materially adversely affected. Please read “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
The risks described below and those risks described in documents incorporated by reference into this
prospectus supplement are not the only ones facing our company. Additional risks not presently known to us
or that we currently deem immaterial individually or in the aggregate may also adversely affect our business
operations.
Risks Related to Our Business
Our ability to use our net operating loss carryforwards or other tax attributes could be limited.
Concho anticipates it could generate a net operating loss (“NOL”) in 2016. Utilization of this NOL depends on
many factors, including our ability to generate future taxable income, which cannot be assured. In addition,
Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (“Section 382”), generally imposes an
annual limitation on the amount of NOLs that may be used to offset taxable income when a corporation has
undergone an “ownership change” (as determined under Section 382). An ownership change generally
occurs if one or more stockholders (or groups of stockholders) who are each deemed to own at least five
percent of our stock change their ownership by more than 50 percentage points over their lowest ownership
percentage within a rolling three-year period. In the event that an ownership change has occurred, or were to
occur, utilization of our NOLs would be subject to an annual limitation under Section 382, determined by
multiplying the value of our equity at the time of the ownership change by the applicable long-term tax-exempt
rate as defined in Section 382, and potentially increased for certain gains recognized within five years after
the ownership change if we have a net built-in gain in our assets at the time of the ownership change. Any
unused annual limitation may be carried over to later years. We cannot assure you that we will not have an
ownership change as a result of this offering, which would result in an annual limitation under Section 382.
However, even if we did have an ownership change as a result of this offering, we do not believe that such
limitation would prevent our utilization of our anticipated 2016 NOL or any other tax attribute prior to their
expiration. Future ownership changes or future regulatory changes could limit our ability to utilize our NOLs.
To the extent we are not able to offset our future income with our NOLs, this would adversely affect our
operating results and cash flows if we attain profitability.
Risks Related to the Acquisition
The completion of the Acquisition is subject to a number of conditions, and we may not be able to
consummate it if such conditions are not met. Failure to complete the Acquisition could negatively
affect our future business and financial results.
The completion of the Acquisition is subject to a number of conditions, and we may not be able to
consummate it if such conditions are not met. Furthermore, the closing of this offering is not conditioned upon
the closing of the Acquisition. Accordingly, we cannot assure you that even if we consummate this offering
that we will consummate the Acquisition. We expect to close the Acquisition in the second half of 2016, but if
the Acquisition is not completed, our future business and financial results could be negatively affected. Even
if the Acquisition is consummated, achieving the targeted benefits of the Acquisition will depend in part upon
whether we can integrate the Acquisition’s businesses in an efficient and effective manner. We may not be
able to
Table of Contents
S-5
accomplish this integration process smoothly or successfully. Any acquisition, including the Acquisition,
involves potential risks, including, among other things:
•
•
•
•
the validity of our assumptions about, among other things, revenues and costs;
a decrease in our liquidity by using a significant portion of our available cash or borrowing capacity
to finance acquisitions;
a significant increase in our interest expense or financial leverage if we incur additional debt to
finance acquisitions;
the assumption of environmental and other unknown liabilities, losses or costs for which we are not
indemnified or for which our indemnity is inadequate;
•
•
•
•
•
•
the diversion of management’s attention from other business concerns;
an inability to hire, train or retain qualified personnel to manage and operate our growing business
and assets;
the incurrence of other significant charges, such as impairment of goodwill or other intangible assets,
asset devaluation or restructuring charges;
increased cost of transportation of production to markets;
significant costs associated with the Acquisition and subsequent integration efforts; and
a failure to attain or maintain compliance with environmental and other governmental regulations.
Additionally, if we are unable to consummate the transaction, we may be required to forfeit the $81.25 million
deposit we made upon execution of the purchase agreement governing the Acquisition.
In addition to the proceeds from this offering, we may seek to fund a portion of the purchase price for
the Acquisition through additional debt financing.
In addition to the proceeds from this offering, we may seek to fund a portion of the purchase price for the
Acquisition through additional debt financing, including through borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
If we incur additional debt, the risks associated with our leverage may be exacerbated.
Table of Contents
S-6
USE OF PROCEEDS
We expect the net proceeds from this offering to be approximately $1,154.2 million (or approximately
$1,327.4 million if the underwriters exercise their option to purchase additional shares in full), after deducting
estimated fees and expenses. We intend to use the net proceeds from this offering to (i) finance part of the
cash portion of the purchase price for the Acquisition, subject to the closing of the Acquisition, and (ii) fund
part of the redemption of our 7.0% Notes, with any remaining balance to be used for general corporate
purposes, including funding future capital expenditures associated with our acquisition, exploration and
development activities. Consummation of this offering, however, is not conditioned upon the completion of the
Acquisition. If the Acquisition is not consummated, we intend to use the net proceeds after the funding of a
portion of the redemption of our 7.0% Notes for general corporate purposes, including funding future capital
expenditures associated with our acquisition, exploration and development activities.
As of the date hereof, the total outstanding principal amount of the 7.0% Notes is $600.0 million. The 7.0%
Notes mature on January 15, 2021. Interest on the 7.0% Notes accrues at the rate of 7.0% per annum and is
payable semiannually in cash on each January 15 and July 15.
The underwriters or their affiliates may be holders of the 7.0% Notes and, therefore, may receive a portion of
the net proceeds from this offering.
Table of Contents
S-7
CAPITALIZATION
The following table sets forth our unaudited capitalization at June 30, 2016:
•
•
on an actual basis; and
on an as adjusted basis to give effect to the issuance and sale of our common stock offered hereby
(assuming no exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) and the application
of the estimated net proceeds therefrom to finance part of the cash portion of the purchase price for
the Acquisition and the redemption of our 7.0% Notes as described under “Summary—Recent
Developments” in addition to 3.96 million shares anticipated to be issued as partial consideration for
the Acquisition pursuant to the option.
June 30, 2016
As adjusted(1)
Actual
(in thousands,
except share amounts)
$ 481,230    $
  
   
  
   $
600,000   
  600,000   
  600,000   
  1,550,000   
23,642   
 
 
(40,110)  
   
   
  3,333,532
—      $
—
123,082  
—    
600,000  
600,000  
1,550,000  
23,642  
(33,158) 
 
2,863,566
Cash and cash equivalents
Long-term debt:
Credit facility(2)
7.0% senior notes due 2021
6.5% senior notes due 2022
5.5% senior notes due 2022
5.5% senior notes due 2023
Unamortized original issue premium
Senior notes issuance costs, net
Total long-term debt
Stockholders’ equity:
Common stock, $0.001 par value; 300,000,000 authorized; (i)
132,240,074 actual shares issued and (ii) 145,198,600 as adjusted
shares issued, each at June 30, 2016(3)
Additional paid-in capital(4)
Retained earnings(5)
Treasury stock, at cost; 427,844 shares at June 30, 2016, actual and as
adjusted
Total stockholders’ equity
132   
  4,887,420   
  1,059,476
145  
6,549,403  
1,041,922
(43,322)
(43,322)
Total stockholders’ equity
Total capitalization
5,903,706
$9,237,238    $
7,548,148  
 
10,411,714
(1) Does not give effect to the payment of approximately $19.4 million of accrued and unpaid interest at
June 30, 2016 on the 7.0% Notes.
(2) At July 31, 2016, we would have been able to incur an additional $2.5 billion of indebtedness under our
credit facility. At July 31, 2016, we had no borrowings outstanding under the senior credit facility.
(3) As adjusted amount reflects the issuance of approximately 3.96 million shares of our common stock as
(4)
partial consideration for the Acquisition.
In addition to the offering, the as adjusted amount reflects the issuance of approximately 3.96 million
shares of our common stock at the offering price of $128.282 per share as partial consideration for the
Acquisition.
(5) As adjusted amount reflects after-tax charges of approximately $17.6 million associated with the
redemption of the 7.0% Notes.
Table of Contents
S-8
PRICE RANGE OF COMMON STOCK
Our common stock is listed on the NYSE under the symbol “CXO.” The following table shows, for the periods
indicated, the high and low reported sale prices for our common stock, as reported on the NYSE.
2014:
First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
2015:
First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
2016:
First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter (through August 15, 2016)
High     
  
$125.15    
$145.70    
$148.61    
$128.05    
  
$122.14    
$134.13    
$115.13    
$120.41    
  
$107.00    
$130.03    
$137.40
Sales Price
Low
$ 94.51  
$120.57  
$123.94  
$ 77.22
$ 91.26  
$110.44  
$ 92.41  
$ 85.87
$ 69.94  
$ 95.87  
$114.33
On August 15, 2016, the last sales price of our common stock as reported on the NYSE was $136.44 per
share.
As of August 12, 2016, there were approximately 1,112 holders of record of our common stock.
S-9
Table of Contents
DIVIDEND POLICY
We have not paid, and do not intend to pay in the foreseeable future, any dividends on our common stock.
Covenants contained in our credit facility and the indentures governing our senior notes limit the payment of
dividends on our common stock. We currently intend to retain all future earnings to fund the development and
growth of our business. Any payment of future dividends will be at the discretion of our board of directors and
will depend on, among other things, our earnings, financial condition, capital requirements, level of
indebtedness, statutory and contractual restrictions applying to the payment of dividends and other
considerations that our board of directors deems relevant. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in our Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, which is incorporated by reference into this prospectus
supplement, for additional information.
Table of Contents
S-10
MATERIAL U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS FOR NON-U.S. HOLDERS
The following is a summary of the material U.S. federal income tax considerations related to the purchase,
ownership and disposition of our common stock by a non-U.S. holder (as defined below) that holds our
common stock as a “capital asset” (generally property held for investment). This summary is based on the
provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), U.S. Treasury regulations,
administrative rulings and judicial decisions, all as in effect on the date hereof, and all of which are subject to
change, possibly with retroactive effect. We have not sought any ruling from the Internal Revenue Service
(“IRS”) with respect to the statements made and the conclusions reached in the following summary, and there
can be no assurance that the IRS or a court will agree with such statements and conclusions.
This summary does not address all aspects of U.S. federal income taxation that may be relevant to non-U.S.
holders in light of their personal circumstances. In addition, this summary does not address the Medicare tax
on certain investment income, U.S. federal estate or gift tax laws, any state, local or non-U.S. tax laws or any
tax treaties. This summary also does not address tax considerations applicable to investors that may be
subject to special treatment under the U.S. federal income tax laws, such as:
•
•
•
•
banks, insurance companies or other financial institutions;
tax-exempt or governmental organizations;
qualified foreign pension funds;
dealers in securities or foreign currencies;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
traders in securities that use the mark-to-market method of accounting for U.S. federal income tax
purposes;
persons subject to the alternative minimum tax;
partnerships or other pass-through entities for U.S. federal income tax purposes or holders of
interests therein;
persons deemed to sell our common stock under the constructive sale provisions of the Code;
persons that acquired our common stock through the exercise of employee stock options or
otherwise as compensation or through a tax-qualified retirement plan;
certain former citizens or long-term residents of the United States; and
persons that hold our common stock as part of a straddle, appreciated financial position, synthetic
security, hedge, conversion transaction or other integrated investment or risk reduction transaction.
PROSPECTIVE INVESTORS ARE ENCOURAGED TO CONSULT THEIR TAX ADVISORS WITH
RESPECT TO THE APPLICATION OF THE U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX LAWS TO THEIR
PARTICULAR SITUATION, AS WELL AS ANY TAX CONSEQUENCES OF THE PURCHASE,
OWNERSHIP AND DISPOSITION OF OUR COMMON STOCK ARISING UNDER THE U.S. FEDERAL
ESTATE OR GIFT TAX LAWS OR UNDER THE LAWS OF ANY STATE, LOCAL, NON-U.S. OR OTHER
TAXING JURISDICTION OR UNDER ANY APPLICABLE INCOME TAX TREATY.
Non-U.S. Holder Defined
For purposes of this discussion, a “non-U.S. holder” is a beneficial owner of our common stock that is not for
U.S. federal income tax purposes a partnership or any of the following:
•
•
an individual who is a citizen or resident of the United States;
a corporation (or other entity treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes) created or
organized in or under the laws of the United States, any state thereof or the District of Columbia;
•
an estate the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income tax regardless of its source; or
S-11
Table of Contents
•
a trust (i) the administration of which is subject to the primary supervision of a U.S. court and which
has one or more United States persons who have the authority to control all substantial decisions of
the trust or (ii) which has made a valid election under applicable U.S. Treasury regulations to be
treated as a United States person.
If a partnership (including an entity or arrangement treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax
purposes) holds our common stock, the tax treatment of a partner in the partnership generally will depend
upon the status of the partner, upon the activities of the partnership and upon certain determinations made at
the partner level. Accordingly, we urge partners in partnerships (including entities or arrangements treated as
partnerships for U.S. federal income tax purposes) considering the purchase of our common stock to consult
their tax advisors regarding the U.S. federal income tax considerations of the purchase, ownership and
disposition of our common stock by such partnership.
Distributions
We do not expect to pay any distributions on our common stock in the foreseeable future. However, in the
event we do make distributions of cash or other property on our common stock, such distributions will
constitute dividends for U.S. federal income tax purposes to the extent paid from our current or accumulated
earnings and profits, as determined under U.S. federal income tax principles. To the extent those distributions
exceed our current and accumulated earnings and profits, the distributions will be treated as a non-taxable
return of capital to the extent of the non-U.S. holder’s tax basis in our common stock and thereafter as capital
gain from the sale or exchange of such common stock. See “—Gain on Disposition of Common Stock.”
Subject to the withholding requirements under FATCA (as defined below) and with respect to effectively
connected dividends, each of which is discussed below, any distribution (regardless of whether classified as
a dividend for U.S. federal income tax purposes) made to a non-U.S. holder on our common stock generally
will be subject to U.S. withholding tax at a rate of 30 percent of the gross amount of the distribution unless an
applicable income tax treaty provides for a lower rate. To receive the benefit of a reduced treaty rate, a non-
U.S. holder must provide the applicable withholding agent with an IRS Form W-8BEN or IRS Form W-8BEN-
E (or other applicable or successor form) certifying qualification for the reduced rate. If, after the end of a given
year, it is established that a distribution made to a non-U.S. holder qualified as a return of capital rather than a
dividend for U.S. federal income tax purposes, such non-U.S. holder generally can obtain a refund of any
amounts withheld by timely filing an appropriate claim for a refund with the IRS.
Dividends paid to a non-U.S. holder that are effectively connected with a trade or business conducted by the
non-U.S. holder in the United States (and, if required by an applicable income tax treaty, are treated as
attributable to a permanent establishment maintained by the non-U.S. holder in the United States) generally
will be taxed on a net income basis at the rates and in the manner generally applicable to United States
persons (as defined under the Code). Such effectively connected dividends will not be subject to U.S.
withholding tax if the non-U.S. holder satisfies certain certification requirements by providing the applicable
withholding agent a properly executed IRS Form W-8ECI certifying eligibility for exemption. If the non-U.S.
holder is a non-U.S. corporation, it may also be subject to a branch profits tax (at a 30 percent rate or such
lower rate as specified by an applicable income tax treaty) on its effectively connected earnings and profits
(as adjusted for certain items), which will include effectively connected dividends.
Gain on Disposition of Common Stock
Subject to the discussion below under “—Additional Withholding Requirements under FATCA,” a non-U.S.
holder generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income tax on any gain realized upon the sale or other
disposition of our common stock unless:
•
the non-U.S. holder is an individual who is present in the United States for a period or periods
aggregating 183 days or more during the calendar year in which the sale or disposition occurs and
certain other conditions are met;
Table of Contents
S-12
•
•
the gain is effectively connected with a trade or business conducted by the non-U.S. holder in the
United States (and, if required by an applicable income tax treaty, is attributable to a permanent
establishment maintained by the non-U.S. holder in the United States); or
our common stock constitutes a United States real property interest by reason of our status as a
United States real property holding corporation (“USRPHC”) for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
A non-U.S. holder described in the first bullet point above will be subject to U.S. federal income tax at a rate
of 30 percent (or such lower rate as specified by an applicable income tax treaty) on the amount of such gain,
which generally may be offset by U.S. source capital losses.
A non-U.S. holder whose gain is described in the second bullet point above or, subject to the exceptions
described in the next paragraph, to whom the third bullet point above applies, generally will be taxed on a net
income basis at the rates and in the manner generally applicable to United States persons (as defined under
the Code) unless an applicable income tax treaty provides otherwise. If the non-U.S. holder is a corporation, it
may also be subject to a branch profits tax (at a 30 percent rate or such lower rate as specified by an
applicable income tax treaty) on its effectively connected earnings and profits (as adjusted for certain items),
which will include such gain.
Generally, a corporation is a USRPHC if the fair market value of its U.S. real property interests equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the sum of the fair market value of its worldwide real property interests and its other
assets used or held for use in a trade or business. Because of the oil and natural gas properties and other
real property assets we own, we believe that we currently are, and expect to remain for the foreseeable future,
a USRPHC for U.S. federal income tax purposes. However, as long as our common stock continues to be
regularly traded on an established securities market, only a non-U.S. holder that actually or constructively
owns, or owned at any time during the shorter of the five-year period ending on the date of the disposition or
the non-U.S. holder’s holding period for the common stock, more than five percent of our common stock will
be taxable on gain recognized on the disposition of our common stock as a result of our status as a
USRPHC. If our common stock were not considered to be regularly traded on an established securities
market during the calendar year in which the relevant disposition by a non-U.S. holder occurs, then
regardless of the percentage of our common stock held by such holder, such holder would be subject to U.S.
federal income tax on a taxable disposition of our common stock (as described in the preceding paragraph),
and a 15 percent withholding tax would apply to the gross proceeds from such disposition.
Non-U.S. holders should consult their tax advisors with respect to the application of the foregoing rules to
their ownership and disposition of our common stock.
Backup Withholding and Information Reporting
Any dividends paid to a non-U.S. holder must be reported annually to the IRS and to the non-U.S. holder.
Copies of these information returns may be made available to the tax authorities in the country in which the
non-U.S. holder resides or is established. Payments of dividends to a non-U.S. holder generally will not be
subject to backup withholding if the non-U.S. holder establishes an exemption by properly certifying its non-
U.S. status on an IRS Form W-8BEN, IRS Form W-8BEN-E or other appropriate version of IRS Form W-8.
Payments of the proceeds from a sale or other disposition by a non-U.S. holder of our common stock effected
by or through a U.S. office of a broker generally will be subject to information reporting and backup
withholding (at the applicable rate) unless the non-U.S. holder establishes an exemption by properly
certifying its non-U.S. status on an IRS Form W-8BEN, IRS Form W-8BEN-E or other appropriate version of
IRS Form W-8 and certain other conditions are met. Information reporting and backup withholding generally
will not apply to any payment of the proceeds from a sale or other disposition of our common stock effected
outside the United States by a non-U.S. office of a broker. However, unless such broker has documentary
evidence in its records
Table of Contents
S-13
that the holder is not a United States person and certain other conditions are met, or the non-U.S. holder
otherwise establishes an exemption, information reporting will apply to a payment of the proceeds of the
disposition of our common stock effected outside the United States by such a broker if it has certain
relationships within the United States.
Backup withholding is not an additional tax. Rather, the U.S. income tax liability (if any) of persons subject to
backup withholding will be reduced by the amount of tax withheld. If backup withholding results in an
overpayment of taxes, a refund may be obtained, provided that the required information is timely furnished to
the IRS.
Additional Withholding Requirements under FATCA
Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code, and the Treasury regulations and administrative guidance issued
thereunder (“FATCA”), impose a 30 percent withholding tax on any dividends paid on our common stock and
on the gross proceeds from a disposition of our common stock (if such disposition occurs after December 31,
2018), in each case if paid to a “foreign financial institution” or a “non-financial foreign entity” (each as defined
in the Code) (including, in some cases, when such foreign financial institution or non-financial foreign entity is
acting as an intermediary), unless (i) in the case of a foreign financial institution, such institution enters into an
agreement with the U.S. government to withhold on certain payments, and to collect and provide to the U.S.
tax authorities substantial information regarding U.S. account holders of such institution (which includes
certain equity and debt holders of such institution, as well as certain account holders that are non-U.S.
entities with U.S. owners), (ii) in the case of a non-financial foreign entity, such entity certifies that it does not
have any “substantial United States owners” (as defined in the Code) or provides the applicable withholding
agent with a certification (in either case, generally on an IRS Form W-8BEN-E) identifying the direct and
indirect substantial United States owners of the entity, or (iii) the foreign financial institution or non-financial
foreign entity otherwise qualifies for an exemption from these rules and provides appropriate documentation
(such as an IRS Form W-8BEN-E). Foreign financial institutions located in jurisdictions that have an
intergovernmental agreement with the United States governing these rules may be subject to different rules.
Under certain circumstances, a holder might be eligible for refunds or credits of such taxes. For example, if a
dividend payment on our common stock is both subject to withholding under FATCA and subject to the
withholding tax discussed above under “—Distributions,” the withholding under FATCA may be credited
against, and therefore reduce, such other withholding tax.
INVESTORS CONSIDERING THE PURCHASE OF OUR COMMON STOCK ARE URGED TO CONSULT
THEIR OWN TAX ADVISORS REGARDING THE APPLICATION OF THE U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX
LAWS TO THEIR PARTICULAR SITUATIONS AND THE APPLICABILITY AND EFFECT OF U.S.
FEDERAL ESTATE AND GIFT TAX LAWS AND ANY STATE, LOCAL OR NON-U.S. TAX LAWS AND TAX
TREATIES.
S-14
Table of Contents
CERTAIN ERISA CONSIDERATIONS
The following is a summary of certain considerations associated with the purchase of our common stock by
employee benefit plans that are subject to Title I of the U.S. Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974, as amended (“ERISA”), plans, individual retirement accounts and other arrangements that are subject
to Section 4975 of the Code or provisions under any federal, state, local, non-U.S. or other laws or
regulations that are similar to such provisions of ERISA or the Code (collectively, “Similar Laws”), and entities
whose underlying assets are considered to include “plan assets” of any such plan, account or arrangement
(each, a “Plan”).
General Fiduciary Matters
ERISA and the Code impose certain duties on persons who are fiduciaries of a Plan subject to Title I of
ERISA or Section 4975 of the Code (an “ERISA Plan”) and prohibit certain transactions involving the assets
of an ERISA Plan and its fiduciaries or other interested parties. Under ERISA and the Code, any person who
exercises any discretionary authority or control over the administration of such an ERISA Plan or the
management or disposition of the assets of such an ERISA Plan, or who renders investment advice for a fee
or other compensation to such an ERISA Plan, is generally considered to be a fiduciary of the ERISA Plan.
In considering an investment in our common stock of a portion of the assets of any Plan, a fiduciary should
determine whether the investment is in accordance with the documents and instruments governing the Plan
and the applicable provisions of ERISA, the Code or any Similar Law relating to a fiduciary’s duties to the
Plan including, without limitation, the prudence, diversification, delegation of control and prohibited
transaction provisions of ERISA, the Code and any other applicable Similar Laws.
Prohibited Transaction Issues
Section 406 of ERISA and Section 4975 of the Code prohibit ERISA Plans from engaging in specified
transactions involving plan assets with persons or entities who are “parties in interest,” within the meaning of
ERISA, or “disqualified persons,” within the meaning of Section 4975 of the Code, unless an exemption is
available. A party in interest or disqualified person who engages in a non-exempt prohibited transaction may
be subject to excise taxes and other penalties and liabilities under ERISA and the Code. In addition, the
fiduciary of the ERISA Plan that engaged in such a non-exempt prohibited transaction may be subject to
penalties and liabilities under ERISA and the Code. The acquisition and/or holding of our common stock by
an ERISA Plan with respect to which we or the underwriters are considered a party in interest or a
disqualified person may constitute or result in a direct or indirect prohibited transaction under Section 406 of
ERISA and/or Section 4975 of the Code, unless the investment is acquired and is held in accordance with an
applicable statutory, class or individual prohibited transaction exemption. In this regard, the U.S. Department
of Labor has issued prohibited transaction class exemptions, or “PTCEs,” that may apply to the acquisition
and holding of our common stock. These class exemptions include, without limitation, PTCE 84-14
respecting transactions determined by independent qualified professional asset managers, PTCE 90-1
respecting insurance company pooled separate accounts, PTCE 91-38 respecting bank collective investment
funds, PTCE 95-60 respecting life insurance company general accounts and PTCE 96-23 respecting
transactions determined by in-house asset managers. In addition, Section 408(b)(17) of ERISA and Section
4975(d)(20) of the Code provide relief from the prohibited transaction provisions of ERISA and Section 4975
of the Code for certain transactions, provided that neither the issuer of the securities nor any of its affiliates
(directly or indirectly) have or exercise any discretionary authority or control or render any investment advice
with respect to the assets of any ERISA Plan involved in the transaction and provided further that the ERISA
Plan pays no more than adequate consideration in connection with the transaction. There can be no
assurance that all of the conditions of any such exemptions will be satisfied.
Because of the foregoing, our common stock should not be purchased or held by any person investing “plan
assets” of any Plan, unless such purchase and holding will not constitute a non-exempt prohibited transaction
under ERISA and the Code or similar violation of any applicable Similar Laws.
Table of Contents
S-15
UNDERWRITING
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC, Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated and J.P. Morgan
Securities LLC are acting as joint book-running managers of the offering and Credit Suisse Securities (USA)
LLC is acting as representative of the underwriters. We have entered into an underwriting agreement with the
underwriters. Subject to the terms and conditions of the underwriting agreement, we have agreed to sell to the
underwriters, and each underwriter has severally agreed to purchase, at the price per share set forth on the
cover page of this prospectus supplement, the number of shares of common stock listed next to its name in
the following table:
Name
Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC
Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith
Incorporated
J.P. Morgan Securities LLC
Barclays Capital Inc.
Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Wells Fargo Securities, LLC
BMO Capital Markets Corp.
Evercore Group L.L.C.
Piper Jaffray & Co.
Scotia Capital (USA) Inc.
Raymond James & Associates, Inc.
RBC Capital Markets, LLC
Tudor, Pickering, Holt, & Co. Securities, Inc.
UBS Securities LLC
Total
Number of Shares 
 
3,510,000
1,350,000  
1,350,000  
450,000  
450,000  
450,000  
180,000  
180,000  
180,000  
180,000  
180,000  
180,000  
180,000  
180,000  
 
9,000,000
The underwriters are committed to purchase all the common shares offered by us if they purchase any
shares. The underwriting agreement also provides that if an underwriter defaults, the purchase commitments
of non-defaulting underwriters may also be increased or the offering may be terminated. We have agreed to
indemnify the underwriters against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act.
The underwriters are purchasing the shares of common stock from us at $128.282 per share (representing
approximately $1,154.5 million aggregate proceeds to us, before we deduct our out-of-pocket expenses, or
approximately $1,327.7 million if the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares described below is
exercised in full). The underwriters may offer the shares of common stock from time to time for sale in one or
more transactions on the NYSE, in the over-the-counter market, through negotiated transactions or otherwise
at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, at prices related to prevailing market prices or at negotiated
prices. In connection with the sale of the shares of common stock offered hereby, the underwriters may be
deemed to have received compensation in the form of underwriting discounts. The underwriters may effect
such transactions by selling shares of common stock to or through dealers, and such dealers may receive
compensation in the form of discounts, concessions or commissions from the underwriters and/or purchasers
of shares of common stock for whom it may act as agent or to whom it may sell as principal. The underwriters
may also receive from purchasers of the shares normal brokerage commissions in amounts agreed with such
purchasers.
The underwriters have an option to buy up to 1,350,000 additional shares of common stock from us. The
underwriters have 30 days from the date of this prospectus supplement to exercise this option to purchase
additional shares of common stock. If any additional shares of common stock are purchased, the underwriters
will offer the additional shares on the same terms as those on which the shares are being offered.
Table of Contents
S-16
We estimate that the total expenses of this offering, including registration, filing and listing fees, printing fees
and legal and accounting expenses, but excluding the underwriting discounts and commissions, will be
approximately $350,000.
A prospectus supplement in electronic format may be made available on the websites maintained by one or
more underwriters, or selling group members, if any, participating in the offering. The underwriters may agree
to allocate a number of shares to underwriters and selling group members for sale to their online brokerage
account holders. Internet distributions will be allocated by the representative to underwriters and selling
group members that may make Internet distributions on the same basis as other allocations.
No Sales of Similar Securities
We, our executive officers and our directors have agreed not to sell or transfer any common stock or
securities convertible into, exchangeable for, exercisable for, or repayable with common stock, for 60 days
after the date of this prospectus supplement without first obtaining the written consent of Credit Suisse
Securities (USA) LLC. Specifically, we and these other persons have agreed, with certain limited exceptions,
not to directly or indirectly:
•
•
•
•
•
•
offer, pledge, announce the intention to sell, sell or contract to sell any common stock;
sell any option or contract to purchase any common stock;
purchase any option or contract to sell any common stock;
grant any option, right or warrant for the sale of any common stock;
otherwise transfer or dispose of any common stock;
request or demand that we file a registration statement related to any common stock; or
•
enter into any swap or other agreement that transfers, in whole or in part, the economic consequence
of ownership of any common stock whether any such swap or transaction is to be settled by delivery
of shares or other securities, in cash or otherwise.
However, notwithstanding this lock-up provision, we may, in connection with certain mergers and
acquisitions as set forth in the underwriting agreement, issue shares of common stock or any securities
convertible into or exercisable or exchangeable for shares of common stock or enter into any contract to issue
shares of common stock or any such securities not exceeding 10 percent of the number of shares outstanding
immediately after this offering (and any offering of additional shares issued upon any exercise of the
underwriters’ option); provided, that either (i) any such shares issued within the 60-day period referred to
above will be subject to such lock-up provision or (ii) such shares of common stock or securities shall not
actually be issued or issuable within such 60-day period. Additionally, pursuant to the underwriting
agreement, we may issue shares of common stock pursuant to the purchase and sale agreement relating to
the Acquisition.
This lock-up provision applies to common stock and to securities convertible into or exchangeable or
exercisable for or repayable with common stock. It also applies to common stock owned now or acquired later
by the person executing the agreement or for which the person executing the agreement later acquires the
power of disposition.
New York Stock Exchange Listing
The shares are listed on the NYSE under the symbol “CXO.”
Stabilization and Short Positions
In connection with this offering, the underwriters may engage in stabilizing transactions, which involves
making bids for, purchasing and selling shares of common stock in the open market for the purpose of
preventing
Table of Contents
S-17
or retarding a decline in the market price of the common stock while this offering is in progress. These
stabilizing transactions may include making short sales of the common stock, which involves the sale by the
underwriters of a greater number of shares of common stock than they are required to purchase in this
offering, and purchasing shares of common stock on the open market to cover positions created by short
sales. Short sales may be “covered” shorts, which are short positions in an amount not greater than the
underwriters’ option referred to above, or may be “naked” shorts, which are short positions in excess of that
amount. The underwriters may close out any covered short position either by exercising their option, in whole
or in part, or by purchasing shares in the open market. In making this determination, the underwriters will
consider, among other things, the price of shares available for purchase in the open market compared to the
price at which the underwriters may purchase shares through the option. A naked short position is more likely
to be created if the underwriters are concerned that there may be downward pressure on the price of the
common stock in the open market that could adversely affect investors who purchase in this offering. To the
extent that the underwriters create a naked short position, it will purchase shares in the open market to cover
the position.
The underwriters have advised us that, pursuant to Regulation M of the Securities Act, they may also engage
in other activities that stabilize, maintain or otherwise affect the price of the common stock, including the
imposition of penalty bids. This means that if the representative of the underwriters purchases common stock
in the open market in stabilizing transactions or to cover short sales, the representative can require the
underwriters that sold those shares as part of this offering to repay the underwriting discount received by
them.
These activities may have the effect of raising or maintaining the market price of the common stock or
preventing or retarding a decline in the market price of the common stock, and, as a result, the price of the
common stock may be higher than the price that otherwise might exist in the open market. If the underwriters
commence these activities, they may discontinue them at any time. The underwriters may carry out these
transactions on the NYSE, in the over-the-counter market or otherwise.
Other Relationships
The underwriters or their affiliates may be holders of the 7.0% Notes and, therefore, may receive a portion of
the net proceeds from this offering. See “Use of Proceeds.”
Certain of the underwriters and their affiliates act as administrative agent, lender, swingline lender and/or
letter of credit lender under the Company’s credit facility. In addition, certain of the underwriters and their
affiliates have provided in the past to us and our affiliates and may provide from time to time in the future
certain commercial banking, financial advisory, investment banking and other services for us and such
affiliates in the ordinary course of their business, for which they have received and may continue to receive
customary fees and commissions. In addition, from time to time, the underwriters and their affiliates may effect
transactions for their own account or the account of customers, and hold on behalf of themselves or their
customers, long or short positions in our debt or equity securities or loans, and may do so in the future.
Notice to Investors
Other than in the United States, no action has been taken by us or the underwriters that would permit a public
offering of the securities offered by this prospectus supplement in any jurisdiction where action for that
purpose is required. The securities offered by this prospectus supplement may not be offered or sold, directly
or indirectly, nor may this prospectus supplement or any other offering material or advertisements in
connection with the offer and sale of any such securities be distributed or published in any jurisdiction, except
under circumstances that will result in compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of that
jurisdiction. Persons into whose possession this prospectus supplement comes are advised to inform
themselves about and to observe any restrictions relating to the offering and the distribution of this prospectus
supplement. This prospectus supplement does not constitute an offer to sell or a solicitation of an offer to buy
any securities offered by this prospectus supplement in any jurisdiction in which such an offer or a solicitation
is unlawful.
Table of Contents
Canada
Resale Restrictions
S-18
The distribution of shares in Canada is being made only in the provinces of Ontario, Quebec, Alberta and
British Columbia on a private placement basis exempt from the requirement that we prepare and file a
prospectus with the securities regulatory authorities in each province where trades of these securities are
made. Any resale of the shares in Canada must be made under applicable securities laws which may vary
depending on the relevant jurisdiction, and which may require resales to be made under available statutory
exemptions or under a discretionary exemption granted by the applicable Canadian securities regulatory
authority. Purchasers are advised to seek legal advice prior to any resale of the securities.
Representations of Canadian Purchasers
By purchasing shares in Canada and accepting delivery of a purchase confirmation, a purchaser is
representing to us and the dealer from whom the purchase confirmation is received that:
•
•
•
•
the purchaser is entitled under applicable provincial securities laws to purchase the shares without
the benefit of a prospectus qualified under those securities laws as it is an “accredited investor” as
defined under National Instrument 45-106 — Prospectus Exemptions,
the purchaser is a “permitted client” as defined in National Instrument 31-103 — Registration
Requirements, Exemptions and Ongoing Registrant Obligations,
where required by law, the purchaser is purchasing as principal and not as agent, and
the purchaser has reviewed the text above under Resale Restrictions.
Conflicts of Interest
Canadian purchasers are hereby notified that Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC is relying on the exemption
set out in section 3A.3 or 3A.4, if applicable, of National Instrument 33-105 — Underwriting Conflicts from
having to provide certain conflict of interest disclosure in this document.
Statutory Rights of Action
Securities legislation in certain provinces or territories of Canada may provide a purchaser with remedies for
rescission or damages if the offering memorandum (including any amendment thereto) such as this document
contains a misrepresentation, provided that the remedies for rescission or damages are exercised by the
purchaser within the time limit prescribed by the securities legislation of the purchaser’s province or territory.
The purchaser of these securities in Canada should refer to any applicable provisions of the securities
legislation of the purchaser’s province or territory for particulars of these rights or consult with a legal advisor.
Enforcement of Legal Rights
All of our directors and officers as well as the experts named herein may be located outside of Canada and,
as a result, it may not be possible for Canadian purchasers to effect service of process within Canada upon
us or those persons. All or a substantial portion of our assets and the assets of those persons may be located
outside of Canada and, as a result, it may not be possible to satisfy a judgment against us or those persons in
Canada or to enforce a judgment obtained in Canadian courts against us or those persons outside of
Canada.
Taxation and Eligibility for Investment
Canadian purchasers of shares should consult their own legal and tax advisors with respect to the tax
consequences of an investment in the shares in their particular circumstances and about the eligibility of the
shares for investment by the purchaser under relevant Canadian legislation.
S-19
Table of Contents
United Kingdom
This document is only being distributed to and is only directed at (i) persons who are outside the United
Kingdom or (ii) investment professionals falling within Article 19(5) of the Financial Services and Markets
Act 2000 (Financial Promotion) Order 2005 (the “Order”) or (iii) high net worth entities, and other persons to
whom it may lawfully be communicated, falling with Article 49(2)(a) to (d) of the Order (all such persons
together being referred to as “relevant persons”). The securities are only available to, and any invitation, offer
or agreement to subscribe, purchase or otherwise acquire such securities will be engaged in only with,
relevant persons. Any person who is not a relevant person should not act or rely on this document or any of
its contents.
European Economic Area
In relation to each Member State of the European Economic Area which has implemented the Prospectus
Directive (each, a “Relevant Member State”), each underwriter has represented and agreed that with effect
from and including the date on which the Prospectus Directive is implemented in that Relevant Member State
it has not made and will not make an offer of common stock which are the subject of the offering contemplated
by this prospectus supplement to the public in that Relevant Member State other than:
•
•
to any legal entity which is a “qualified investor” as defined in the Prospectus Directive;
to fewer than 150 natural or legal persons (other than “qualified investors” as defined in the
Prospectus Directive), per Relevant Member State, subject to obtaining the prior consent of the
underwriters; or
•
in any other circumstances falling within Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive,
provided that no such offer of common stock shall result in a requirement for us or any underwriter to publish
a prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive or a supplemental prospectus pursuant to
Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive.
For the purposes of this provision, the expression an “offer of common stock to the public” in relation to any
common stock in any Relevant Member State means the communication in any form and by any means of
sufficient information on the terms of the offer and the common stock to be offered so as to enable an investor
to decide to purchase or subscribe for the common stock, as the same may be varied in that Relevant
Member State by any measure implementing the Prospectus Directive in that Relevant Member State. The
expression “Prospectus Directive” means Directive 2003/71/EC (as amended, including by Directive
2010/73/EU), and includes any relevant implementing measure in the Relevant Member State.
Switzerland
The shares may not be publicly offered in Switzerland and will not be listed on the SIX Swiss Exchange
(“SIX”) or on any other stock exchange or regulated trading facility in Switzerland. This document has been
prepared without regard to the disclosure standards for issuance prospectuses under art. 652a or art. 1156 of
the Swiss Code of Obligations or the disclosure standards for listing prospectuses under art. 27 ff. of the SIX
Listing Rules or the listing rules of any other stock exchange or regulated trading facility in Switzerland.
Neither this document nor any other offering or marketing material relating to the shares or the offering may
be publicly distributed or otherwise made publicly available in Switzerland.
Neither this document nor any other offering or marketing material relating to the offering, the Company, the
shares have been or will be filed with or approved by any Swiss regulatory authority. In particular, this
document will not be filed with, and the offer of shares will not be supervised by, the Swiss Financial Market
Supervisory Authority FINMA, and the offer of shares has not been and will not be authorized under the
Swiss Federal Act on Collective Investment Schemes (“CISA”). The investor protection afforded to acquirers
of interests in collective investment schemes under the CISA does not extend to acquirers of shares.
S-20
Table of Contents
Dubai International Financial Centre
This prospectus supplement relates to an Exempt Offer in accordance with the Offered Securities Rules of the
Dubai Financial Services Authority (“DFSA”). This prospectus supplement is intended for distribution only to
persons of a type specified in the Offered Securities Rules of the DFSA. It must not be delivered to, or relied
on by, any other person. The DFSA has no responsibility for reviewing or verifying any documents in
connection with Exempt Offers. The DFSA has not approved this prospectus supplement nor taken steps to
verify the information set forth herein and has no responsibility for this prospectus supplement. The shares to
which this prospectus supplement relates may be illiquid and/or subject to restrictions on their resale.
Prospective purchasers of the shares offered should conduct their own due diligence on the shares. If you do
not understand the contents of this prospectus supplement you should consult an authorized financial
advisor.
Australia
No placement document, prospectus, product disclosure statement or other disclosure document has been
lodged with the Australian Securities and Investments Commission, in relation to the offering. This
prospectus supplement does not constitute a prospectus, product disclosure statement or other disclosure
document under the Corporations Act 2001 (the “Corporations Act”), and does not purport to include the
information required for a prospectus, product disclosure statement or other disclosure document under the
Corporations Act.
Any offer in Australia of the shares may only be made to persons (the “Exempt Investors”) who are
“sophisticated investors” (within the meaning of section 708(8) of the Corporations Act), “professional
investors” (within the meaning of section 708(11) of the Corporations Act) or otherwise pursuant to one or
more exemptions contained in section 708 of the Corporations Act so that it is lawful to offer the shares
without disclosure to investors under Chapter 6D of the Corporations Act.
The shares applied for by Exempt Investors in Australia must not be offered for sale in Australia in the period
of 12 months after the date of allotment under the offering, except in circumstances where disclosure to
investors under Chapter 6D of the Corporations Act would not be required pursuant to an exemption under
section 708 of the Corporations Act or otherwise or where the offer is pursuant to a disclosure document
which complies with Chapter 6D of the Corporations Act. Any person acquiring shares must observe such
Australian on-sale restrictions.
This prospectus supplement contains general information only and does not take account of the investment
objectives, financial situation or particular needs of any particular person. It does not contain any securities
recommendations or financial product advice. Before making an investment decision, investors need to
consider whether the information in this prospectus supplement is appropriate to their needs, objectives and
circumstances, and, if necessary, seek expert advice on those matters.
Hong Kong
The shares have not been offered or sold and will not be offered or sold in Hong Kong, by means of any
document, other than (a) to “professional investors” as defined in the Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap.
571) of Hong Kong and any rules made under that Ordinance; or (b) in other circumstances which do not
result in the document being a “prospectus” as defined in the Companies Ordinance (Cap. 32) of Hong Kong
or which do not constitute an offer to the public within the meaning of that Ordinance. No advertisement,
invitation or document relating to the shares has been or may be issued or has been or may be in the
possession of any person for the purposes of issue, whether in Hong Kong or elsewhere, which is directed at,
or the contents of which are likely to be accessed or read by, the public of Hong Kong (except if permitted to
do so under the securities laws of Hong Kong) other than with respect to shares which are or are intended to
be disposed of only to persons outside Hong Kong or only to “professional investors” as defined in the
Securities and Futures Ordinance (Cap. 571) of Hong Kong and any rules made under that Ordinance.
Table of Contents
Japan
S-21
The shares have not been and will not be registered under the Financial Instruments and Exchange Law of
Japan (Law No. 25 of 1948, as amended) and, accordingly, will not be offered or sold, directly or indirectly, in
Japan, or for the benefit of any Japanese Person or to others for re-offering or resale, directly or indirectly, in
Japan or to any Japanese Person, except in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and ministerial
guidelines promulgated by relevant Japanese governmental or regulatory authorities in effect at the relevant
time. For the purposes of this paragraph, “Japanese Person” shall mean any person resident in Japan,
including any corporation or other entity organized under the laws of Japan.
Singapore
This prospectus supplement has not been registered as a prospectus with the Monetary Authority of
Singapore. Accordingly, this prospectus supplement and any other document or material in connection with
the offer or sale, or invitation for subscription or purchase, of the shares may not be circulated or distributed,
nor may the shares be offered or sold, or be made the subject of an invitation for subscription or purchase,
whether directly or indirectly, to persons in Singapore other than (i) to an institutional investor under Section
274 of the Securities and Futures Act, Chapter 289 of Singapore (the “SFA”), (ii) to a relevant person pursuant
to Section 275(1), or any person pursuant to Section 275(1A), and in accordance with the conditions
specified in Section 275, of the SFA, or (iii) otherwise pursuant to, and in accordance with the conditions of,
any other applicable provision of the SFA.
Where the shares are subscribed or purchased under Section 275 of the SFA by a relevant person which is:
(a) a corporation (which is not an accredited investor (as defined in Section 4A of the SFA)) the sole
business of which is to hold investments and the entire share capital of which is owned by one or
more individuals, each of whom is an accredited investor; or
(b) a trust (where the trustee is not an accredited investor) whose sole purpose is to hold investments
and each beneficiary of the trust is an individual who is an accredited investor,
securities (as defined in Section 239(1) of the SFA) of that corporation or the beneficiaries’ rights and interest
(howsoever described) in that trust shall not be transferred within six months after that corporation or that trust
has acquired the shares pursuant to an offer made under Section 275 of the SFA except:
(a)
to an institutional investor or to a relevant person defined in Section 275(2) of the SFA, or to any
person arising from an offer referred to in Section 275(1A) or Section 276(4)(i)(B) of the SFA;
(b) where no consideration is or will be given for the transfer;
(c) where the transfer is by operation of law;
(d) as specified in Section 276(7) of the SFA; or
(e) as specified in Regulation 32 of the Securities and Futures (Offers of Investments) (Shares and
Debentures) Regulations 2005 of Singapore.
Table of Contents
S-22
LEGAL MATTERS
Certain legal matters in connection with the common stock offered hereby will be passed upon by Vinson &
Elkins L.L.P., Houston, Texas, as our counsel. The validity of the common stock offered hereby will be
passed upon for the underwriters by Simpson Thacher & Bartlett LLP, New York, New York.
EXPERTS
The audited consolidated financial statements and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting incorporated by reference in this prospectus supplement and elsewhere in the
registration statement have been so incorporated by reference in reliance upon the reports of Grant Thornton
LLP, independent registered public accountants, upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and
auditing.
Certain estimates of our net oil and natural gas reserves and related information included or incorporated by
reference in this prospectus supplement have been derived from reports prepared by Cawley, Gillespie &
Associates, Inc. and Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc., independent petroleum engineers. All such
information has been so included or incorporated by reference on the authority of such firms as experts
regarding the matters contained in their reports.
Table of Contents
PROSPECTUS
S-23
Concho Resources Inc.
Debt Securities
Preferred Stock
Common Stock
Depositary Shares
Warrants
Guarantees of Debt Securities of Concho Resources Inc. by:
COG Acreage LP
COG Holdings LLC
COG Operating LLC
COG Production LLC
COG Realty LLC
Concho Oil & Gas LLC
Delaware River SWD LLC
Quail Ranch LLC
We may offer and sell the securities listed above from time to time in one or more offerings of one or more
classes or series. Any debt securities we offer pursuant to this prospectus may be fully and unconditionally
guaranteed by certain of our subsidiaries, including COG Acreage LP, COG Holdings LLC, COG Operating
LLC, COG Production LLC, COG Realty LLC, Concho Oil & Gas LLC, Delaware River SWD LLC and Quail
Ranch LLC.
This prospectus provides you with a general description of the securities that may be offered. Each time
securities are offered, we will provide a prospectus supplement and attach it to this prospectus. The
prospectus supplement will contain more specific information about the offering and the terms of the
securities being offered, including any guarantees by our subsidiaries. A prospectus supplement may also
add, update or change information contained in this prospectus. This prospectus may not be used to offer or
sell securities without a prospectus supplement describing the method and terms of the offering.
We may sell these securities directly or through agents, underwriters or dealers, or through a combination of
these methods. See “Plan of Distribution.” The prospectus supplement will list any agents, underwriters or
dealers that may be involved and the compensation they will receive. The prospectus supplement will also
show you the total amount of money that we will receive from selling the securities being offered, after the
expenses of the offering. You should carefully read this prospectus and any accompanying prospectus
supplement, together with the documents we incorporate by reference, before you invest in any of our
securities.
Investing in any of our securities involves risk. Please read carefully the information included and
incorporated by reference in this prospectus and in any applicable prospectus supplement for a
discussion of the factors you should consider before deciding to purchase our securities. See “Risk
Factors” beginning on page 5 of this prospectus.
Our common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “CXO.”
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission has approved
or disapproved of these securities or determined if this prospectus is truthful or complete. Any
representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
This prospectus is dated August 6, 2015.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
THE COMPANY
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
RISK FACTORS
RATIOS OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES AND EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES AND
PREFERRED STOCK DIVIDENDS
USE OF PROCEEDS
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
1  
     1  
     2  
     3  
     5
5  
     6  
     7  
    20  
    25  
    26  
    27  
    29  
    29
You should rely only on the information contained in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus and
any prospectus supplement. We have not authorized any dealer, salesman or other person to provide you
with additional or different information. If anyone provides you with different or inconsistent information, you
should not rely on it. This prospectus and any prospectus supplement are not an offer to sell or the solicitation
of an offer to buy any securities other than the securities to which they relate and are not an offer to sell or the
solicitation of an offer to buy securities in any jurisdiction to any person to whom it is unlawful to make an offer
or solicitation in that jurisdiction. You should not assume that the information contained in this prospectus is
accurate as of any date other than the date on the front cover of this prospectus, or that the information
contained in any document incorporated by reference is accurate as of any date other than the date of the
document incorporated by reference, regardless of the time of delivery of this prospectus or any sale of a
security.
Table of Contents
i
ABOUT THIS PROSPECTUS
This prospectus is part of a registration statement that we filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(the “SEC”), using a “shelf” registration process. Under this shelf registration process, we may offer and sell
any combination of the securities described in this prospectus in one or more offerings. This prospectus
provides you with a general description of the securities we may offer. Each time we sell securities, we will
provide you with a prospectus supplement that will contain specific information about the terms of the offering
and the offered securities. The prospectus supplement may also add, update or change information
contained in this prospectus. Any statement that we make in this prospectus will be modified or superseded
by any inconsistent statement made by us in a prospectus supplement.
Additional information, including our financial statements and the notes thereto, is incorporated in this
prospectus by reference to our reports filed with the SEC. Please read “Where You Can Find More
Information” below. You are urged to read this prospectus carefully, including “Risk Factors,” any prospectus
supplement and the documents incorporated by reference in their entirety before investing in our securities.
Unless the context requires otherwise or unless otherwise noted, all references in this prospectus or any
accompanying prospectus supplement to “Concho,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” or “our” are to Concho
Resources Inc. and its subsidiaries.
THE COMPANY
We are an independent oil and natural gas company engaged in the acquisition, development and
exploration of producing oil and natural gas properties. Our core operations are primarily focused in the
Permian Basin of Southeast New Mexico and West Texas. We refer to our three core operating areas as the
(i) New Mexico Shelf, where we primarily target the Yeso formation with horizontal and vertical development,
(ii) Delaware Basin, where we use horizontal drilling to target the Bone Spring formation (including the
Avalon Shale and the Bone Spring sands) and the Wolfcamp shale formation, and (iii) Texas Permian in the
Midland Basin, where we target the Wolfcamp and Spraberry formations with horizontal and vertical
development. We intend to grow our reserves and production through development drilling and exploration
activities on our multi-year project inventory and through acquisitions that meet our strategic and financial
objectives.
Our principal executive offices are located at One Concho Center, 600 W. Illinois Avenue, Midland, Texas
79701, and our telephone number at that address is (432) 683-7443. Our common stock is listed on the New
York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) under the symbol “CXO.”
Table of Contents
1
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and current reports and other information with the SEC (File No. 001-33615)
pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”). You may read and copy any
documents that are filed at the SEC’s public reference room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549.
You may also obtain copies of these documents at prescribed rates from the public reference section of the
SEC at its Washington address. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further information.
Our filings are also available to the public through the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” information that we file with it, which means that we can
disclose important information to you by referring you to documents previously filed with the SEC. The
information incorporated by reference is an important part of this prospectus, and the information that we later
file with the SEC will automatically update and supersede this information. The following documents that we
filed with the SEC pursuant to the Exchange Act are incorporated herein by reference:
•
•
•
•
our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, including information
specifically incorporated by reference into such Annual Report on Form 10-K from our Proxy Statement
for our 2015 Annual Meeting of Stockholders filed on April 21, 2015;
our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarterly periods ended March 31, 2015 and June 30, 2015;
our Current Reports on Form 8-K filed on January 5, 2015, March 3, 2015, April 9, 2015, and June 5,
2015 (excluding any information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 of any such Current Report
on Form 8-K); and
the description of our common stock contained in our registration statement on Form 8-A filed on July 23,
2007, including any amendment to that form that we may file in the future for the purpose of updating the
description of our common stock.
These reports contain important information about us, our financial condition and our results of operations.
All documents subsequently filed pursuant to Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act
(excluding any information furnished pursuant to Item 2.02 or Item 7.01 on any Current Report on Form 8-K)
before the termination of each offering under this prospectus shall be deemed to be incorporated in this
prospectus by reference and to be a part hereof from the date of filing of such documents. Any statement
contained herein, or in a document incorporated or deemed to be incorporated by reference herein, shall be
deemed to be modified or superseded for purposes of this prospectus to the extent that a statement contained
herein or in any subsequently filed document that also is or is deemed to be incorporated by reference herein,
modifies or supersedes such statement. Any such statement so modified or superseded shall not be deemed,
except as so modified or superseded, to constitute a part of this prospectus.
You may request a copy of these filings at no cost by writing or telephoning us at the following address and
telephone number:
Concho Resources Inc.
One Concho Center
600 W. Illinois Avenue
Midland, Texas 79701
Attention: General Counsel
(432) 683-7443
We also maintain a website at www.concho.com. However, the information on our website is not part of this
prospectus.
Table of Contents
2
CAUTIONARY STATEMENT REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Various statements and information contained in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus that
express a belief, expectation, or intention, or that are not statements of historical fact, are “forward-looking
statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 (the “Securities Act”) and
Section 21E of the Exchange Act. These forward-looking statements include statements, projections and
estimates concerning our operations, performance, business strategy, oil and natural gas reserves, drilling
program, capital expenditures, liquidity and capital resources, the timing and success of specific projects,
outcomes and effects of litigation, claims and disputes, derivative activities and potential financing. Forward-
looking statements are generally accompanied by words such as “estimate,” “project,” “predict,” “believe,”
“expect,” “anticipate,” “potential,” “could,” “may,” “foresee,” “plan,” “goal” or other words that convey the
uncertainty of future events or outcomes. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of performance. We
have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and assumptions about future
events and their potential effect on us. These statements are based on certain assumptions and analyses
made by us in light of our experience and our perception of historical trends, current conditions and expected
future developments as well as other factors we believe are appropriate under the circumstances. Actual
results may differ materially from those implied or expressed by any forward-looking statements. These
forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this prospectus, or if earlier, as of the date they were
made. We disclaim any obligation to update or revise these statements unless required by law, and we
caution you not to rely on them unduly. While our management considers these expectations and
assumptions to be reasonable, they are inherently subject to significant business, economic, competitive,
regulatory and other risks, contingencies and uncertainties relating to, among other matters, the risks
discussed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 and our subsequent
SEC filings, as well as those factors summarized below:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
declines in the prices we receive for our oil and natural gas;
uncertainties about the estimated quantities of oil and natural gas reserves;
drilling and operating risks, including risks related to properties where we do not serve as the operator;
the adequacy of our capital resources and liquidity including, but not limited to, access to additional
borrowing capacity under our credit facility;
the effects of government regulation, permitting and other legal requirements, including new legislation or
regulation of hydraulic fracturing and the export of oil and natural gas;
environmental hazards, such as uncontrollable flows of oil, natural gas, brine, well fluids, toxic gas or
other pollution into the environment, including groundwater contamination;
difficult and adverse conditions in the domestic and global capital and credit markets;
risks related to the concentration of our operations in the Permian Basin of Southeast New Mexico and
West Texas;
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
disruptions to, capacity constraints in or other limitations on the pipeline systems that deliver oil, natural
gas liquids and natural gas and other processing and transportation considerations;
the costs and availability of equipment, resources, services and personnel required to perform our drilling
and operating activities;
potential financial losses or earnings reductions from our commodity price management program;
risks and liabilities associated with acquired properties or businesses;
uncertainties about our ability to successfully execute our business and financial plans and strategies;
uncertainties about our ability to replace reserves and economically develop our current reserves;
general economic and business conditions, either internationally or domestically;
Table of Contents
3
•
•
competition in the oil and natural gas industry; and
uncertainty concerning our assumed or possible future results of operations.
Reserve engineering is a process of estimating underground accumulations of oil and natural gas that cannot
be measured in an exact way. The accuracy of any reserve estimate depends on the quality of available data,
the interpretation of such data and price and cost assumptions made by our reserve engineers. In addition,
the results of drilling, testing and production activities may justify revisions of estimates that were made
previously. If significant, such revisions would change the schedule of any further production and
development drilling. Accordingly, reserve estimates may differ from the quantities of oil and natural gas that
are ultimately recovered.
Table of Contents
4
RISK FACTORS
An investment in our securities involves a significant degree of risk. Before you invest in our securities you
should carefully consider those risk factors included in our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K, any
subsequently filed Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and any subsequently filed Current Reports on Form 8-K,
which are incorporated herein by reference, and those risk factors that may be included in any applicable
prospectus supplement, together with all of the other information included in this prospectus, any prospectus
supplement and the documents we incorporate by reference, in evaluating an investment in our securities. If
any of the risks discussed in the foregoing documents were to occur, our business, financial condition, results
of operations and cash flows could be materially adversely affected. Please read “Cautionary Statement
Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
RATIOS OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES AND EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES AND
PREFERRED STOCK DIVIDENDS
The following table contains our consolidated ratios of earnings to fixed charges and earnings to fixed
charges and preferred stock dividends for the periods indicated.
Six
Ratios of earnings to fixed charges(a)
Ratios of earnings to fixed charges and preferred stock
dividends(b)
Months
Ended
June 30,
2015
Years Ended December 31,
2014     2013     2012     2011     2010 
(c)    4.86      2.62      4.58      6.69      5.07
(c)    4.86      2.62      4.58      6.69      5.07
(a) The ratio has been computed by dividing earnings by fixed charges. For purposes of computing the ratio:
•   earnings include income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes, adjusted for interest
expense and the portion of rental expense deemed to be representative of the interest component of
rental expense; and
•   fixed charges consist of interest expense, capitalized interest and the portion of rental expense
deemed to be representative of the interest component of rental expense.
(b) The ratio has been computed by dividing earnings by fixed charges and preferred stock dividends. For
purposes of computing the ratio:
•   earnings include income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes, adjusted for interest
expense and the portion of rental expense deemed to be representative of the interest component of
rental expense; and
•   fixed charges and preferred stock dividends consist of interest expense, capitalized interest, the
portion of rental expense deemed to be representative of the interest component of rental expense
and preferred stock dividends.
(c) Due to our loss from continuing operations before income taxes for the six months ended June 30, 2015,
the ratio coverage was less than 1:1. To achieve ratio coverage of 1:1, we would have needed additional
earnings of approximately $181.9 million.
Table of Contents
5
USE OF PROCEEDS
Except as may otherwise be stated in any prospectus supplement, we intend to use the net proceeds from
any sales of securities by us under this prospectus for general corporate purposes, which may include
repayment or refinancing of borrowings, working capital, capital expenditures, investments and acquisitions.
Pending any specific application, we may initially invest funds in short-term marketable securities or apply
them to repayments of outstanding indebtedness.
Table of Contents
6
DESCRIPTION OF DEBT SECURITIES
The debt securities will be either our senior debt securities (“Senior Debt Securities”) or our subordinated
debt securities (“Subordinated Debt Securities,” and together with the Senior Debt Securities, “Debt
Securities”). The Senior Debt Securities and the Subordinated Debt Securities will be issued under separate
indentures among us, the Subsidiary Guarantors (as defined below) of such Debt Securities, if any, and a
trustee to be determined (the “Trustee”). Senior Debt Securities will be issued under a “Senior Indenture” and
Subordinated Debt Securities will be issued under a “Subordinated Indenture.” Together, the Senior
Indenture and the Subordinated Indenture are called “Indentures.”
The Debt Securities may be issued from time to time in one or more series. The particular terms of each
series that are offered by a prospectus supplement will be described in the prospectus supplement.
Unless the Debt Securities are guaranteed by our subsidiaries as described below, the rights of Concho and
our creditors, including holders of the Debt Securities, to participate in the assets of any subsidiary upon the
latter’s liquidation or reorganization, will be subject to the prior claims of the subsidiary’s creditors, except to
the extent that we may ourself be a creditor with recognized claims against such subsidiary.
We have summarized selected provisions of the Indentures below. The summary is not complete. The form of
each Indenture has been filed with the SEC as an exhibit to the registration statement of which this
prospectus is a part, and you should read the Indentures for provisions that may be important to you.
Capitalized terms used in the below summary but not otherwise defined herein have the meanings specified
in the Indentures.
General
The Indentures provide that Debt Securities in separate series may be issued thereunder from time to time
without limitation as to aggregate principal amount. We may specify a maximum aggregate principal amount
for the Debt Securities of any series. We will determine the terms and conditions of the Debt Securities,
including the maturity, principal and interest, but those terms must be consistent with the Indenture. The Debt
Securities will be our unsecured obligations.
The Subordinated Debt Securities will be subordinated in right of payment to the prior payment in full of all of
our Senior Debt (as defined in the Subordinated Indenture) as described under “— Subordination of
Subordinated Debt Securities” and in the prospectus supplement applicable to any Subordinated Debt
Securities. If the prospectus supplement so indicates, the Debt Securities will be convertible into our common
stock.
If specified in the prospectus supplement respecting a particular series of Debt Securities, certain
subsidiaries of Concho named herein (each a “Subsidiary Guarantor”) will fully and unconditionally
guarantee (the “Subsidiary Guarantee”) that series as described under “— Subsidiary Guarantee” and in the
prospectus supplement. Each Subsidiary Guarantee will be an unsecured obligation of the Subsidiary
Guarantor. A Subsidiary Guarantee of Subordinated Debt Securities will be subordinated to the Senior Debt
of the Subsidiary Guarantor on the same basis as the Subordinated Debt Securities are subordinated to our
Senior Debt.
The applicable prospectus supplement will set forth the price or prices at which the Debt Securities to be
issued will be offered for sale and will describe the following terms of such Debt Securities:
(1) the title of the Debt Securities;
(2) whether the Debt Securities are Senior Debt Securities or Subordinated Debt Securities and, if
Subordinated Debt Securities, the related subordination terms;
(3) whether any Subsidiary Guarantor will provide a Subsidiary Guarantee of the Debt Securities;
(4) any limit on the aggregate principal amount of the Debt Securities;
Table of Contents
7
(5) each date on which the principal of the Debt Securities will be payable;
(6) the interest rate that the Debt Securities will bear and the Interest Payment Dates for the Debt Securities;
(7) each place where payments on the Debt Securities will be payable;
(8) any terms upon which the Debt Securities may be redeemed, in whole or in part, at our option;
(9) any sinking fund or other provisions that would obligate us to redeem or otherwise repurchase the Debt
Securities;
(10) the portion of the principal amount, if less than all, of the Debt Securities that will be payable upon
declaration of acceleration of the Maturity of the Debt Securities;
(11) whether the Debt Securities are defeasible;
(12) any addition to or change in the Events of Default (as defined below);
(13) whether the Debt Securities are convertible into our common stock and, if so, the terms and conditions
upon which conversion will be effected, including the initial conversion price or conversion rate and any
adjustments thereto and the conversion period;
(14) any addition to or change in the covenants in the Indenture applicable to the Debt Securities; and
(15) any other terms of the Debt Securities not inconsistent with the provisions of the Indenture.
Debt Securities, including any Debt Securities that provide for an amount less than the principal amount
thereof to be due and payable upon a declaration of acceleration of the Maturity thereof (“Original Issue
Discount Securities”), may be sold at a substantial discount below their principal amount. Special United
States federal income tax considerations applicable to Debt Securities sold at an original issue discount may
be described in the applicable prospectus supplement. In addition, special United States federal income tax
or other considerations applicable to any Debt Securities that are denominated in a currency or currency unit
other than United States dollars may be described in the applicable prospectus supplement.
Subordination of Subordinated Debt Securities
The indebtedness evidenced by the Subordinated Debt Securities will, to the extent set forth in the
Subordinated Indenture with respect to each series of Subordinated Debt Securities, be subordinated in right
of payment to the prior payment in full of all of our Senior Debt, including the Senior Debt Securities, and it
may also be senior in right of payment to all of our Subordinated Debt. The prospectus supplement relating to
any Subordinated Debt Securities will summarize the subordination provisions of the Subordinated Indenture
applicable to that series including:
•
•
•
the applicability and effect of such provisions upon any payment or distribution respecting that series
following any liquidation, dissolution or other winding-up, or any assignment for the benefit of creditors or
other marshalling of assets or any bankruptcy, insolvency or similar proceedings;
the applicability and effect of such provisions in the event of specified defaults with respect to any Senior
Debt, including the circumstances under which and the periods during which we will be prohibited from
making payments on the Subordinated Debt Securities; and
the definition of Senior Debt applicable to the Subordinated Debt Securities of that series and, if the
series is issued on a senior subordinated basis, the definition of Subordinated Debt applicable to that
series.
Table of Contents
8
The prospectus supplement will also describe as of a recent date the approximate amount of Senior Debt to
which the Subordinated Debt Securities of that series will be subordinated.
The failure to make any payment on any of the Subordinated Debt Securities by reason of the subordination
provisions of the Subordinated Indenture described in the prospectus supplement will not be construed as
preventing the occurrence of an Event of Default with respect to the Subordinated Debt Securities arising
from any such failure to make payment.
The subordination provisions described above will not be applicable to payments in respect of the
Subordinated Debt Securities from a defeasance trust established in connection with any legal defeasance or
covenant defeasance of the Subordinated Debt Securities as described under “— Legal Defeasance and
Covenant Defeasance.”
Subsidiary Guarantee
If specified in the prospectus supplement, one or more of the Subsidiary Guarantors will guarantee the Debt
Securities of a series. Unless otherwise indicated in the prospectus supplement, the following provisions will
apply to the Subsidiary Guarantee of the Subsidiary Guarantor.
Subject to the limitations described below and in the prospectus supplement, one or more of the Subsidiary
Guarantors will jointly and severally, fully and unconditionally guarantee the punctual payment when due,
whether at Stated Maturity, by acceleration or otherwise, of all our payment obligations under the Indentures
and the Debt Securities of a series, whether for principal of, premium, if any, or interest on the Debt Securities
or otherwise. The Subsidiary Guarantors will also pay all expenses (including reasonable counsel fees and
expenses) incurred by the applicable Trustee in enforcing any rights under a Subsidiary Guarantee with
respect to a Subsidiary Guarantor.
In the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, a Subsidiary Guarantor’s Subsidiary Guarantee will be
subordinated in right of payment to the Senior Debt of such Subsidiary Guarantor on the same basis as the
Subordinated Debt Securities are subordinated to our Senior Debt. No payment will be made by any
Subsidiary Guarantor under its Subsidiary Guarantee during any period in which payments by us on the
Subordinated Debt Securities are suspended by the subordination provisions of the Subordinated Indenture.
Each Subsidiary Guarantee will be limited in amount to an amount not to exceed the maximum amount that
can be guaranteed by the relevant Subsidiary Guarantor without rendering such Subsidiary Guarantee
voidable under applicable law relating to fraudulent conveyance or fraudulent transfer or similar laws
affecting the rights of creditors generally.
Each Subsidiary Guarantee will be a continuing guarantee and will:
(1) remain in full force and effect until either (a) payment in full of all the applicable Debt Securities (or such
Debt Securities are otherwise satisfied and discharged in accordance with the provisions of the applicable
Indenture) or (b) released as described in the following paragraph;
(2) be binding upon each Subsidiary Guarantor; and
(3) inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by the applicable Trustee, the Holders and their successors,
transferees and assigns.
In the event that (a) a Subsidiary Guarantor ceases to be a Subsidiary, (b) either legal defeasance or
covenant defeasance occurs with respect to the series or (c) all or substantially all of the assets or all of the
Capital Stock of such Subsidiary Guarantor is sold, including by way of sale, merger, consolidation or
otherwise, such Subsidiary Guarantor will be released and discharged of its obligations under its Subsidiary
Guarantee without any further action required on the part of the Trustee or any Holder, and no other person
acquiring or
Table of Contents
9
owning the assets or Capital Stock of such Subsidiary Guarantor will be required to enter into a Subsidiary
Guarantee. In addition, the prospectus supplement may specify additional circumstances under which a
Subsidiary Guarantor can be released from its Subsidiary Guarantee.
Form, Exchange and Transfer
The Debt Securities of each series will be issuable only in fully registered form, without coupons, and, unless
otherwise specified in the applicable prospectus supplement, only in denominations of $1,000 and integral
multiples thereof.
At the option of the Holder, subject to the terms of the applicable Indenture and the limitations applicable to
securities in global form (“Global Securities”), Debt Securities of each series will be exchangeable for other
Debt Securities of the same series of any authorized denomination and of a like tenor and aggregate
principal amount.
Subject to the terms of the applicable Indenture and the limitations applicable to Global Securities, Debt
Securities may be presented for exchange as provided above or for registration of transfer (duly endorsed or
with the form of transfer endorsed thereon duly executed) at the office of the Security Registrar or at the office
of any transfer agent designated by us for such purpose. No service charge will be made for any registration
of transfer or exchange of Debt Securities, but we may require payment of a sum sufficient to cover any tax or
other governmental charge payable in that connection. Such transfer or exchange will be effected upon the
Security Registrar or such transfer agent, as the case may be, being satisfied with the documents of title and
identity of the person making the request. The Security Registrar and any other transfer agent initially
designated by us for any Debt Securities will be named in the applicable prospectus supplement. We may at
any time designate additional transfer agents or rescind the designation of any transfer agent or approve a
change in the office through which any transfer agent acts, except that we will be required to maintain a
transfer agent in each Place of Payment for the Debt Securities of each series.
If the Debt Securities of any series (or of any series and specified tenor) are to be redeemed in part, we will
not be required to (1) issue, register the transfer of or exchange any Debt Security of that series (or of that
series and specified tenor, as the case may be) during a period beginning at the opening of business 15 days
before the day of mailing of a notice of redemption of any such Debt Security that may be selected for
redemption and ending at the close of business on the day of such mailing or (2) register the transfer of or
exchange any Debt Security so selected for redemption, in whole or in part, except the unredeemed portion of
any such Debt Security being redeemed in part.
Global Securities
Some or all of the Debt Securities of any series may be represented, in whole or in part, by one or more
Global Securities that will have an aggregate principal amount equal to that of the Debt Securities they
represent. Each Global Security will be registered in the name of a Depositary or its nominee identified in the
applicable prospectus supplement, will be deposited with such Depositary or nominee or its custodian and
will bear a legend regarding the restrictions on exchanges and registration of transfer thereof referred to
below and any such other matters as may be provided for pursuant to the applicable Indenture.
Notwithstanding any provision of the Indentures or any Debt Security described in this prospectus, no Global
Security may be exchanged in whole or in part for Debt Securities registered, and no transfer of a Global
Security in whole or in part may be registered, in the name of any Person other than the Depositary for such
Global Security or any nominee of such Depositary unless:
(1) the Depositary has notified us that it is unwilling or unable to continue as Depositary for such Global
Security or has ceased to be qualified to act as such as required by the applicable Indenture, and in either
case we fail to appoint a successor Depositary within 90 days;
Table of Contents
10
(2) an Event of Default with respect to the Debt Securities represented by such Global Security has occurred
and is continuing and the Trustee has received a written request from the Depositary to issue certificated
Debt Securities;
(3) subject to the rules of the Depositary, we shall have elected to terminate the book-entry system through
the Depositary; or
(4) other circumstances exist, in addition to or in lieu of those described above, as may be described in the
applicable prospectus supplement.
All certificated Debt Securities issued in exchange for a Global Security or any portion thereof will be
registered in such names as the Depositary may direct.
As long as the Depositary, or its nominee, is the registered holder of a Global Security, the Depositary or such
nominee, as the case may be, will be considered the sole owner and Holder of such Global Security and the
Debt Securities that it represents for all purposes under the Debt Securities and the applicable Indenture.
Except in the limited circumstances referred to above, owners of beneficial interests in a Global Security will
not be entitled to have such Global Security or any Debt Securities that it represents registered in their
names, will not receive or be entitled to receive physical delivery of certificated Debt Securities in exchange
for those interests and will not be considered to be the owners or Holders of such Global Security or any Debt
Securities that it represents for any purpose under the Debt Securities or the applicable Indenture. All
payments on a Global Security will be made to the Depositary or its nominee, as the case may be, as the
Holder of the security. The laws of some jurisdictions may require that some purchasers of Debt Securities
take physical delivery of such Debt Securities in certificated form. These laws may impair the ability to
transfer beneficial interests in a Global Security.
Ownership of beneficial interests in a Global Security will be limited to institutions that have accounts with the
Depositary or its nominee (“participants”) and to persons that may hold beneficial interests through
participants. In connection with the issuance of any Global Security, the Depositary will credit, on its book-
entry registration and transfer system, the respective principal amounts of Debt Securities represented by the
Global Security to the accounts of its participants. Ownership of beneficial interests in a Global Security will
be shown only on, and the transfer of those ownership interests will be effected only through, records
maintained by the Depositary (with respect to participants’ interests) or any such participant (with respect to
interests of Persons held by such participants on their behalf). Payments, transfers, exchanges and other
matters relating to beneficial interests in a Global Security may be subject to various policies and procedures
adopted by the Depositary from time to time. None of us, the Subsidiary Guarantors, the Trustees or the
agents of us, the Subsidiary Guarantors or the Trustees will have any responsibility or liability for any aspect
of the Depositary’s or any participant’s records relating to, or for payments made on account of, beneficial
interests in a Global Security, or for maintaining, supervising or reviewing any records relating to such
beneficial interests.
Payment and Paying Agents
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, payment of interest on a Debt Security
on any Interest Payment Date will be made to the Person in whose name such Debt Security (or one or more
Predecessor Securities) is registered at the close of business on the Regular Record Date for such interest.
Unless otherwise indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, principal of and any premium and
interest on the Debt Securities of a particular series will be payable at the office of such Paying Agent or
Paying Agents as we may designate for such purpose from time to time, except that at our option payment of
any interest on Debt Securities in certificated form may be made by check mailed to the address of the
Person entitled thereto as such address appears in the Security Register. Unless otherwise indicated in the
applicable prospectus supplement, the corporate trust office of the Trustee under the Senior Indenture in The
City of New York will be designated as sole Paying Agent for payments with respect to Senior Debt
Securities of each series, and the
Table of Contents
11
corporate trust office of the Trustee under the Subordinated Indenture in The City of New York will be
designated as the sole Paying Agent for payment with respect to Subordinated Debt Securities of each
series. Any other Paying Agents initially designated by us for the Debt Securities of a particular series will be
named in the applicable prospectus supplement. We may at any time designate additional Paying Agents or
rescind the designation of any Paying Agent or approve a change in the office through which any Paying
Agent acts, except that we will be required to maintain a Paying Agent in each Place of Payment for the Debt
Securities of a particular series.
All money paid by us to a Paying Agent for the payment of the principal of or any premium or interest on any
Debt Security which remains unclaimed at the end of two years after such principal, premium or interest has
become due and payable will be repaid to us, and the Holder of such Debt Security thereafter may look only
to us for payment.
Consolidation, Merger and Sale of Assets
Unless otherwise specified in the prospectus supplement, we may not consolidate with or merge into, or
transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets to, any Person (a “Successor
Person”), and may not permit any Person to consolidate with or merge into us, unless:
(1) the Successor Person (if not us) is a corporation, partnership, trust or other entity organized and validly
existing under the laws of any domestic jurisdiction and assumes our obligations on the Debt Securities and
under the Indentures;
(2) immediately before and after giving pro forma effect to the transaction, no Event of Default, and no event
which, after notice or lapse of time or both, would become an Event of Default, has occurred and is
continuing; and
(3) several other conditions, including any additional conditions with respect to any particular Debt Securities
specified in the applicable prospectus supplement, are met.
The Successor Person (if not us) will be substituted for us under the applicable Indenture with the same effect
as if it had been an original party to such Indenture, and, except in the case of a lease, we will be relieved
from any further obligations under such Indenture and the Debt Securities.
Events of Default
Unless otherwise specified in the prospectus supplement, each of the following will constitute an “Event of
Default” under the applicable Indenture with respect to Debt Securities of any series:
(1) failure to pay principal of or any premium on any Debt Security of that series when due, whether or not, in
the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, such payment is prohibited by the subordination provisions of the
Subordinated Indenture;
(2) failure to pay any interest on any Debt Securities of that series when due, continued for 30 days, whether
or not, in the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, such payment is prohibited by the subordination
provisions of the Subordinated Indenture;
(3) failure to deposit any sinking fund payment, when due, in respect of any Debt Security of that series,
whether or not, in the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, such deposit is prohibited by the subordination
provisions of the Subordinated Indenture;
(4) failure to perform or comply with the provisions described under “— Consolidation, Merger and Sale of
Assets”;
12
Table of Contents
(5) failure to perform any of our other covenants in such Indenture (other than a covenant included in such
Indenture solely for the benefit of a series other than that series), continued for 60 days after written notice has
been given by the applicable Trustee, or the Holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the Outstanding
Debt Securities of that series, as provided in such Indenture;
(6) any Debt of ourself, any Significant Subsidiary or, if a Subsidiary Guarantor has guaranteed the series,
such Subsidiary Guarantor, is not paid within any applicable grace period after final maturity or is accelerated
by its holders because of a default and the total amount of such Debt unpaid or accelerated exceeds $20.0
million;
(7) any judgment or decree for the payment of money in excess of $20.0 million is entered against us, any
Significant Subsidiary or, if a Subsidiary Guarantor has guaranteed the series, such Subsidiary Guarantor,
remains outstanding for a period of 60 consecutive days following entry of such judgment and is not
discharged, waived or stayed;
(8) certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization affecting us, any Significant Subsidiary or, if a
Subsidiary Guarantor has guaranteed the series, such Subsidiary Guarantor; and
(9) if any Subsidiary Guarantor has guaranteed such series, the Subsidiary Guarantee of any such Subsidiary
Guarantor is held by a final non-appealable order or judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction to be
unenforceable or invalid or ceases for any reason to be in full force and effect (other than in accordance with
the terms of the applicable Indenture) or any Subsidiary Guarantor or any Person acting on behalf of any
Subsidiary Guarantor denies or disaffirms such Subsidiary Guarantor’s obligations under its Subsidiary
Guarantee (other than by reason of a release of such Subsidiary Guarantor from its Subsidiary Guarantee in
accordance with the terms of the applicable Indenture).
If an Event of Default (other than an Event of Default with respect to Concho Resources Inc. described in
clause (8) above) with respect to the Debt Securities of any series at the time Outstanding occurs and is
continuing, either the applicable Trustee or the Holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the Outstanding
Debt Securities of that series by notice as provided in the Indenture may declare the principal amount of the
Debt Securities of that series (or, in the case of any Debt Security that is an Original Issue Discount Security,
such portion of the principal amount of such Debt Security as may be specified in the terms of such Debt
Security) to be due and payable immediately, together with any accrued and unpaid interest thereon. If an
Event of Default with respect to Concho Resources Inc. described in clause (8) above with respect to the
Debt Securities of any series at the time Outstanding occurs, the principal amount of all the Debt Securities of
that series (or, in the case of any such Original Issue Discount Security, such specified amount) will
automatically, and without any action by the applicable Trustee or any Holder, become immediately due and
payable, together with any accrued and unpaid interest thereon. After any such acceleration, but before a
judgment or decree based on acceleration, the Holders of a majority in principal amount of the Outstanding
Debt Securities of that series may, under certain circumstances, rescind and annul such acceleration and its
consequences if all Events of Default with respect to that series, other than the non-payment of accelerated
principal (or other specified amount), have been cured or waived as provided in the applicable Indenture. For
information as to waiver of defaults, see “— Modification and Waiver” below.
Subject to the provisions of the Indentures relating to the duties of the Trustees in case an Event of Default
has occurred and is continuing, no Trustee will be under any obligation to exercise any of its rights or powers
under the applicable Indenture at the request or direction of any of the Holders, unless such Holders have
offered to such Trustee reasonable security or indemnity. Subject to such provisions for the indemnification of
the Trustees, the Holders of a majority in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of any series
will have the right to direct the time, method and place of conducting any proceeding for any remedy available
to the Trustee or exercising any trust or power conferred on the Trustee with respect to the Debt Securities of
that series.
13
Table of Contents
No Holder of a Debt Security of any series will have any right to institute any proceeding with respect to the
applicable Indenture, or for the appointment of a receiver or a trustee, or for any other remedy thereunder,
unless:
(1) such Holder has previously given to the Trustee under the applicable Indenture written notice of a
continuing Event of Default with respect to the Debt Securities of that series;
(2) the Holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of that series have
made written request, and such Holder or Holders have offered reasonable security or indemnity, to the
Trustee to institute such proceeding as trustee; and
(3) the Trustee has failed to institute such proceeding and has not received from the Holders of a majority in
principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of that series a direction inconsistent with such request
within 60 days after such notice, request and offer.
However, such limitations do not apply to a suit instituted by a Holder of a Debt Security for the enforcement
of payment of the principal of or any premium or interest on such Debt Security on or after the applicable due
date specified in such Debt Security or, if applicable, to convert such Debt Security.
We will be required to furnish to each Trustee annually a statement by certain of our officers as to whether or
not we, to their knowledge, are in default in the performance or observance of any of the terms, provisions
and conditions of the applicable Indenture and, if so, specifying all such known defaults.
Modification and Waiver
We may modify or amend an Indenture without the consent of any Holders of the Debt Securities in certain
circumstances, including:
(1) to evidence the succession under the Indenture of another Person to us or any Subsidiary Guarantor and
to provide for its assumption of our or such Subsidiary Guarantor’s obligations to Holders of Debt Securities;
(2) to make any changes that would add any additional covenants of us or the Subsidiary Guarantors for the
benefit of the Holders of Debt Securities or that do not adversely affect the rights under the Indenture of the
Holders of Debt Securities in any material respect;
(3) to add any additional Events of Default;
(4) to provide for uncertificated Debt Securities in addition to or in place of certificated Debt Securities;
(5) to secure the Debt Securities;
(6) to establish the form or terms of any series of Debt Securities;
(7) to evidence and provide for the acceptance of appointment under the Indenture of a successor Trustee;
(8) to cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency;
(9) to add Subsidiary Guarantors; or
(10) in the case of any Subordinated Debt Security, to make any change in the subordination provisions that
limits or terminates the benefits applicable to any holder of Senior Debt.
Other modifications and amendments of an Indenture may be made by us, the Subsidiary Guarantors, if
applicable, and the applicable Trustee with the consent of the Holders of not less than a majority in principal
Table of Contents
14
amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of each series affected by such modification or amendment;
provided, however, that no such modification or amendment may, without the consent of the Holder of each
Outstanding Debt Security affected thereby:
(1) change the Stated Maturity of the principal of, or any installment of principal of or interest on, any Debt
Security;
(2) reduce the principal amount of, or any premium or interest on, any Debt Security;
(3) reduce the amount of principal of an Original Issue Discount Security or any other Debt Security payable
upon acceleration of the Maturity thereof;
(4) change the place or currency of payment of principal of, or any premium or interest on, any Debt Security;
(5) impair the right to institute suit for the enforcement of any payment due on or any conversion right with
respect to any Debt Security;
(6) modify the subordination provisions in the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, or modify any conversion
provisions, in either case in a manner adverse to the Holders of the Subordinated Debt Securities;
(7) except as provided in the applicable Indenture, release the Subsidiary Guarantee of a Subsidiary
Guarantor;
(8) reduce the percentage in principal amount of Outstanding Debt Securities of any series, the consent of
whose Holders is required for modification or amendment of the Indenture;
(9) reduce the percentage in principal amount of Outstanding Debt Securities of any series necessary for
waiver of compliance with certain provisions of the Indenture or for waiver of certain defaults;
(10) modify such provisions with respect to modification, amendment or waiver; or
(11) following the making of an offer to purchase Debt Securities from any Holder that has been made
pursuant to a covenant in such Indenture, modify such covenant in a manner adverse to such Holder.
The Holders of not less than a majority in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of any series
may waive compliance by us with certain restrictive provisions of the applicable Indenture. The Holders of not
less than a majority in principal amount of the Outstanding Debt Securities of any series may waive any past
default under the applicable Indenture, except a default in the payment of principal, premium or interest and
certain covenants and provisions of the Indenture which cannot be amended without the consent of the
Holder of each Outstanding Debt Security of such series.
Each of the Indentures provides that in determining whether the Holders of the requisite principal amount of
the Outstanding Debt Securities have given or taken any direction, notice, consent, waiver or other action
under such Indenture as of any date:
(1) the principal amount of an Original Issue Discount Security that will be deemed to be Outstanding will be
the amount of the principal that would be due and payable as of such date upon acceleration of maturity to
such date;
(2) if, as of such date, the principal amount payable at the Stated Maturity of a Debt Security is not
determinable (for example, because it is based on an index), the principal amount of such Debt Security
deemed to be Outstanding as of such date will be an amount determined in the manner prescribed for such
Debt Security;
Table of Contents
15
(3) the principal amount of a Debt Security denominated in one or more foreign currencies or currency units
that will be deemed to be Outstanding will be the United States-dollar equivalent, determined as of such date
in the manner prescribed for such Debt Security, of the principal amount of such Debt Security (or, in the case
of a Debt Security described in clause (1) or (2) above, of the amount described in such clause); and
(4) certain Debt Securities, including those owned by us, any Subsidiary Guarantor or any of our other
Affiliates, will not be deemed to be Outstanding.
Except in certain limited circumstances, we will be entitled to set any day as a record date for the purpose of
determining the Holders of Outstanding Debt Securities of any series entitled to give or take any direction,
notice, consent, waiver or other action under the applicable Indenture, in the manner and subject to the
limitations provided in the Indenture. In certain limited circumstances, the Trustee will be entitled to set a
record date for action by Holders. If a record date is set for any action to be taken by Holders of a particular
series, only persons who are Holders of Outstanding Debt Securities of that series on the record date may
take such action. To be effective, such action must be taken by Holders of the requisite principal amount of
such Debt Securities within a specified period following the record date. For any particular record date, this
period will be 180 days or such other period as may be specified by us (or the Trustee, if it set the record
date), and may be shortened or lengthened (but not beyond 180 days) from time to time.
Satisfaction and Discharge
Each Indenture will be discharged and will cease to be of further effect as to all outstanding Debt Securities of
any series issued thereunder, when:
(1) either:
(a) all outstanding Debt Securities of that series that have been authenticated (except lost, stolen or
destroyed Debt Securities that have been replaced or paid and Debt Securities for whose payment money
has theretofore been deposited in trust and thereafter repaid to us) have been delivered to the Trustee for
cancellation; or
(b) all outstanding Debt Securities of that series that have been not delivered to the Trustee for cancellation
have become due and payable or will become due and payable at their Stated Maturity within one year or are
to be called for redemption within one year under arrangements satisfactory to the Trustee and in any case
we have irrevocably deposited with the Trustee as trust funds money in an amount sufficient, without
consideration of any reinvestment of interest, to pay the entire indebtedness of such Debt Securities not
delivered to the Trustee for cancellation, for principal, premium, if any, and accrued interest to the Stated
Maturity or redemption date;
(2) we have paid or caused to be paid all other sums payable by us under the Indenture with respect to the
Debt Securities of that series; and
(3) we have delivered an Officers’ Certificate and an Opinion of Counsel to the Trustee stating that all
conditions precedent to satisfaction and discharge of the Indenture with respect to the Debt Securities of that
series have been satisfied.
Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance
To the extent indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, we may elect, at our option at any time, to
have our obligations discharged under provisions relating to defeasance and discharge of indebtedness,
which we call “legal defeasance,” or relating to defeasance of certain restrictive covenants applied to the
Debt Securities of any series, or to any specified part of a series, which we call “covenant defeasance.”
Legal Defeasance. The Indentures provide that, upon our exercise of our option (if any) to have the legal
defeasance provisions applied to any series of Debt Securities, we and, if applicable, each Subsidiary
Guarantor will be discharged from all our obligations, and, if such Debt Securities are Subordinated Debt
Securities, the
Table of Contents
16
provisions of the Subordinated Indenture relating to subordination will cease to be effective, with respect to
such Debt Securities (except for certain obligations to convert, exchange or register the transfer of Debt
Securities, to replace stolen, lost or mutilated Debt Securities, to maintain paying agencies and to hold
moneys for payment in trust) upon the deposit in trust for the benefit of the Holders of such Debt Securities of
money or U.S. Government Obligations, or both, which, through the payment of principal and interest in
respect thereof in accordance with their terms, will provide money in an amount sufficient (in the opinion of a
nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants) to pay the principal of and any premium and
interest on such Debt Securities on the respective Stated Maturities in accordance with the terms of the
applicable Indenture and such Debt Securities. Such defeasance or discharge may occur only if, among
other things:
(1) we have delivered to the applicable Trustee an Opinion of Counsel to the effect that we have received
from, or there has been published by, the United States Internal Revenue Service a ruling, or there has been
a change in tax law, in either case to the effect that Holders of such Debt Securities will not recognize gain or
loss for federal income tax purposes as a result of such deposit and legal defeasance and will be subject to
federal income tax on the same amount, in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the
case if such deposit and legal defeasance were not to occur;
(2) no Event of Default or event that with the passing of time or the giving of notice, or both, shall constitute an
Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing at the time of such deposit or, with respect to any
Event of Default described in clause (8) under “— Events of Default,” at any time until 121 days after such
deposit;
(3) such deposit and legal defeasance will not result in a breach or violation of, or constitute a default under,
any agreement or instrument (other than the applicable Indenture) to which we are a party or by which we are
bound;
(4) in the case of Subordinated Debt Securities, at the time of such deposit, no default in the payment of all or
a portion of principal of (or premium, if any) or interest on any Senior Debt shall have occurred and be
continuing, no event of default shall have resulted in the acceleration of any Senior Debt and no other event
of default with respect to any Senior Debt shall have occurred and be continuing permitting after notice or the
lapse of time, or both, the acceleration thereof; and
(5) we have delivered to the Trustee an Opinion of Counsel to the effect that such deposit shall not cause the
Trustee or the trust so created to be subject to the Investment Company Act of 1940.
Covenant Defeasance. The Indentures provide that, upon our exercise of our option (if any) to have the
covenant defeasance provisions applied to any Debt Securities, we may fail to comply with certain restrictive
covenants (but not with respect to conversion, if applicable), including those that may be described in the
applicable prospectus supplement, and the occurrence of certain Events of Default, which are described
above in clause (5) (with respect to such restrictive covenants) and clauses (6), (7) and (9) under “— Events
of Default” and any that may be described in the applicable prospectus supplement, will not be deemed to
either be or result in an Event of Default and, if such Debt Securities are Subordinated Debt Securities, the
provisions of the Subordinated Indenture relating to subordination will cease to be effective, in each case with
respect to such Debt Securities. In order to exercise such option, we must deposit, in trust for the benefit of the
Holders of such Debt Securities, money or U.S. Government Obligations, or both, which, through the payment
of principal and interest in respect thereof in accordance with their terms, will provide money in an amount
sufficient (in the opinion of a nationally recognized firm of independent public accountants) to pay the
principal of and any premium and interest on such Debt Securities on the respective Stated Maturities in
accordance with the terms of the applicable Indenture and such Debt Securities. Such covenant defeasance
may occur only if we have delivered to the applicable Trustee an Opinion of Counsel to the effect that Holders
of such Debt Securities will not recognize gain or loss for federal income tax purposes as a result of such
deposit and covenant defeasance and will be subject to federal income tax on the same amount, in the same
manner and at the same times as would have been the case if such deposit and covenant defeasance were
not to occur, and the requirements set forth in clauses (2),
Table of Contents
17
(3), (4) and (5) above are satisfied. If we exercise this option with respect to any series of Debt Securities and
such Debt Securities were declared due and payable because of the occurrence of any Event of Default, the
amount of money and U.S. Government Obligations so deposited in trust would be sufficient to pay amounts
due on such Debt Securities at the time of their respective Stated Maturities but may not be sufficient to pay
amounts due on such Debt Securities upon any acceleration resulting from such Event of Default. In such
case, we would remain liable for such payments.
If we exercise either our legal defeasance or covenant defeasance option, any Subsidiary Guarantee will
terminate.
No Personal Liability of Directors, Officers, Employees and Stockholders
No director, officer, employee, incorporator, stockholder, member, partner or trustee of the Company or any
Subsidiary Guarantor, as such, shall have any liability for any obligations of the Company or any Subsidiary
Guarantor under the Debt Securities, the Indentures or any Subsidiary Guarantees or for any claim based on,
in respect of, or by reason of, such obligations or their creation. By accepting a Debt Security, each Holder
shall be deemed to have waived and released all such liability. The waiver and release shall be a part of the
consideration for the issue of the Debt Securities. The waiver may not be effective to waive liabilities under
the federal securities laws, and it is the view of the SEC that such a waiver is against public policy.
Notices
Notices to Holders of Debt Securities will be given by mail to the addresses of such Holders as they may
appear in the Security Register.
Title
We, the Subsidiary Guarantors, the Trustees and any agent of us, the Subsidiary Guarantors or a Trustee
may treat the Person in whose name a Debt Security is registered as the absolute owner of the Debt Security
(whether or not such Debt Security may be overdue) for the purpose of making payment and for all other
purposes.
Governing Law
The Indentures and the Debt Securities will be governed by, and construed in accordance with, the law of the
State of New York.
The Trustee
We will enter into the Indentures with a Trustee that is qualified to act under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939,
as amended (the “Trust Indenture Act”), and with any other Trustees chosen by us and appointed in a
supplemental indenture for a particular series of Debt Securities. We may maintain a banking relationship in
the ordinary course of business with our Trustee and one or more of its affiliates.
Resignation or Removal of Trustee. If the Trustee has or acquires a conflicting interest within the meaning of
the Trust Indenture Act, the Trustee must either eliminate its conflicting interest or resign, to the extent and in
the manner provided by, and subject to the provisions of, the Trust Indenture Act and the applicable
Indenture. Any resignation will require the appointment of a successor Trustee under the applicable Indenture
in accordance with the terms and conditions of such Indenture.
The Trustee may resign or be removed by us with respect to one or more series of Debt Securities and a
successor Trustee may be appointed to act with respect to any such series. The Holders of a majority in
aggregate principal amount of the Debt Securities of any series may remove the Trustee with respect to the
Debt Securities of such series.
Table of Contents
18
Limitations on Trustee if It Is Our Creditor. Each Indenture will contain certain limitations on the right of the
Trustee, in the event that it becomes our creditor, to obtain payment of claims in certain cases, or to realize on
certain property received in respect of any such claim as security or otherwise.
Certificates and Opinions to Be Furnished to Trustee. Each Indenture will provide that, in addition to other
certificates or opinions that may be specifically required by other provisions of an Indenture, every application
by us for action by the Trustee must be accompanied by an Officers’ Certificate and an Opinion of Counsel
stating that, in the opinion of the signers, all conditions precedent to such action have been complied with by
us.
Table of Contents
19
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
The following summary of our capital stock, Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Certificate of
Incorporation”) and Second Amended and Restated Bylaws (the “Bylaws”) does not purport to be complete
and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the provisions of applicable law and to our Certificate of
Incorporation and Bylaws.
Our authorized capital stock consists of 300,000,000 shares of common stock, $0.001 par value per share,
and 10,000,000 shares of preferred stock, $0.001 par value per share.
Common Stock
As of August 3, 2015, we had 120,301,994 shares of common stock outstanding, including 1,259,098 shares
of restricted stock. The shares of restricted stock have voting rights, rights to receive dividends and are
subject to certain forfeiture restrictions.
Our common stock commenced trading on the NYSE under the symbol “CXO” on August 3, 2007 in
connection with our initial public offering. As of August 3, 2015, there were approximately 1,133 holders of
record of our common stock.
Holders of our common stock are entitled to one vote for each share held on all matters submitted to a vote of
stockholders and do not have cumulative voting rights. Accordingly, holders of a majority of the shares of our
common stock entitled to vote in any election of directors may elect all of the directors standing for election.
Holders of our common stock are entitled to receive proportionately any dividends if and when such
dividends are declared by our board of directors, subject to any preferential dividend rights of preferred stock
that may be outstanding at the time such dividends are declared. Upon the liquidation, dissolution or winding
up of our company, the holders of our common stock are entitled to receive ratably our net assets available
after the payment of all debts and other liabilities and subject to the prior rights of any outstanding preferred
stock. Holders of our common stock have no preemptive, subscription, redemption or conversion rights. The
rights, preferences and privileges of holders of our common stock are subject to, and may be adversely
affected by, the rights of the holders of shares of any series of preferred stock that we may designate and
issue in the future.
We have not paid, and do not intend to pay in the foreseeable future, cash dividends on our common stock.
Covenants contained in our credit facility and the indentures governing our senior notes limit the payment of
dividends on our common stock. We currently intend to retain all future earnings to fund the development and
growth of our business. Any payment of future dividends will be at the discretion of our board of directors and
will depend on, among other things, our earnings, financial condition, capital requirements, level of
indebtedness, statutory and contractual restrictions applying to the payment of dividends and other
considerations that our board of directors deems relevant.
There are no redemption or sinking fund provisions applicable to our common stock. All outstanding shares
of our common stock are fully paid and non-assessable.
Preferred Stock
Under the terms of our Certificate of Incorporation, our board of directors is authorized to designate and issue
shares of preferred stock in one or more series without further vote or action by our stockholders. Our board of
directors has the discretion to determine the rights, preferences, privileges and restrictions, including voting
rights, dividend rights, conversion rights, redemption privileges and liquidation preferences, of each series of
Table of Contents
20
preferred stock. It is not possible to state the actual effect of the issuance of any shares of preferred stock
upon the rights of holders of the common stock until the board of directors determines the specific rights of the
holders of the preferred stock. However, these effects might include:
•
•
restricting dividends on the common stock;
diluting the voting power of the common stock;
•
•
impairing the liquidation rights of the common stock; and
delaying or preventing a change in control of our company.
We currently have no shares of preferred stock outstanding, and we have no present plans to issue any
shares of preferred stock.
Anti-Takeover Provisions of Our Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws
Our Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws contain several provisions that could delay or make more difficult
the acquisition of us through a hostile tender offer, open market purchases, proxy contest, merger or other
takeover attempt that a stockholder might consider in his or her best interest, including those attempts that
might result in a premium over the market price of our common stock.
Written Consent of Stockholders
Our Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws provide that any action required or permitted to be taken by our
stockholders must be taken at a duly called meeting of stockholders and not by written consent.
Special Meetings of Stockholders
Subject to the rights of the holders of any series of preferred stock, our Bylaws provide that special meetings
of the stockholders may only be called by the chairman of the board of directors or by the resolution of our
board of directors approved by a majority of the total number of authorized directors. No business other than
that stated in a notice may be transacted at any special meeting.
Advance Notice Procedure for Director Nominations and Stockholder Proposals
Our Bylaws provide that adequate notice must be given to nominate candidates for election as directors or to
make proposals for consideration at annual meetings of our stockholders. For nominations or other business
to be properly brought before an annual meeting by a stockholder, the stockholder must have delivered a
written notice to the Secretary of our company at our principal executive offices not less than 90 calendar
days nor more than 120 calendar days prior to the first anniversary of the date on which we first mailed our
proxy materials for the preceding year’s annual meeting; provided, however, that in the event that the date of
the annual meeting is more than 30 calendar days before or more than 30 calendar days after the first
anniversary of the date of the preceding year’s annual meeting, notice by the stockholder to be timely must be
so delivered not later than the close of business on the later of the 90th calendar day prior to such annual
meeting or the 10th calendar day following the calendar day on which public announcement, if any, of the
date of such meeting is first made by us.
Nominations of persons for election to our board of directors may be made at a special meeting of
stockholders at which directors are to be elected pursuant to our notice of meeting (i) by or at the direction of
our board of directors, or (ii) by any stockholder of our company who is a stockholder of record at the time of
the giving of notice of the meeting, who is entitled to vote at the meeting and who complies with the notice
procedures set forth in our Bylaws. In the event we call a special meeting of stockholders for the purpose of
electing one or more directors to our board of directors, any stockholder may nominate a person or persons
(as the case may be) for election to such position(s) if the stockholder provides written notice to the Secretary
of our
21
Table of Contents
company at our principal executive offices not earlier than the close of business on the 90th calendar day
prior to such special meeting, nor later than the close of business on the later of the 70th calendar day prior to
such special meeting or the 10th calendar day following the day on which public announcement, if any, is first
made of the date of the special meeting and of the nominees proposed by our board of directors to be elected
at such meeting.
These procedures may operate to limit the ability of stockholders to bring business before a stockholders
meeting, including the nomination of directors and the consideration of any transaction that could result in a
change in control and that may result in a premium to our stockholders.
Classified Board
Our Certificate of Incorporation divides our directors into three classes serving staggered three-year terms. As
a result, stockholders will elect approximately one-third of the board of directors each year. This provision,
when coupled with provisions of our Certificate of Incorporation authorizing only the board of directors to fill
vacant or newly created directorships or increase the size of the board of directors and provisions providing
that directors may only be removed for cause and then only by the holders of not less than 66 2⁄3% of the
voting power of all outstanding voting stock, may deter a stockholder from gaining control of our board of
directors by removing incumbent directors or increasing the number of directorships and simultaneously
filling the vacancies or newly created directorships with its own nominees.
Authorized Capital Stock
Our Certificate of Incorporation contains provisions that the authorized but unissued shares of common stock
and preferred stock are available for future issuance, subject to various limitations imposed by the NYSE.
These additional shares may be utilized for a variety of corporate purposes, including public offerings to raise
capital, corporate acquisitions and employee benefit plans. The existence of authorized but unissued shares
of common stock and preferred stock could make it more difficult or discourage an attempt to obtain control of
our company by means of a proxy contest, tender offer, merger or otherwise.
Amendment of Bylaws
Under Delaware law, the power to adopt, amend or repeal bylaws is conferred upon the stockholders. A
corporation may, however, in its certificate of incorporation also confer upon the board of directors the power
to adopt, amend or repeal its bylaws. Our Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws grant our board of directors
the power to adopt, amend and repeal our Bylaws on the affirmative vote of a majority of the directors then in
office. Our stockholders may adopt, amend or repeal our Bylaws but only at any regular or special meeting of
stockholders by the holders of not less than 66 2⁄3% of the voting power of all outstanding voting stock.
Certain Oil and Natural Gas Opportunities
Certain of our stockholders who received shares of common stock in connection with our formation and our
non-employee directors may from time to time have investments in other exploration and production
companies that may compete with us. Our Certificate of Incorporation and our Business Opportunities
Agreement provide a safe harbor under which these entities and directors may participate in the oil and gas
exploration, exploitation, development and production business without breaching their fiduciary duties as
controlling stockholders or directors. No participation is allowed with respect to:
•
any business opportunity that is brought to the attention of a covered individual or entity solely in such
person’s capacity as a director or officer of our company and with respect to which, at the time of such
presentment, no other covered individual or entity has independently received notice or otherwise
identified such opportunity; or
Table of Contents
22
•
any business opportunity that is identified by a covered individual or entity solely through the disclosure
of information by or on behalf of us.
The covered individuals and entities have no obligation to offer such opportunities to us, but interested
directors are required to disclose conflicts of interest. We are not prohibited from pursuing any business
opportunity with respect to which we have renounced any interest.
Limitation of Liability of Directors
Our Certificate of Incorporation provides that no director shall be personally liable to us or our stockholders for
monetary damages for breach of fiduciary duty as a director, except for liability as follows:
•
•
•
•
for any breach of the director’s duty of loyalty to us or our stockholders;
for acts or omissions not in good faith or which involve intentional misconduct or a knowing violation of
laws;
for unlawful payment of a dividend or unlawful stock purchase or stock redemption; and
for any transaction from which the director derived an improper personal benefit.
The effect of these provisions is to eliminate our rights and our stockholders’ rights, through stockholders’
derivative suits on our behalf, to recover monetary damages against a director for a breach of fiduciary duty
as a director, including breaches resulting from grossly negligent behavior, except in the situations described
above.
Delaware Takeover Statute
We are subject to Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law (“DGCL”), which prohibits a
Delaware corporation from engaging in any business combination with any interested stockholder for a
period of three years after the date that such stockholder became an interested stockholder, with the following
exceptions:
•
•
before such date, the board of directors of the corporation approved either the business combination or
the transaction that resulted in the stockholder becoming an interested stockholder;
upon completion of the transaction that resulted in the stockholder becoming an interested stockholder,
the interested stockholder owned at least 85% of the voting stock of the corporation outstanding at the
time the transaction began, excluding for purposes of determining the voting stock outstanding (but not
the outstanding voting stock owned by the interested stockholder) those shares owned (1) by persons
who are directors and also officers and (2) employee stock plans in which employee participants do not
have the right to determine confidentially whether shares held subject to the plan will be tendered in a
tender or exchange offer; or
•
on or after such date, the business combination is approved by the board of directors and authorized at
an annual or special meeting of the stockholders, and not by written consent, by the affirmative vote of at
least 66 2⁄3% of the outstanding voting stock that is not owned by the interested stockholder.
In general, Section 203 of the DGCL defines a business combination to include the following:
•
•
•
•
any merger or consolidation involving the corporation and the interested stockholder;
any sale, transfer, pledge or other disposition (in one transaction or a series of transactions) of 10% or
more of the assets of the corporation involving the interested stockholder;
subject to certain exceptions, any transaction that results in the issuance or transfer by the corporation of
any stock of the corporation to the interested stockholder;
any transaction involving the corporation that has the effect of increasing the proportionate share of the
stock or any class or series of the corporation beneficially owned by the interested stockholder; or
23
Table of Contents
•
the receipt by the interested stockholder of the benefit of any loss, advances, guarantees, pledges or
other financial benefits by or through the corporation.
In general, Section 203 of the DGCL defines an “interested stockholder” as an entity or person who, together
with the person’s affiliates and associates, beneficially owns, or within three years prior to the time of
determination of interested stockholder status did own, 15% or more of the outstanding voting stock of the
corporation.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The transfer agent and registrar for our common stock is American Stock Transfer & Trust Company.
Table of Contents
24
DESCRIPTION OF DEPOSITARY SHARES
We may offer depositary shares (either separately or together with other securities) representing fractional
interests in our preferred stock of any series. In connection with the issuance of any depositary shares, we
will enter into a depositary agreement with a bank or trust company, as depositary, which will be named in the
applicable prospectus supplement. Depositary shares will be evidenced by depositary receipts issued
pursuant to the related depositary agreement. If we elect to offer fractional interests in shares of preferred
stock to the public, we will deposit the preferred stock with the relevant preferred stock depositary and will
cause the preferred stock depositary to issue, on our behalf, the related depositary receipts. Subject to the
terms of the depositary agreement, each owner of a depositary receipt will be entitled, in proportion to the
fraction of a share of preferred stock represented by the related depositary share, to all the rights, preferences
and privileges of, and will be subject to all of the limitations and restrictions on, the preferred stock
represented by the depositary receipt (including, if applicable, dividend, voting, conversion, exchange
redemption and liquidation rights).
Table of Contents
25
DESCRIPTION OF WARRANTS
We may issue warrants for the purchase of our common stock. Warrants may be issued independently or
together with Debt Securities, preferred stock or common stock offered by any prospectus supplement and
may be attached to or separate from any such offered securities. Each series of warrants will be issued under
a separate warrant agreement to be entered into between us and a bank or trust company, as warrant agent,
all as set forth in the prospectus supplement relating to the particular issue of warrants. The warrant agent will
act solely as our agent in connection with the warrants and will not assume any obligation or relationship of
agency or trust for or with any holders of warrants or beneficial owners of warrants. The following summary of
certain provisions of the warrants does not purport to be complete and is subject to, and is qualified in its
entirety by reference to, all provisions of the warrant agreements.
You should refer to the prospectus supplement relating to a particular issue of warrants for the terms of and
information relating to the warrants, including, where applicable:
(1)
the number of shares of common stock purchasable upon exercise of the warrants and the price at
which such number of shares of common stock may be purchased upon exercise of the warrants;
(2)
the date on which the right to exercise the warrants commences and the date on which such right
expires (the “Expiration Date”);
(3) United States federal income tax consequences applicable to the warrants;
(4)
the amount of the warrants outstanding as of the most recent practicable date; and
(5) any other terms of the warrants.
Warrants will be offered and exercisable for United States dollars only. Warrants will be issued in registered
form only. Each warrant will entitle its holder to purchase such number of shares of common stock at such
exercise price as is in each case set forth in, or calculable from, the prospectus supplement relating to the
warrants. The exercise price may be subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of events described in such
prospectus supplement. After the close of business on the Expiration Date (or such later date to which we
may extend such Expiration Date), unexercised warrants will become void. The place or places where, and
the manner in which, warrants may be exercised will be specified in the prospectus supplement relating to
such warrants.
Prior to the exercise of any warrants, holders of the warrants will not have any of the rights of holders of
common stock, including the right to receive payments of any dividends on the common stock purchasable
upon exercise of the warrants, or to exercise any applicable right to vote.
Table of Contents
26
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
We may sell the offered securities in and outside the United States (1) through underwriters or dealers,
(2) directly to purchasers, including our affiliates and stockholders, (3) through agents or (4) through a
combination of any of these methods. The prospectus supplement will include the following information:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
the terms of the offering;
the names of any underwriters or agents;
the name or names of any managing underwriter or underwriters;
the purchase price of the securities;
the estimated net proceeds to us from the sale of the securities;
any delayed delivery arrangements;
any underwriting discounts, commissions and other items constituting underwriters’ compensation;
any discounts or concessions allowed or reallowed or paid to dealers; and
any commissions paid to agents.
Sale Through Underwriters or Dealers
If underwriters are used in the sale, the underwriters will acquire the securities for their own account for resale
to the public, either on a firm commitment basis or a best efforts basis. The underwriters may resell the
securities from time to time in one or more transactions, including negotiated transactions, at a fixed public
offering price or at varying prices determined at the time of sale. Underwriters may offer securities to the
public either through underwriting syndicates represented by one or more managing underwriters or directly
by one or more firms acting as underwriters. Unless we inform you otherwise in the prospectus supplement,
the obligations of the underwriters to purchase the securities will be subject to certain conditions. The
underwriters may change from time to time any offering price and any discounts or concessions allowed or
reallowed or paid to dealers.
During and after an offering through underwriters, the underwriters may purchase and sell the securities in the
open market. These transactions may include overallotment and stabilizing transactions and purchases to
cover syndicate short positions created in connection with the offering. The underwriters may also impose a
penalty bid, which means that selling concessions allowed to syndicate members or other broker-dealers for
the offered securities sold for their account may be reclaimed by the syndicate if the offered securities are
repurchased by the syndicate in stabilizing or covering transactions. These activities may stabilize, maintain
or otherwise affect the market price of the offered securities, which may be higher than the price that might
otherwise prevail in the open market. If commenced, the underwriters may discontinue these activities at any
time.
If dealers are used, we will sell the securities to them as principals. The dealers may then resell those
securities to the public at varying prices determined by the dealers at the time of resale. We will include in the
prospectus supplement the names of the dealers and the terms of the transaction.
Direct Sales and Sales Through Agents
We may sell the securities directly. In this case, no underwriters or agents would be involved. We may also
sell the securities through agents designated from time to time. In the prospectus supplement, we will name
any agent involved in the offer or sale of the offered securities, and we will describe any commissions
payable to the agent. Unless we inform you otherwise in the prospectus supplement, any agent will agree to
use its reasonable best efforts to solicit purchases for the period of its appointment.
Table of Contents
27
We may sell the securities directly to institutional investors or others who may be deemed to be underwriters
within the meaning of the Securities Act with respect to any sale of securities. We will describe the terms of
any such sales in the prospectus supplement.
Remarketing Arrangements
Offered securities may also be offered and sold, if so indicated in the applicable prospectus supplement, in
connection with a remarketing upon their purchase, in accordance with a redemption or repayment pursuant
to their terms, or otherwise, by one or more remarketing firms, acting as principals for their own accounts or as
agents for us. Any remarketing firm will be identified and the terms of its agreements, if any, with us and its
compensation will be described in the applicable prospectus supplement. Remarketing firms may be deemed
to be underwriters, as that term is defined in the Securities Act, in connection with the securities remarketed.
Delayed Delivery Contracts
If we so indicate in the prospectus supplement, we may authorize agents, underwriters or dealers to solicit
offers from certain types of institutions to purchase securities from us at the public offering price under
delayed delivery contracts. These contracts would provide for payment and delivery on a specified date in the
future. The contracts would be subject only to those conditions described in the prospectus supplement. The
prospectus supplement will describe the commission payable for solicitation of those contracts.
General Information
We may have agreements with the agents, dealers, underwriters and remarketing firms to indemnify them
against certain civil liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act, or to contribute with respect to
payments that the agents, dealers, underwriters or remarketing firms may be required to make. Agents,
dealers, underwriters and remarketing firms may be customers of, engage in transactions with, or perform
services for us in the ordinary course of their businesses.
Unless otherwise specified in the applicable prospectus supplement each series of securities will be a new
issue and will have no established trading market, other than our common stock, which is listed on the NYSE.
We may elect to list any series of securities on an exchange, but we are not obligated to do so.
Table of Contents
28
LEGAL MATTERS
Certain legal matters in connection with the securities will be passed upon by Vinson & Elkins L.L.P.,
Houston, Texas, as our counsel. Any underwriter or agent will be advised about other issues relating to any
offering by its own legal counsel.
EXPERTS
The audited consolidated financial statements and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting incorporated by reference in this prospectus and elsewhere in the registration
statement have been so incorporated by reference in reliance upon the reports of Grant Thornton LLP,
independent registered public accountants, upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and
auditing.
Certain estimates of our net oil and natural gas reserves and related information included or incorporated by
reference in this prospectus have been derived from reports prepared by Cawley, Gillespie & Associates, Inc.
and Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. All such information has been so included or incorporated by
reference on the authority of such firms as experts regarding the matters contained in their reports.
29
Table of Contents