
EX-99 3 ex99.htm PRESS RELEASE LITTLE SQUAW REPORTS DISCOVERY OF MORE
HIGH GRADE GOLD VEINS AT CHANDALAR
EXHIBIT 99.1
PRESS RELEASE 3-05
LITTLE SQUAW GOLD SECURES MILLION DOLLAR FINACING
Spokane, WA, November 28, 2005 - Little Squaw Gold Mining Company (LITS:OTC.BB) (the
Company)  is  pleased  announce  that  it  has  completed  a  US$  1,000,000  brokered  private
placement of its securities with RAB Special Situations (Master) Fund Limited (RAB-Special), a
hedge fund managed by RAB Capital PLC of London, England. RAB-Special is the Company’s
first institutional investor, and has also become its leading shareholder.
Little Squaw board chairman, Jim Duff, noted: “This is truly a seminal event in the long life of
Little  Squaw.  We  have  resurrected  this  Company  from  dormancy  two  years  ago,  we’ve  put
together a sterling management and board team, and we have now attracted our first institutional
capital.”
On November 21, 2005, Little Squaw and RAB-Special signed the agreement for the issuance of
6%  Convertible  Debentures  in  the  principal  amount  of  US$1,000,000  (the  “Debentures”)  and
2,500,000 Class A Warrants (the “Warrants”) to RAB-Special.  The Debentures are convertible
into  shares  of  Common  Stock,  US$0.10  par  value  (“Common  Shares”),  at  $0.20  per  share,
subject to certain adjustments.  Each Warrant is exercisable to acquire one Common Share (the
“Warrant Shares”), at an exercise price of  $0.30  per share  for a period of thirty-six months (36)
following the Closing Date (collectively the Debentures, the Common Shares, the Warrants and
the Warrant Shares are referred to as the "Securities").  The Debentures are due November 21,
2008.  The Company received $1,000,000 from RAB-Special on November 22, 2005.
The Subscription Agreement also requires Little Squaw to prepare and file with the Securities
and  Exchange  Commission  (“SEC”)  within  60  days  after  the  Closing  Date  a  registration
statement acceptable to the Subscriber (the “Registration Statement”) under the Securities Act of
1933, as amended, so as to permit a public offering and resale by RAB-Special of the Common
Shares acquirable upon conversion of the Debenture and exercise of the Warrants in the United
States by RAB-Special as selling stockholder and not as underwriter.  Little Squaw is subject to
additional obligations that are set forth in the Subscription Agreement.
In  connection  with  the  issuance  of  the  Debentures  and  pursuant  to  the  terms  of  a  Placement
Agent  Agreement,  Little  Squaw  has  paid  Strata  Partners,  LLC,  a  registered  broker-dealer  (the
“Agent”), an agent compensation fee of $100,000 and has issued the Agent Warrants exercisable
to acquire 500,000 shares of common stock on the same terms and with the same registration
rights as the warrants issued to RAB-Special.
The proceeds of the offering fulfill working capital needs and are intended to be used principally
for the exploration and development of the Company’s wholly-owned Chandalar, Alaska mining
property.
Additional funding is required to fulfill the Company’s plans for a 2006 summer field program on
Chandalar.  It  includes  an  aggressive  drilling  campaign  of  31  holes  on  eleven  targets,  and  is
budgeted at $1.7million.
The Company is looking to expand its capital reserves in the near term by further equity or debt
financings.
Information on the Company, its Chandalar property and the gold showings thereon is available
on the Company’s website at www.littlesquawgold.com. Additional information on the Company
and its plans may be found in the Company’s SEC filings, specifically its Form 10-KSB/A annual
report for 2004, which can also be accessed through the Company’s website.
Richard Walters, President of Little Squaw Gold Mining Company, is responsible for this news
release. For further information please contact Richard Walters at (509) 624-5831, or
ir@littlesquawgold.com.
About Little Squaw Gold: Little Squaw Gold Mining Company (OTCBB: LITS), is a 46 year-old,
publicly-traded junior mining company with new management, an infusion of capital, and a new
vision going forward. The company is committed to exploring and developing gold deposits on its
wholly-owned Chandalar property in Alaska. Over 84,000 ounces of recorded gold production
have been produced from the Chandalar district; additional production has gone unrecorded. The
Chandalar gold property is located approximately 190 miles north of Fairbanks and 48 miles
northeast of Coldfoot truck stop on the Dalton highway.  Some 30 high-grade gold-bearing quartz
veins and vein swarms have been identified on the Company’s mining claims.
About RAB Capital PLC (RAB): RAB is a pan-European fund management and investment firm
primary focused on hedge funds. Its principal activities are managing hedge funds and providing
advisory and distribution services to the hedge fund management industry. RAB manages some
of the world’s top-performing resource funds, one of which is the $600 million RAB Special
Situations (Master) Fund Limited.