
EX-99.1 3 ex99-1.htm PRESS RELEASE
Lucas Energy, Inc. 8-K
Exhibit 99.1
Carol Coale / Ken Dennard
Contacts:
Dennard ▪ Lascar Associates LLC
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
(713) 529-6600
LUCAS ENERGY ANNOUNCES FISCAL 2017 FIRST QUARTER RESULTS
HOUSTON, TEXAS – August 12, 2016-- Lucas Energy, Inc. (NYSE MKT: LEI) (“Lucas” or the
“Company”), an independent oil and gas company with its operations in central Texas, today
announced its first quarter results for the period ending June 30, 2016 and the filing of its
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2016, on August 12, 2016.
“With the shareholder vote on the proposed acquisition of oil and gas properties from a
consortium of sellers and Segundo Resources just a couple of weeks away, the recent financial
results will be less meaningful if the transaction is approved,” said Anthony C. Schnur, Chief
Executive Officer of Lucas Energy, who continued, “As previously disclosed, we entered into an
agreement last December to acquire the working interests in producing properties and
undeveloped acreage in Texas and Oklahoma that would add about 1,000 net barrels of
equivalent (BOE) oil production to our existing productive base if the deal is closed.
“As demonstrated in the current quarterly financial results, we continue to diligently reduce our
overhead and operating costs, excluding the impact of transaction costs associated with our
acquisition. We resumed our workover program in late June as we returned several shut-in wells
back into service, and we saw a resulting uptick in our production volumes. We expect to see an
increase in production from our legacy wells continue throughout the remainder of this year.
Going forward, our outlook for the Company as outlined in our year-end earnings release that we
published on July 13, 2016, remains unchanged. We are excited about the course we have
chosen, and we are eager to bring it to a close.”
Fiscal 2017 First Quarter Results
For the three months ending June 30, 2016, Lucas reported a fiscal year net loss of $1.4 million,
or a loss of ($0.80) per share, compared to a net loss of $1.0 million or loss of ($0.73) per share in
the three months ending June 30, 2015. The net loss increased primarily because of a $0.2
million decrease in sales revenues and an increase of $0.1 million in operating expense.
Total revenues from the sale of crude oil for the fiscal 2017 first quarter were $0.15 million
compared to $0.39 million in the same period a year ago largely reflecting a 24% drop in the
price of crude oil coupled with a 49% decline in crude oil volumes. The decline in crude oil prices
reduced revenues by approximately $0.09 million and the lower production volumes reduced
revenues by another $0.15 million when compared with the same period last year. The Company
has implemented several workover plans in the later part of the current reporting period in order
to get these wells on-line and increase production flows, funding permitting. Additional
production declines can be attributed to workover drilling and lateral programs with higher front-
end production in the prior reporting period coupled with interference from offset activity in the
current period.
Lease operating expenses of $0.28 million for the fiscal 2017 first quarter increased by $0.11
million from $0.16 million for the same period a year ago, principally because several workovers
were completed in the current quarter. The Company implemented the workover programs in the
later part of the fiscal 2017 first quarter in order to address wells that had been shut-in for a
significant period of time. As a result of these workovers, production volumes rose in the latter
part of the quarter and are expected to continue to increase over the next few quarters.
General and administrative (G&A) expenses (excluding share-based compensation) increased
by approximately $0.12 million in the fiscal 2017 first quarter compared to the prior year’s first
quarter primarily related to transaction costs associated with the pending Segundo acquisition.
Excluding those transaction costs, certain other G&A expenses have decreased significantly,
reflecting improved efficiencies in daily operating activities as a result of internal restructuring
initiatives. Share-based compensation also decreased, by about 30%, reflecting cuts in
employee stock-based options and compensation. Last year’s expenses included $0.3 million of
legal expenses, investment banking fees and other transaction costs related to strategic
initiatives that were subsequently abandoned.
Depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion (DD&A) expense decreased for the current
quarter as compared to the prior year period by approximately $0.1 million primarily related to
lower production volumes of 3,428 BOE compared to the previous period. The production
decrease was primarily due to numerous wells being shut-in during the early part of current
reporting period and drilling and lateral programs with higher front-end production when
compared to the prior period.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA   
Three Months Ending 06/30/2016  
INCOME STATEMENT ($000s)
Net Operating Revenues
Operating Expenses
  Lease Operating Expense
  G&A
  Other Operating Expenses
    Total Operating Expense
06/30/2016    06/30/2015 
 $ 153
 
 
  
 
   276
 
   658
   161
 
 
   1,095
$ 394
   
    163
    550
    313
    1,026
Interest Expense & Other
 
Net Loss, reported
About Lucas Energy, Inc.
(428
  
 ($1,370
)   (400
   
) ($1,032
)
 
)
Based in Houston, Texas, Lucas Energy (NYSE MKT: LEI) is a growth-oriented, independent oil
and gas company engaged in the development of crude oil and natural gas in the Austin Chalk
and Eagle Ford formations in South Texas.
For more information, please visit the updated Lucas Energy web site at www.lucasenergy.com.
Safe Harbor Statement and Disclaimer
This news release includes “forward looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of
the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended. Forward looking statements give our current expectations, opinions, belief or
forecasts of future events and performance. A statement identified by the use of forward looking
words including “may,” “expects,” “projects,” “anticipates,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimate,” “should,”
and certain of the other foregoing statements may be deemed forward-looking statements.
Although Lucas believes that the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are
reasonable, these statements involve risks and uncertainties that may cause actual future
activities and results to be materially different from those suggested or described in this news
release. These include risks inherent in natural gas and oil drilling and production activities,
including risks of fire, explosion, blowouts, pipe failure, casing collapse, unusual or unexpected
formation pressures, environmental hazards, and other operating and production risks, which
may temporarily or permanently reduce production or cause initial production or test results to not
be indicative of future well performance or delay the timing of sales or completion of drilling
operations; delays in receipt of drilling permits; risks with respect to natural gas and oil prices, a
material decline which could cause Lucas to delay or suspend planned drilling operations or
reduce production levels; risks relating to the availability of capital to fund drilling operations that
can be adversely affected by adverse drilling results, production declines and declines in natural
gas and oil prices; risks relating to unexpected adverse developments in the status of properties;
risks relating to the absence or delay in receipt of government approvals or fourth party consents;
and other risks described in Lucas’s Annual Report on Form 10-K and other filings with the SEC,
available at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Investors are cautioned that any forward-looking
statements are not guarantees of future performance and actual results or developments may
differ materially from those projected. The forward-looking statements in this press release are
made as of the date hereof. The Company takes no obligation to update or correct its own
forward-looking statements, except as required by law, or those prepared by third parties that are
not paid for by the Company. The Company's SEC filings are available at http://www.sec.gov.