
ASX/MEDIA	RELEASE
5	SEPTEMBER	2016
APPOINTMENT	OF	NEW	CHAIRMAN
The	Board	of	Directors	of	Liquefied	Natural	Gas	Limited	(ASX:	LNG,	OTC	ADR:	LNGLY)	(LNGL	
or	the	Company)	is	pleased	to	announce	that	it	has	appointed	Non-Executive	Director	Mr	
Paul	Cavicchi	as	chairman	of	the	LNGL	Board	effective	at	the	close	of	the	Annual	General	
Meeting	 on	 17	 November	 2016.	 The	 current	 Chairman,	 Mr	 Richard	 Beresford,	 will	 step	
down	as	Chairman	and	remain	on	the	LNGL	Board	as	Non-Executive	Director.	
Mr	 Cavicchi	 is	 based	 in	 Houston	 and	 will	 be	 able	 to	 directly	 provide	 assistance	 with	 the	
North	American	development	and	operational	efforts.		Houston	is	the	location	of	the	North	
American	headquarters	of	LNGL.			
Mr	 Cavicchi	 has	 over	 30	 years’	 experience	 in	 the	 international	 energy	 industry	 across	 a	
range	 of	 natural	 gas	 and	 power	 projects,	 including	 development	 and	 construction	 of	 LNG	
infrastructure.	His	most	recent	position	was	Executive	Vice	President	of	GDF	SUEZ	Energy	
North	 America,	 Inc.	 (GSENA),	 a	 subsidiary	 of	 GDF	 SUEZ	 Energy	 International,	 where	 he	
supervised	and	directed	all	business	development	and	construction	efforts	for	GSENA	in	the	
United	 States,	 Canada	 and	 Mexico.	 Previously,	 he	 held	 the	 roles	 of	 President	 and	 CEO	 of	
SUEZ	 Renewable	 Energy	 NA,	 LLC,	 and	 before	 that	 President	 and	 CEO	 of	 SUEZ	 Energy	
Generation	North	America,	Inc.		Mr	Cavicchi	joined	the	LNGL	Board	in	October	2014.
Mr	 Richard	 Beresford	 stated,	 "We	 are	 delighted	 to	 welcome	 Mr	 Cavicchi	 as	 our	 new	
Chairman	 and	 we	 believe	 that,	 with	 his	 extensive	 experience	 in	 international	 energy	
industry	and	commitment	to	governance	best	practice,	he	is	an	excellent	choice	to	step	in	as	
Chairman."	
LNGL’s	 Managing	 Director	 and	 Chief	 Executive	 Officer	 Mr	 Greg	 Vesey	 said,	 "The	 Board	
wishes	to	thank	Richard	for	his	guidance,	leadership	and	commitment	as	Chair	of	the	Board	
since	2010,	and	is	pleased	that	the	Company	will	continue	to	benefit	from	Richard's	30-plus	
years	of	experience	in	the	international	energy	industry	through	his	ongoing	Non-Executive	
Directorship."	
ABOUT	LIQUEFIED	NATURAL	GAS	LIMITED	
LNGL	is	an	ASX	listed	company	(Code:	LNG	and	OTC	ADR:	LNGLY)	whose	portfolio	consists	of	
100%	ownership	of	the	following	companies:
1
•  Magnolia	 LNG,	 LLC	 (Magnolia	 LNG),	 a	 US-based	 subsidiary,	 which	 is	 developing	 an	 8
mtpa	or	greater	LNG	export	terminal,	in	the	Port	of	Lake	Charles,	Louisiana,	USA;
•  Bear	Head	LNG	Corporation	Inc.	(Bear	Head	LNG),	a	Canadian	based	subsidiary,	which	is	
developing	an	8	mtpa	or	greater	LNG	export	terminal	in	Richmond	County,	Nova	Scotia,	
Canada	with	potential	for	further	expansion;
•  Bear	 Paw	 Pipeline	 Corporation	 Inc.	 (Bear	 Paw),	 proposing	 to	 construct	 and	 operate	 a
62.5	km	gas	pipeline	lateral	to	connect	gas	supply	to	Bear	Head	LNG;
•  Gladstone	LNG	Pty	Ltd,	a	subsidiary	which	plans	to	develop	the	3.5	mtpa	Fisherman’s
Landing	LNG	(FLLNG)	project	at	the	Port	of	Gladstone	in	Queensland,	Australia;	and
•  LNG	Technology	Pty	Ltd,	a	subsidiary	which	owns	and	develops	the	Company’s	OSMR®	
LNG	 liquefaction	 process,	 a	 mid-scale	 LNG	 business	 model	 that	 plans	 to	 deliver	 lower	
capital	 and	 operating	 costs,	 faster	 construction,	 and	 improved	 efficiency,	 relative	 to	
larger	traditional	LNG	projects.
For	further	information	contact:		
	
Mr	Richard	Beresford															
Chairman																				
LNG	Limited																																								
+61	8	9366	3700
Liquefied	Natural	Gas	Limited
Email:	LNG@LNGLimited.com.au		Website:	www.LNGLimited.com.au
Level	1,	10	Ord	Street,	West	Perth	WA	6005
Telephone:	(08)	9366	3700	Facsimile:	(08)	9366	3799
Mr	Greg	Vesey																	
Managing	Director	&	CEO									
LNG	Limited																																																													
+1	713	815	6900
Disclaimer	
Forward-looking	statements	may	be	set	out	within	this	correspondence.	Such	statements	are	only	predictions,	and	actual	events	or	results	
may	differ	materially.			Please	refer	to	our	forward-looking	statement	disclosure	contained	on	our	website	at	www.LNGLimited.com.au	and	
to	the	Company’s	Annual	Report	and	Accounts	for	a	discussion	of	important	factors	that	could	cause	actual	results	to	differ	from	these	
forward-looking	statements.	The	Company	does	not	undertake	any	obligation	to	update	publicly,	or	revise,	forward-looking	statements,	
whether	as	a	result	of	new	information,	future	events	or	otherwise,	except	to	the	extent	legally	required.