
S-3/A 1 v028374_s3a.htm Unassociated Document
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on November 4, 2005
Registration No. 333-127824
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
____________________
AMENDMENT NO. 3 TO
FORM S-3
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
Under
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
____________________
HARKEN ENERGY CORPORATION
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
(State or other jurisdiction
of incorporation or organization)
95-2841597
(I.R.S. employer
identification number)
180 State Street, Suite 200
Southlake, Texas 76092
(817) 424-2424
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including
area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)
Elmer A. Johnston
Vice President, Secretary and
General Counsel
Harken Energy Corporation
180 State Street, Suite 200
Southlake, Texas 76092
(817) 424-2424
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number,
including area code, of agent for service)
Copy to:
William A. Newman
McGuire Woods LLP
1345 Avenue of the Americas, Seventh Floor
New York, New York 10105-0106
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public: From time to time as
the selling stockholders may decide.
If the only  securities  being  registered  on  this  Form  are  being  offered  pursuant  to dividend  or
interest reinvestment plans, please check the following box: ¨ 
 
If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous
basis pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933, other than securities offered only in
connection with dividend or interest reinvestment plans, check the following box: x 
 
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under
the Securities Act, please check the following box and list the Securities Act registration
statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. ¨ 
 
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act,
check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier
effective registration statement for the same offering. ¨ 
 
If delivery of the prospectus is expected to be made pursuant to Rule 434, please check the
following box. ¨ 
The Registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may
be necessary to delay its effective date until the Registrant shall file a further amendment
which specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective
in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 or until this Registration
Statement shall become effective on such date as the Securities and Exchange
Commission, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not sell
these  securities  until  the  registration  statement  filed  with  the  Securities and  Exchange
Commission is effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is
not  soliciting  an  offer  to  buy  these  securities in any state where the offer or sale is not
permitted.
Subject to Completion. Dated November 4, 2005
PROSPECTUS
____________________
COMMON STOCK
($.01 par value)
____________________
We have prepared this prospectus to allow the selling stockholders to sell up to an aggregate of
20,197,246 shares of our common stock:
·  issuable upon conversion of our Series M Convertible Preferred Shares;
 
·  issuable upon declaration of a dividend on the Series M Convertible Preferred Shares;
 
·  issuable upon exercise of warrants to purchase our common stock issued in connection with
the Series M Convertible Preferred Shares and Series L Convertible Preferred Shares; and
 
·  issued as a bonus dividend to participating holders of our Series G1 and G2 Convertible
Preferred Shares.
W e w i l l not  receive  any  of  the  proceeds  from  the  sale  of  common  stock  by  the  selling
stockholders.
The selling stockholders have advised us that they will sell the shares from time to time in the
open  market,  on  the  American  Stock  Exchange,  in  privately  negotiated transactions  or  a
combination of these methods, at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, at prices related to
the  prevailing  market  prices,  at negotiated  prices,  or  otherwise  as  described  under  “Plan  of
Distribution.” We will pay all expenses of registration incurred in connection with this offering, but
the  selling  stockholders  will  pay  all  of  their  selling  commission,  brokerage fees  and  related
expenses.
Our common  stock  is  traded  on  the  American  Stock  Exchange  under  the  symbol  “HEC.”  On
November 3, 2005, the closing price of the common stock was $0.62 per share.
Investing in  our  common  stock  involves  risks.  You  should  carefully  consider  the risk
factors beginning on page 2 prior to investing in our common stock.
Neither the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  nor  any  state  securities  commission has
approved  or  disapproved  of  these  securities,  or  determined  if  this  prospectus i s truthful  or
complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
, 2005.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Prospectus Summary
Risk Factors
Forward-Looking Statements
Use of Proceeds
Capitalization
Business
Selling Stockholders
Description of Capital Stock
Plan of Distribution
Where You Can Find More Information
Legal Matters
Experts
1
2
12
13
13
15
16
18
27
29
29
29
____________________
No person has been authorized to give any information or to make any representations other than
those  contained  in  this  prospectus,  and,  if  given  or  made,  such  information or  representations
must not be relied upon as having been authorized. This prospectus does not constitute an offer
to  sell  or  the  solicitation  of  an  offer to  buy  any  securities  other  than  the  securities  to  which  it
relates or an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy such securities in any circumstances
in which such offer or solicitation is unlawful. Neither the delivery of this prospectus nor any sale
made hereunder shall, under any circumstances, create any implication that there has been no
change in our affairs since the date hereof or that the information contained in this prospectus is
correct as of any time subsequent to its date.
____________________
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
T h e following  summary  highlights  information  we  present  more  fully  elsewhere  in this
prospectus.  This  prospectus  contains  forward-looking  statements  that  involve risks  and
uncertainties.  Our  actual  results  could  differ  materially  from  those anticipated  in  the  forward-
looking  statements  as  a  result  of  factors  described under  the  heading  “Risk  Factors”  and
elsewhere in this prospectus.
HARKEN ENERGY CORPORATION
O u r company  explores  for,  develops  and  produces  oil  and  gas  both  domestically  and
internationally.  The  majority  of  our  domestic  operations  include  oil  and  gas exploration,
development and production in the onshore and offshore Gulf Coast regions of South Texas and
Louisiana. Our international operations are concentrated in Colombia, Peru and Panama.
Our company was incorporated in 1973 in the State of California and reincorporated in 1979 in
the State of Delaware. Our principal offices are located at 180 State Street, Suite 200, Southlake,
Texas 76092, and our telephone number is (817) 424-2424.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references to “Harken,”  “we,”“us,”  “our” or the “Company”
refer to Harken Energy Corporation and its subsidiaries.
THE OFFERING
the  selling
C o m m o n stock  offered  by 
stockholders
 
Common stock  to  be  outstanding  after  the
offering
Use of proceeds
American Stock Exchange Symbol
20,197,246 shares
247,848,120 shares(1) 
 
We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of
the  shares  of  common stock offered  by  this
prospectus.
 
HEC
(1) The number  of  shares  of  our  common  stock  that  are  to  be  outstanding  after  this offering  is
based  on  the  number  of  shares  outstanding  on  October  24,  2005, after giving  effect  to  the
conversion  of  the  Series  M  Convertible  Preferred  Shares a n d the  issuance  of  shares  in
connection  with  the  declaration  of  dividends  on  those preferred  shares  and  the  exercise  of
warrants  related  to  our  Series  M Convertible  Preferred  Shares  and  our  Series  L  Convertible
Preferred  Shares f o r all  of  the  shares  included  in  the  registration  statement  of  which  this
prospectus forms a part.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
During the third quarter 2005, our domestic operations were affected by Hurricane Katrina and to a lesser extent by
Hurricane Rita. In preparation for Hurricane Katrina, 75% of our domestic production was shut in. Following Hurricane
Katrina, our domestic operations were restored and remained at approximately 55% of their pre-Katrina production
levels. We continue to inspect and repair damage to our eastern Gulf operations that remained shut in as of the
beginning of the fourth quarter which include Main Pass, Point a la Hache, Branville Bay and Lapeyrouse. Restoration
of remaining curtailed production is also dependent on resumption of downstream infrastructure and the availability of
service and equipment contractors necessary for over-water transportation and repairs. Our preliminary assessment
on the effects of Hurricane Rita is that our domestic operations were not significantly affected. We anticipate that our
domestic operations may not be back to 100% of their pre-Katrina levels until December 2005. We anticipate that the
impact of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita on our future results of operations will be reflected in an increase in operating
cost in the affected area, due to the loss of land based infrastructure.
RISK FACTORS
Investing in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the
following risk factors and all other information contained in this prospectus before investing in our
common stock. The trading price of our common stock could decline due to any of these risks,
and you may lose all or part of your investment.
Risk factors associated with our financial condition:
I f we  fail  to  maintain  an  effective  system  of  internal  controls,  we  may  not  be able to
accurately  report  our  financial  results.  As  a  result,  current  and  potential stockholders
could lose confidence in our financial reporting, which would harm our business and the
trading price of our stock.
Effective internal controls are necessary for us to provide reliable financial reports. If we cannot
provide reliable financial reports, our business and operating results could be harmed. We have
in the past discovered, and may in the future discover, areas of our internal controls that need
improvement including control deficiencies that may constitute material weaknesses. On March
16, 2005, immediately after completion of the audit and filing of our Annual Report on Form 10-K,
we  were  advised  by  our  independent  registered  public  accounting firm of  the  discovery  of  an
error  in  our  2004  financial  statements  relating  to  a modification  of  a  share  option  plan  by  the
board of directors of our 62% owned subsidiary, Global Energy Development, plc. This resulted
in  a  restatement of our financial statements for the quarter ended September 30, 2004 and the
year ended December 31, 2004.
We also identified significant deficiencies in our internal control over financial reporting that could
have resulted in errors in the accounting and/or the disclosures associated with:
1.  Accounting for our initial investment in IBA, and a subsequent derivative transaction by IBA,
and
2.  Income tax disclosures.
We concluded that, in the aggregate, these significant deficiencies, along with the restatement
associated with Global’s modification of its share option plan, as described above, constitute a
material weakness in internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2004 which is
associated with our level of complex transactions and the lack of adequate accounting personnel
to ensure ongoing compliance with relevant accounting and financial reporting requirements. A
material  weakness  is  a  significant  deficiency,  as  defined  in Public  Company  Accounting
Oversight Board Audit Standard No.2 or a combination of significant deficiencies, that results in
more  than  a  remote  likelihood that material  misstatements  of  our  annual  or  interim  financial
statements  would not be prevented or detected by company personnel in the normal course of
performing their assigned functions.
Consequently, management has concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was
not effective as of December 31, 2004 based on criteria set forth by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission in Internal Control-Integrated Framework.
Any failure  to  implement  and  maintain  the  improvements  in  our  internal  control over financial
reporting, or difficulties encountered in the implementation of these improvements in our controls,
could  cause  us  to  fail  to  meet  our  reporting obligations.  Any  failure  to  improve  our  internal
controls to address these identified weaknesses could also cause investors to lose confidence in
our reported financial information, which could have a negative impact on the trading price of our
stock.
If we do not continue to meet the listing requirements of the American Stock Exchange,
our common stock could be delisted.
2
The American Stock Exchange requires companies to fulfill certain requirements in order for their
shares to continue to be listed. The securities of a company may be considered for delisting if the
company fails to meet certain financial thresholds, including if the company has sustained losses
from continuing operations and/or net losses in its five most recent fiscal years. As of December
31,  2004,  we  have  sustained  losses  in  each  of  our  last  six  fiscal years.  There  can  be  no
assurance  that  we  will  not  report  additional  losses i n the  future  or  that  the  American  Stock
Exchange will not delist our common stock. The potential delisting of our common stock could
adversely  affect  our  ability to raise capital in the future by issuing common stock or securities
convertible into common stock.
We have a history of losses and may suffer losses in the future.
W e have reported  losses  in  each  of  the  last  six  fiscal  years,  including  a  restated net loss  of
approximately  $17.9  million  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2004.  We have  reported
cumulative net losses of approximately $222 million over the last six fiscal years. Our ability to
generate net income is strongly affected by, among other factors, our ability to successfully drill
undeveloped reserves as well as the market price of crude oil and natural gas. During the fourth
quarter of 2000, we recorded a writedown of our oil and gas properties of approximately $156
million primarily due to a significant reduction in our proved undeveloped reserves in Colombia
following the drilling of a non-productive well. If we are unsuccessful in drilling productive wells
or the market price of crude oil and natural gas declines, we may report additional losses in the
future.  During 2004, we recorded a loss of approximately $14 million related to the increase of
the fair value of the liability of the Global warrants held by minority shareholders of Global and
Lyford  Investments.  Consequently,  future  losses may adversely affect our business, prospects,
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Further sales of our interest in Global Energy Development plc may cause our revenues to
decrease.
During the six months ended June 30, 2005, we sold some of our common shares of Global,
based on market price at the date of sale, in exchange for total cash consideration, net of fees, of
approximately  $26  million.  These  sales  of  shares decreased  our  share  holding  percentage  in
Global  by  approximately  31%.  We currently  hold  approximately  21.8  million  shares  of  Global,
representing approximately 62% of the total issued share capital of Global.
Lyford holds warrants to purchase up to 7,000,000 shares of Global shares beneficially owned by
us.  In  addition,  as  of  June  30,  2005,  certain  minority  shareholders o f Global  hold  warrants  to
purchase 165,383 Global shares from Global. If, or when, all of these warrants are exercised, our
ownership of Global could decrease to approximately 30%.
Global represented 54% of our total proved reserves at December 31, 2004 and approximately
37% of our consolidated oil and gas revenues in 2004. Any further sales of Global common stock
by us will reduce our equity interest in Global and may reduce our revenue from Global.
Our financial condition may suffer if estimates of our oil and gas reserve information are
adjusted, and fluctuations in oil and gas prices and other factors affect our oil and gas
reserves.
Our oil and gas reserve information is based upon criteria mandated by the SEC, and reflects
only  estimates  of  the  accumulation  of  oil  and  gas  and  the  economic recoverability  of  those
volumes.  Our  future  production,  revenues  and expenditures  with  respect  to  such  oil  and  gas
reserves could be different from estimates, and any material differences may negatively affect our
business, financial condition and results of operations.
 
3
Petroleum engineering is a subjective process of estimating underground accumulations o f oil
and gas that cannot be measured in an exact manner. Estimates of economically recoverable oil
and gas reserves and of future net cash flows necessarily depend upon a number of variable
factors and assumptions.
Because all reserve estimates are to some degree subjective, each of the following items may
prove to differ materially from that assumed in estimating reserves:
·    the quantities of oil and gas that are ultimately recovered,
·    the production and operating costs incurred,
·    the amount and timing of future development expenditures, and
·    future oil and gas sales prices.
Furthermore, different reserve engineers may make different estimates of reserves and cash flow
based on the same available data.
The estimated  discounted  future  net  cash  flows  described  in  our  Annual  Report  for the  year
ended  December  31,  2004,  should  not  be  considered  as  the  current  market value  of  the
estimated  oil  and  gas  reserves  attributable  to  our  properties from proved  reserves.  Such
estimates are based on prices and costs as of the date of the estimate, in accordance with SEC
requirements, while future prices and costs may be materially higher or lower. The SEC requires
that we report our oil and natural gas reserves using the price as of the last day of the year. Using
lower values in forecasting reserves will result in a shorter life being given to producing oil and
natural  gas  properties  because  such  properties,  as  their production  levels  are  estimated  to
decline, will reach  an  uneconomic  limit, with lower prices, at an earlier date. There can be no
assurance that a decrease in oil and gas prices or other differences in our estimates of its reserve
will not adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
I f estimated  discounted  future  net  cash  flows  decrease,  we  may  be  required  to take
additional writedowns.
We periodically review the carrying value of our oil and gas properties under applicable full-cost
accounting rules. These rules require a writedown of the carrying value of oil and gas properties
if  the  carrying  value  exceeds  the applicable  estimated  discounted  future  net  cash  flows  from
proved oil and gas reserves. Given the volatility of oil and gas prices, it is reasonably possible
that the estimated discounted future net cash flows could change in the near term. If oil and gas
prices decline in the future, even if only for a short period of time, it is possible that additional
writedowns  of  oil  and  gas properties could occur. Whether we will be required to take such a
charge will depend on the prices for oil and gas at the end of any quarter and the effect of reserve
additions or revisions, property sales and capital expenditures during such quarter.
Lyford owns a significant amount of our common stock and exercises significant control
over us.
A s o f August  9,  2005,  Lyford  beneficially  owned  approximately  30%  of  the  combined voting
power  of  our  outstanding  common  stock.  Lyford  is  in  a  position  to significantly  influence
decisions with respect to:
·    our direction and policies, including the election and removal of directors,
·    mergers or other business combinations,
·    the acquisition or disposition of our assets,
4
·    future issuances of our common stock or other securities,
·    our incurrence of debt, and
·  
the payment of dividends, if any, on our common stock, and amendments to  our certificate of
 
incorporation and bylaws.
Lyford’s concentration of ownership may also have the effect of delaying, deferring or preventing
a future change of control.
Risks associated with market conditions:
Our stock  price  is  volatile  and  the  value  of  any  investment  in  our  common  stock may
fluctuate.
Our stock price has been and is highly volatile, and we believe this volatility is due to, among
other things:
·   the results of our drilling,
·   current expectations of our future financial performance,
·   commodity prices of oil and natural gas,
·   the volatility of the market in general.
For example, the common stock price has fluctuated from a high of $1.30 per share to a low of
$0.16 per share over the last three years ending December 31, 2004. This volatility may affect the
market value of our common stock in the future.
Future sales of our common stock pursuant to outstanding registration statements may
affect the market price of our common stock.
There are currently  several  registration  statements  with  respect  to  our  common  stock that are
effective, pursuant to which certain of our stockholders may sell shares o f common stock. Any
such sale of stock may also decrease the market price of our common stock.
Any conversions  or  redemptions  of  our  5%  Notes,  Series  G1  Preferred,  Series  G2 Preferred,
Series G4 Preferred, Series J Preferred and Series M Preferred or exercise of warrants issued to
holders of our Series L and Series M Preferred Stock, involving a large issuance of shares of our
common stock could result in a dilution of stockholders’ ownership percentage of our common
stock and may result in a decrease in the market value of our common stock. In addition, we may
elect to issue a significant number of additional shares of common stock for financing or other
purposes, which could result in a decrease in the market price of our common stock.
We have issued shares of preferred stock with greater rights than our common stock and
may issue additional shares of preferred stock in the future.
 
5
We are permitted under our charter to issue up to 10 million shares of preferred stock. We can
issue shares of our preferred stock in one or more series and can set the terms of the preferred
stock without seeking any further approval from our common stockholders. Any preferred stock
that we issue may rank ahead of our common stock in terms of dividend priority or liquidation
premiums and may have greater voting rights than our common stock. At June 30, 2005, we had
outstanding  13,925  shares  of  Series  G1  Preferred,  2,000  shares  of  Series  G2 Preferred  and
77,517 shares of Series G4 Preferred, 50,000 shares of Series J Preferred and 50,000 shares of
Series M Preferred. These shares of preferred stock have rights senior to our common stock with
respect  to  dividends  and liquidation.  In  addition,  such  preferred  stock  may  be  converted  into
shares of common stock, which could dilute the value of common stock to current stockholders
and could adversely affect the market price of our common stock. At June 30, 2005, each share of
Series G1 Preferred, Series G2 Preferred, Series G4 Preferred, Series J Preferred and Series M
Preferred, may be converted into shares of common stock at conversion prices of $12.50, $3.00,
$2.00,  $0.85, and $0.59 per share of common stock, respectively, for each $100.00 liquidation
value of a share of such preferred stock, plus the amount of any accrued and unpaid dividends.
Ou r domestic  operating  strategic  plan  includes  the  acquisition  of  additional reserves
through business combinations.
Our domestic operations have shifted from primarily an exploration and development focus to an
acquisition and exploitation growth strategy. We are seeking acquisition opportunities to expand
our domestic operations and increase our oil and gas reserves in North America. We may not be
able  to  consummate  future acquisitions  on  favorable  terms.  Additionally,  any  such  future
transactions may not achieve favorable financial results. Inherent in any future acquisitions are
certain  risks,  such  as  the  difficulty  of  assimilating  operations  and  facilities of  the  acquired
business, which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results, particularly during
the period immediately following such acquisition.
Future business  combinations  may  also  involve  the  issuance  of  shares  of  our  common stock,
which could have a dilutive effect on stockholders’ percentage ownership. We may not have a
sufficient number of authorized shares to issue in any such business combinations and we may
need to obtain stockholder approval to authorize additional shares for issuance. Further, the use
of shares in business combinations will reduce the number of shares available for the redemption
of existing convertible notes and preferred stock.
I n addition,  acquisitions  may  require  substantial  financial  expenditures  that will need  to  be
financed through cash flow from operations or future debt and our equity offerings, and we may
not be able to acquire companies or oil and gas properties using its equity as currency. In the
case of cash acquisitions, we may not be able to generate sufficient cash flow from operations or
obtain debt or equity financing sufficient to fund future acquisitions of reserves.
Risks associated with our operations:
Oil and  gas  price  fluctuations  in  the  market  may  adversely  affect  the  results  of our
operations.
The results  of  our  operations  are  highly  dependent  upon  the  prices  received  for our oil  and
natural gas production. Substantially all of our sales of oil and natural gas are made in the spot
market,  or  pursuant  to  contracts  based  on spot market  prices,  and  not  pursuant  to  long-term,
fixed-price contracts. Accordingly, the prices received for our oil and natural gas production are
dependent  upon  numerous  factors  beyond  our  control.  These  factors  include  the level  of
consumer  product  demand,  governmental  regulations  and  taxes,  the  price and  availability  of
alternative  fuels,  the  level  of  foreign  imports  of  oil and natural  gas  and  the  overall  economic
environment. Significant declines in prices for oil and natural gas could have a material adverse
effect on our financial condition, results of operations and quantities of reserves recoverable on
an economic basis. Any significant decline in prices of oil or gas could have a material adverse
effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Recently, the price of oil and natural
gas has been volatile. For example, during 2003, the price for a bbl of oil ranged from a high of
$35.60 to a low of $28.07 and the price for a Mcf of gas ranged from a high of $9.13 to a low of
$4.43. During 2004, based on NYMEX pricing, the price for a bbl of oil ranged from a high of
$55.46 to a low of $32.48 and the price for a Mcf of gas ranged from a high of $8.725 to a low of
$4.570.
6
Our operations require significant expenditures of capital that may not be recovered.
We require significant expenditures of capital in order to locate and acquire producing properties
and  to  drill  exploratory  and  exploitation  wells.  In conducting  exploration,  exploitation  and
development  activities  from  a particular  well,  the  presence  of  unanticipated  pressure  or
irregularities in formations, miscalculations or accidents may cause our exploration, exploitation,
development and production activities to be unsuccessful, potentially resulting in abandoning the
well. This could result in a total loss of our investment. In addition, the cost and timing of drilling,
completing and operating wells is difficult to predict.
The oil and gas we produce may not be readily marketable at the time of production.
Crude oil, natural gas, condensate and other oil and gas products are generally sold to other oil
and gas companies, government agencies and other industries. The availability of ready markets
for oil and gas that we might discover and the prices obtained for such oil and gas depend on
many factors beyond our control, including:
·   the extent of local production and imports of oil and gas,
·   the proximity and capacity of pipelines and other transportation facilities,
·   fluctuating demand for oil and gas,
·   the marketing of competitive fuels, and
·   the effects of governmental regulation of oil and gas production and sales.
Natural gas  associated  with  oil  production  is  often  not  marketable  due  to  demand  or
transportation limitations and is often flared at the producing well site. Pipeline facilities do not
exist  in  certain  areas  of  exploration  and,  therefore, any actual sales of discovered oil and gas
might be delayed for extended periods until such facilities are constructed.
We may suffer losses through futures trading.
Through our investment in International Business Associates, Ltd., we are investing capital in the
trading of energy futures contracts. The results of these investments can be significantly impacted
by factors such as the volatility of the relationship between the value of futures contracts and the
cash prices of the underlying commodity, counterparty contract defaults, and general volatility of
the  capital  markets.  The  changes  in  the  market  value  of  such  futures contracts  may  fluctuate
significantly  from  time  to  time,  and  gains  or  losses o n any  particular  futures  contract  may
contribute to fluctuations in our quarterly results of operations.
We may encounter operating hazards that may result in substantial losses.
We are subject to operating hazards normally associated with the exploration and production of
oil  and  gas,  including  blowouts,  explosions,  oil  spills, cratering,  pollution,  earthquakes,
hurricanes,  labor  disruptions  and  fires. The occurrence  of  any  such  operating  hazards  could
result in substantial losses to us due to injury or loss of life and damage to or destruction of oil
and  gas wells,  formations,  production  facilities  or  other  properties.  Our operations  in  the  Gulf
Coast  were  affected  by  Hurricane  Katrina,  and  to  a  lesser extent, Hurricane Rita,  and  we  are
currently assessing their impact. We anticipate an increase in operating costs as a result of those
hurricanes. See "Summary — Recent Developments."
 
  We do  not  maintain  full  insurance  coverage  for  all  matters  that  may  adversely affect  our
operations,  including  war,  terrorism,  nuclear  reactions,  government fines,  treatment  of  waste,
blowout  expenses  and  business  interruptions.  Losses and  liabilities  arising  from  uninsured  or
underinsured  events  could  reduce o u r revenues  or  increase  our  costs.  There  can  be  no
assurance  that  any  insurance will  be  adequate  to  cover  losses  or  liabilities  associated  with
operational hazards. We cannot predict the continued availability of insurance, or its availability
at premium levels that justify its purchase.
 
7
Drilling oil  and  gas  wells  particularly  in  certain  regions  of  the  United  States  and foreign
countries  could  be  hindered  by  hurricanes,  earthquakes  and  other weather-related
operating risks.
Our operations in the Texas and Louisiana Gulf Coast area and in Colombia, Peru and Panama
are subject to risks from hurricanes and other natural disasters. Damage caused by hurricanes,
earthquakes  or  other  operating  hazards  could  result  in substantial  losses  to  us.  For  example,
during 2004 our domestic operations were affected by Hurricane Ivan resulting in reduced oil and
gas volumes in the fourth quarter of 2004.
W e face  strong  competition  from  larger  oil  and  gas  companies,  which  could  result in
adverse effects on our business.
T h e exploration,  exploitation  and  production  business  is  highly  competitive.  Many o f our
competitors have substantially larger financial resources, staffs and facilities. Our competitors in
the  United  States  include  numerous  major  oil and gas  exploration  and  production  companies
and in Colombia, Peru and Panama include such major oil and gas companies as BP Amoco,
Exxon/Mobil,  Texaco/Shell and Conoco/Phillips. These major oil and gas companies are often
better positioned to obtain the rights to exploratory acreage for which we compete.
 
 
Our operations are subject to various litigation that could have an adverse effect on our
business.
From time to time our subsidiaries are defendants in various litigation matters. The nature of our
and our subsidiaries’ operations expose us to further possible litigation claims in the future.
There i s risk  that  any  matter  in  litigation  could  be  adversely  decided  against  us  or our
subsidiaries, regardless of our belief, opinion and position, which could have a material adverse
effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Litigation is highly costly and the costs
associated  with  defending  litigation could also have a material adverse effect on our financial
condition.
Compliance with,  or  breach  of,  environmental  laws  can  be  costly  and  could  limit  our
operations.
Our operations are subject to numerous and frequently changing laws and regulations governing
the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection.
We own or lease, and have in the past owned or leased, properties that have been used for the
exploration and production of oil and gas and these properties and the wastes disposed on these
properties  may be subject to the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act,  the  Oil  Pollution  Act  of  1990,  the  Resource  Conservation  and  Recovery Act, the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act and analogous state laws. Under such laws, we could be
required to remove or remediate previously released wastes or property contamination. Laws and
regulations protecting the environment have generally become more stringent and, may in some
cases,  impose  “strict liability” for environmental damage. Strict  liability  means  that  we  may  be
held liable  for  damage  without  regard  to  whether  we  were  negligent  or  otherwise a t fault.
Environmental laws and regulations may expose us to liability for the conduct of or conditions
caused  by  others  or  for  acts  that  were  in  compliance with all applicable laws at the time they
were performed. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations may result in the imposition of
administrative, civil and criminal penalties.
 
8
Although we believe that our operations are in substantial compliance with existing requirements
of  governmental  bodies,  our  ability  to  conduct  continued  operations is  subject  to  satisfying
applicable regulatory and permitting controls. Our current permits and authorizations and ability
to get future permits and authorizations, particularly in foreign countries, may be susceptible, on a
going  forward  basis,  to  increased  scrutiny,  greater  complexity  resulting  in increased  costs,  or
delays  in  receiving  appropriate  authorizations.  In particular,  we  have  experienced  and  may
continue to experience delays in obtaining permits and authorization in Colombia necessary for
our  operations. W e are  required  to  obtain  an  environmental  permit  or  approval  from  the
governments in Colombia, Peru and Panama prior to conducting seismic operations, drilling a
well or constructing a pipeline in such foreign locations. Our operations in foreign countries have
been delayed in the past and could be delayed in the future through the process of obtaining an
environmental  permit.  Compliance with these  laws  and  regulations  may  increase  our  costs  of
operations, as well as further restrict our foreign operations.
Our foreign operations involve substantial costs and are subject to certain risks because
the oil and gas industries in such countries are less developed.
The oil and gas industries in Colombia, Peru and Panama are not as developed as the oil and
gas industry in the United States. As a result, our drilling and development operations in many
instances  take  longer  to  complete  and  often  cost  more  than similar  operations  in  the  United
States. The availability of technical expertise, specific equipment and supplies is more limited in
Colombia, Peru and Panama than in the United States. We expect that such factors will continue
to subject our international operations to economic and operating risks not experienced  in  our
domestic  operations.  We  follow  the  full  cost  method  of accounting  for  exploration  and
development of oil and gas reserves in which all of our acquisition, exploration and development
costs are capitalized. Costs related to the acquisition, holding and initial exploration of oil and
gas associated with our contracts in countries with no proved reserves are initially capitalized,
including  internal  costs  directly  identified  with  acquisition, exploration  and  development
activities.  If  we  abandon  all  exploration  efforts i n a  country  where  no  proved  reserves  are
assigned, all acquisition and exploration costs associated with the country are expensed. From
time  to  time,  we  make assessments as to whether our investment within a country is impaired
and whether exploration activities within a country will be abandoned based on our analysis of
drilling  results,  seismic  data  and  other  information  we  believe t o be  relevant.  Due  to  the
unpredictable  nature  of  exploration  drilling  activities, the  amount  and  timing  of  impairment
expenses are difficult to predict.
If we fail to comply with the terms of certain contracts related to our foreign operations, we
could lose our rights under each of those contracts.
The terms of each of the Colombian Association and Exploration and Production Contracts, the
Peruvian Exploration and Development Concession Agreement and the anticipated Panamanian
Concession  Contract  require  that  we  perform  certain activities, such as seismic interpretations
and the drilling of required wells, in accordance with those contracts and agreements. Our failure
to  timely  perform those  activities  as  required  could  result  in  the  loss  of  our  rights  under  a
particular contract, which would likely result in a significant loss to us. As of August 1, 2005, we
were in compliance with the requirements of each of the existing Association and Concession
Contracts.
We require significant additional financing for our foreign operations, which financing may
not be available.
W e anticipate  that  full  development  of  our  existing  and  future  oil  and  gas discoveries  and
prospects  in  Colombia,  Peru  and  Panama  may  take  several  years and  require  significant
additional capital expenditures. If we are unable to timely obtain adequate funds to finance these
investments,  our  ability  to develop  oil  and  gas  reserves  in  these  countries  may  be  severely
limited or substantially delayed. Such limitations or delay would likely result in substantial losses.
 
9
W e anticipate that amounts required to fund our foreign activities, conducted primarily  through
our ownership of Global, will be funded from existing cash balances, operating cash flows, third-
party financing and from joint venture partners. The exact usage of other future funding sources is
unknown  at  this time,  and  there  can  be  no  assurance  that  Global  will  have  adequate  funds
available to finance our foreign operations.
Our foreign operations are subject to political, economic and other uncertainties.
Our subsidiary, Global, currently conducts significant operations in Colombia, Peru and Panama
and may also conduct operations in other foreign countries in the future. At December 31, 2004,
approximately  54%  of  our  consolidated  proved reserve  volumes  and  37%  of  our  consolidated
revenues were related to Global’s Colombian operations. Exploration and production operations
in foreign countries are subject to political, economic and other uncertainties, including:
·   th e risk  of  war,  revolution,  border  disputes,  expropriation,  renegotiation o r modification  of
existing contracts, import,
·   export and  transportation  regulations  and  tariffs  resulting  in  loss  of  revenue, property  and
equipment,
·   taxation policies, including royalty and tax increases and retroactive tax claims,
·   exchange controls,  currency  fluctuations  and  other  uncertainties  arising  out o f foreign
government sovereignty over international operations,
·   laws and policies of the United States affecting foreign trade, taxation and investment, and
·   the possibility of being subjected to the jurisdiction of foreign courts i n connection with legal
disputes and the possible inability to subject foreign persons to the jurisdiction of courts in the
United States.
Central and South America have a history of political and economic instability. This instability
could result in new governments or the adoption of new policies, laws or regulations that might
assume a substantially more hostile attitude toward foreign investment. In an extreme case, such
a change could result in termination of contract rights and expropriation of foreign-owned assets.
Any such activity could result in a significant loss to Global.
 
 
Guerrilla activity  in  Colombia  could  disrupt  or  delay  Global’s  operations,  and  we  are
concerned about safeguarding Global’s operations and personnel in Colombia.
Colombia’s 40-year  armed  conflict  between  the  government  and  leftist  guerrilla  groups has
escalated  in  recent  years.  The  current  government  has  taken  a  strong  approach against  the
guerilla movement after peace overtures by the preceding Colombian administration failed. The
increased  military  action  by  the  Colombian  government  directed against  the  rebel  groups
operating  in  Colombia  may  result  in  escalated  guerilla activity.  Also,  the  increased  activity  of
right-wing  paramilitary  groups,  formed in  opposition  to  the  left-wing  guerilla  groups,  has
contributed to the escalation in violence. The increase in violence has affected business interests
in  Colombia.  Targeting  such  enterprises  as  symbols  of  foreign  exploitation, particularly  in  the
North of the country, the rebel groups have attempted to hamper production of hydrocarbons. The
cumulative  effect  of  escalation  in  the armed  conflict  and  the  resulting  unstable  political  and
security  situation h a s led  to  increased  risks  and  costs  and  the  downgrading  of  Colombia’s
country risk rating. Guerilla activity has increased over the last few years, causing delays in the
development of our fields in Colombia. Guerilla activity, such as road blockades, has also from
time  to  time  slowed  our  deployment  of  workers  in  the field  and  affected  our  operations.  In
addition,  guerillas  could  attempt  to disrupt  the  flow  of  our  production  through  pipelines.  In
addition to these security issues, we have also become the subject of media focus in Colombia
that may further compromise our security position in the country.
 
10
There can be no assurance that attempts to reduce or prevent guerilla activity will be successful
or  that  guerilla  activity  will  not  disrupt  Global’s  operations  in  the future. There can  also  be  no
assurance that Global can maintain the safety of its operations and personnel in Colombia or that
this violence will not affect its operations in the future. Continued or heightened security concerns
in Colombia could also result in a significant loss to us. 
 
The United States government may impose economic or trade sanctions on Colombia that
could result in a significant loss to us.
Colombia is among several nations whose progress in stemming the production and transit of
illegal  drugs  is  subject  to  annual  certification  by  the  President  of  the United  States.  Although
Colombia was so certified in 2004, there can be no assurance that, in the future, Colombia will
receive certification or a national interest waiver. The failure to receive certification or a national
interest waiver may result in any of the following:
·   all bilateral aid, except anti-narcotics and humanitarian aid, would be suspended,
·   the Export-Import Bank of the United States and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation
would not approve financing for new projects in Colombia,
·   United States  representatives  at  multilateral  lending  institutions  would b e required  to  vote
against all loan requests from Colombia, although such votes would not constitute vetoes, and
·   the President of the United States and Congress would retain the right to apply  future  trade
sanctions.
Each of these consequences could result in adverse economic consequences in Colombia and
could further heighten the political and economic risks associated with our operations there. Any
changes in the holders of significant government offices could have adverse consequences on
our  relationship  with  the  Colombian  national oil  company  and  the  Colombian  government’s
ability  to  control  guerrilla activities  and  could  exacerbate  the  factors  relating  to  our  foreign
operations discussed  above.  Any  sanctions  imposed  on  Colombia  by  the  United  States
government could threaten our ability to obtain necessary financing to develop the  Colombian
properties or cause Colombia to retaliate against us, including b y nationalizing our Colombian
assets. Accordingly, the imposition of the foregoing economic and trade sanctions on Colombia
would likely result in a substantial loss and a decrease in the price of our common stock. There
can be no assurance that the United States will not impose sanctions on Colombia in the future
or predict the effect in Colombia that these sanctions might cause.
We may suffer losses from exchange rate fluctuations.
We account for our Colombian, Peruvian and Panamanian operations using the U.S. dollar as
the functional currency. The costs associated with our exploration efforts in Colombia, Peru and
Panama have typically been denominated in U.S. dollars. A portion of Colombian revenues are
denominated in Colombian pesos. To the extent that the amount of our revenues denominated in
Colombian  pesos  is greater  than  the  amount  of  costs  denominated  in  Colombian  pesos,  we
could  suffer a loss if the value of the Colombian peso were to drop relative to the value o f the
U.S.  dollar.  Any  substantial  currency  fluctuations  could  have  a  material adverse  effect  on  our
results of operations. 
 
11
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
We are exposed to market risk from movements in commodity prices, interest rates and foreign
currency  exchange  rates.  As  part  of  an  overall  risk  management  strategy, we  use  derivative
financial instruments to manage and reduce risks associated with these factors.
Commodity Price Risk— We  are a  producer  of  hydrocarbon  commodities,  including  crude  oil,
condensate  and natural  gas.  We  use  oil  and  gas  derivative  financial  instruments,  limited  to
collars and floors with maturities of 24 months or less, to mitigate our exposure of fluctuations in
oil and gas commodity prices on future crude oil and natural gas production. We have evaluated
the potential effect that near term changes in commodity prices would have had on the fair value
of its commodity price risk sensitive financial instruments at year end 2004.
In September  2004,  we  purchased  a  crude  oil  floor  contract  with  a  strike  price o f $30.00  per
barrel for a notional amount of 6,000 barrels per month over a contract period from January 1,
2005  through  December  31  2005.  We  designated th e above  derivative  as  a  hedge  of  the
exposure  to  variability  of  cash  flows  related to  forecasted  sales  of  specified  production  from
certain of our domestic property operations. Such crude oil floor contract was reflected in Prepaid
Expenses and Other Assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2004 with a
fair value of approximately $40,000.
In October 2004, we purchase a natural gas floor contract with a strike price of $5.00 per MMBTU
for a notional amount of 70,000 MMBTUs per month over a period of the contract from January 1,
2005  to  December  31,  2005.  We  designated  this derivative  as  a  hedge  under  SFAS  133.  At
December 31, 2004, this hedge no longer qualified for hedge accounting treatment under SFAS
133. This natural gas floor contract was reflected in Prepaid Expenses and Other Assets in the
Consolidated Balance  Sheet  at  December  31,  2004  with  a  market  value  of  approximately
$63,000.
Interest Rate Risk — Consistent with the prior year, we invest cash in interest-bearing temporary
investments of high quality issuers. Due to the short time the investments are outstanding and
their general liquidity, these instruments are classified as cash equivalents in the consolidated
balance sheet and do not represent a significant interest rate risk to us. Consistent with the prior
year,  we consider our interest rate risk exposure related to long-term debt obligations to not be
material.  At  December  31,  2004  all  of  our  financing  obligations  carry a  fixed  interest  rate  per
annum. We have no open interest rate swap agreements.
Foreign Currency  Exchange  Rate  Risk—  Consistent  with  the  prior  year,  Global  conducts
international business in Colombia and is subject to foreign currency exchange rate risk on cash
flows related  to  sales,  expenses  and  capital  expenditures  that  are  denominated  in Colombian
pesos.  However,  because  predominately  all  material  transactions  in Global’s  existing  foreign
operations  are  denominated  in  U.S.  dollars,  the  U.S. dollar  is  the  functional  currency  for  all
operations.  Consistent  with  the  prior year, exposure from transactions in currencies other than
U.S. dollars is not considered material.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain information in this prospectus is “forward-looking information” as defined by the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Examples include discussions as to our expectations,
beliefs, plans, goals, objectives and future financial or other performance or assumptions. This
information, by its nature, involves estimates, projections, forecasts and uncertainties that could
cause actual  results  or  outcomes  to  differ  substantially  from  those  expressed  in th e forward-
looking statement.
 
12
Our business is influenced by many factors that are difficult to predict, involve uncertainties that
may materially affect actual results and are often beyond our ability to control. A number of these
factors have been identified herein under “Risk Factors” beginning on page 2. Factors that may
affect  us 
include  weather conditions;  governmental  regulations;  cost  of  environmental
compliance;  inherent risk  in  the  operation  of  drilling;  production  risks;  fluctuations  in energy-
related commodities prices and the effect these could have on our earnings, liquidity position and
the underlying value of our assets; capital market conditions; changes in accounting standards;
the  risks  of  operating businesses  in  regulated  industries  that  are  in  the  process  of  becoming
deregulated or increasingly regulated; and political and economic conditions in Eastern Europe,
Middle America and South America (including inflation rates).
 
Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and we undertake
no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the
date on which it is made.
USE OF PROCEEDS
W e will not receive any proceeds from the sale of the shares of common stock offered b y this
prospectus.
CAPITALIZATION
The following table sets forth our capitalization as of June 30, 2005. You should read this table in
conjunction with our audited financial statements contained in our Annual Report on Form 10-
K/A,  as  amended,  for  the  period  ended  December 31,  2004  and  our  unaudited  financial
statements contained in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ended June 30, 2005.
See “Where You Can Find Additional Information”.
 
13
June 30, 2005
(unaudited)
$
(in thousands)
$
    
   $
4,675
52,880 
11,103 
63,983
Total long-term liabilities, less current portion
Total current liabilities
Total liabilities
Temporary Equity:
Series J Preferred Stock, $1.00 par value; $5,000,000 liquidation
value;
65,000 shares authorized; 50,000 shares outstanding
 
Stockholders Equity:
Series G1 Preferred Stock, $1.00 par value; $1,393,000 liquidation
value;
700,000 shares authorized; 13,925 shares outstanding
Series G2 Preferred Stock, $1.00 par value; $200,000 liquidation
value;
100,000 shares authorized; 2,000 shares outstanding
Series G4 Preferred Stock, $1.00 par value; $7,752,000 liquidation
value;
150,000 shares authorized; 77,517 shares outstanding
Series M Preferred Stock, $1.00 par value; $5,000,000 liquidation
value;
50,000 shares authorize; 50,000 shares outstanding
Common stock, $0.01 par value; 325,000,000 shares authorized;
221,680,677 shares issued
Additional paid-in capital
Accumulated deficit
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Treasury stock, at cost, 2,605,700 shares held
Total stockholders equity
Total capitalization
 
As of June 30, 2005, we had 38,000,000 shares of our common stock reserved for issuance upon
conversion of our Series J, Series G1, Series G2, Series G4 and Series M Preferred Stock, as
well as our 5% Senior Convertible Notes. The 38,000,000 shares of common stock reserved for
issuance  represent 
in approximately  104%  of  the  shares  of  common  stock  required  for
conversion  of o u r outstanding  convertible  securities  if  the  convertible  securities  had  been
converted on June 30, 2005.
2,192 
    
449,674 
    
(390,200)
    
119 
    
(933)
    
   $
60,996 
   $ 129,654
78
14
2
50
14
BUSINESS
W e are  an independent  oil  and  gas  exploration,  exploitation,  development  and  production
company operating both internationally and domestically. Our operations are divided into three
operating  segments.  Our  domestic  operations  are  conducted through  our  wholly-owned
subsidiary, Gulf Energy Management Company. Gulf Energy Management’s operations consist
of exploration, exploitation, development, production and acquisition efforts in the United States,
principally  in  the onshore and offshore Gulf Coast regions of South Texas and Louisiana. Our
international  crude  oil  exploration  and  production  operations  are  conducted through  our
approximately  62%  owned  subsidiary,  Global  Energy  Development  plc with  activities  in
Colombia, Panama and Peru. During 2004, we invested in International  Business  Associates,
Ltd. which comprises our third segment. International Business Associates is in the initial stages
of  operations  and focuses primarily on opportunities created  by  the  recent  deregulation  of  the
energy  markets  in  Eastern  Europe  by  trading  energy  futures  or  other  energy based contracts,
principally in Hungary and the United States.
Our revenues are primarily derived from production from our oil and gas properties. Gulf Energy
Management operates approximately 40% of its natural gas and crude oil properties which are all
located  in  the  United  States.  Global  operates 100% of  its  crude  oil  producing  properties,  all
located in Colombia. Our revenues are a function of the oil and gas volumes produced and the
prevailing  commodity price  at  the  time  of  production,  and  certain  quality  and  transportation
discounts. The commodity prices for crude oil and natural gas as well as the timing of production
volumes  have  a  significant  impact  on  our  operating  income. From  time-to-time  we  enter  into
hedging contracts to achieve more predictable cash flows and to reduce our exposure to declines
in market prices.
As of December 31, 2004 Gulf Energy Management had approximately 22 BCFe of proved oil
and gas reserves net to our interest with discounted future net cash flows, discounted at 10%, of
approximately $59 million. At December 31, 2004, Gulf Energy Management represented 46% of
our  consolidated  oil  and  gas  proved  reserve volumes, and in 2004, Gulf Energy Management
represented approximately 63% of our consolidated oil and gas revenues. In 2004, Gulf Energy
Management’s  oil  and gas revenues were comprised of approximately 40% oil sales and 60%
natural gas sales. Substantially all of Gulf Energy Management’s production is concentrated in
four oil and gas fields along the onshore and offshore Texas and Louisiana Gulf Coast.
Revenues from  Global  are  derived  solely  from  Global’s  Colombian  oil  production.  As  of
December 31, 2004 we had approximately 4.2 million barrels of international proved oil reserve
volumes  net  to  our  interest  with  discounted  future  net  cash flows,  discounted  at  10%,  of
approximately  $66  million.  Approximately  615,000 barrels  of  proved  oil  reserve  volumes  and
$9.7 million of discounted future net cash flows are attributable to a 14.65% minority interest of a
consolidated subsidiary. All of Global’s proved reserve volumes are located in Colombia. During
2004,  Global  produced  366,000  net  barrels  of  oil  in  Colombia  generating oil  revenues  of
approximately $11 million. Global represented 54% of our total proved reserves at December 31,
2004  and  approximately  37%  of  our  consolidated oil  and  gas  revenues  in  2004.  Global’s
activities in Panama and Peru, thus far, have been limited to technical evaluations of potential
exploration areas.
We were incorporated in 1973 in the state of California and reincorporated in 1979 in the state of
Delaware.  Our  principal  offices  are  located  at  180  State  Street, Suite  200,  Southlake,  Texas
76092, and our telephone number is (817) 424-2424.
15
SELLING STOCKHOLDERS
The selling stockholders may from time to time offer and sell pursuant to this prospectus any or
all  of  the  shares  of  common  stock  to  be  issued  upon  conversion of  the  Series  M  Convertible
Preferred Shares and issuable upon the declaration of dividends on those shares or to be issued
upon exercise of warrants issued in connection with the Series M Convertible Preferred Shares
and  the  Series  L Convertible  Preferred  Shares  or  issued  as  bonus  dividends  to  participating
holders of our Series G1 and G2 Convertible Preferred Shares.
The table below  sets  forth  the  name  of  the  selling  stockholder  and  the  number  of  shares of
common  stock  that  each  selling  stockholder  may  offer  pursuant  to  this prospectus.  Unless  set
forth below, to our knowledge, none of the selling stockholders has, or within the past three years
has had, any material relationship with us or any of our predecessors or affiliates.
The selling stockholders may from time to time offer and sell any or all of the shares under this
prospectus. Because the selling stockholders may offer all or some of the common stock offered
pursuant  to  this  prospectus,  we  cannot  estimate how  may  shares  of  common  stock  that  the
selling stockholders will hold upon consummation of any such sales.
Based upon the information provided to us by the selling stockholders, none of the selling
stockholders is a broker-dealer or affiliated with a broker-dealer. None of the selling stockholders
have agreements, arrangements or understandings with any other persons, either directly or
indirectly to dispose of the common stock being registered. Each of the selling stockholders has
represented to us that the common stock being registered was acquired for the selling
stockholder’s own account and not as nominee or agent, and that such selling stockholder was
not a registered broker-dealer or an entity engaged in the business of being a broker-dealer.
Shares Beneficially
Number of
Owned
Before the
Offering
Shares
Being
Offered
Shares Beneficially
Owned After The
Offering(1)
Percent(2) Number(3) Number Percent
Name and Address of Beneficial
Owner
Solomon Strategic  Holdings,  Inc.
(4)
c/o Andrew P. MacKellar
Greenlands
The Red Gap
Castletown
IM9 1HB British Isles
 
The Tail Wind Fund Ltd. (5)
c/o Bank of Nova Scotia Trust
Company
404 E. Bay Street
Nassau, Bahamas
 
Frost National Bank (6)
Number
[Amount]
1,322,962
*
1,574,351
0
15,472,852
6.62%
18,105,034
258,800
718,336
*
117,760
600,576
*
*
*
FBO Renaissance US Growth
Investment Trust PLC
100 W. Houston Street
San Antonio, TX 78205
 
Frost National Bank (7)
FBO BFS US Special
Opportunities Trust PLC
100 W. Houston Street
San Antonio, TX 78205
16
Name and Address of Beneficial
Owner
Sreedeswar Holdings Inc. (8)
P.O. Box 1961
Al Futtain Tower
Suite 304
Dubai
United Arab Emirates
 
Concordia Partners LP (9)
Unit 12, First Floor 
Harbour Yard, Chelsea Harbour
London SW10 OXO
 
Hana Grove
Rye House, Catesby Lane
Lapworth Solihull
West Midlands
B94 5QY United Kingdome
 
Louise Francesca Briscoe
Foxbrook Cottage
Old Warwick Road
Rowington, Warwickshire, GB
CB35 7AA
 
Anglo Irish Bank (SUISSE) SA (10)
7 Rue des Alpes
CH 1211
Geneve 1 Switzerland
538,752
*
88,320
450,432
*
Shares Beneficially
Owned
Before the
Offering
Percent(2)
Number
[Amount]
344,733
92,761
88,718
44,359
125,213
Number of
Shares
Being
Offered 
Number(3)
Shares Beneficially
Owned After The
Offering(1)
Number Percent
*
*
*
*
*
45,296 299,437
66,723 26,038
14,544 74,174
7,272 37,087
125,213
0
*
*
*
*
*
64,057
640
3,264
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
3,904
97,600
4,093 59,964
16,000 81,600
32,000 163,200
195,200
Centrum Bank AG (11)
Kirchstrasse 3
9490 Vaduz
Principality of Liechtenstein
 
Franz Horhager
Kohlmarkt 5/6
A-101 Vienna, Austria
 
Bank Julius Baer & Co. Ltd. (12)
Bahnhofstrasse 36
P.O. Box
CH-8010 Zurich
Switzerland
 
Hassan Nemazee
720 Fifth Avenue
9th Floor
New York, NY 10268
 
* Less than 1.0%
(1) Assumes all shares of common stock offered hereby are sold.
(2) Based on the number of shares outstanding on August 15, 2005.
(3) Includes shares issuable as dividends in connection with the Series M Convertible Preferred
Shares.
(4) Mr. Andrew P. MacKeller, a director of Solomon Strategic Holdings, Inc., has the power to vote
and dispose of the common shares being registered on behalf of the selling stockholder.
(5) Tailwind Advisory & Management Ltd., a UK corporation, is the investment manager for The
Tail Wind Fund, Ltd., with the power to vote and dispose of the common shares being registered
on behalf of the selling stockholder. David Crook is the Chief Executive Officer and controlling
shareholder of Tailwind Advisory & Management Ltd. and possesses the power to act on its
behalf. David Crook disclaims beneficial ownership of the shares of common stock being
registered.
(6) Russell Cleveland has the power to vote and dispose of the common shares being registered
on behalf of Renaissance US Growth Investment Trust PLC, as well as BFS US Special
Opportunities Trust PLC. Under Rule 13d-3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, each of the
selling security holders would be deemed to be the beneficial owner of 1,257,088 shares of
common stock prior to the offering of the shares being registered on behalf of the selling
stockholders and 1,051,008 after such offering. 
(7) Russell Cleveland has the power to vote and dispose of the common shares being registered
on  behalf  of  BFS  US  Special  Opportunites  Trust  PLC,  as  well a s Rennaisance  US  Growth
Investment Trust PLC. Under Rule 13d-3 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, each of the
selling  security  holders  would be  deemed to  be  the  beneficial  owner  of  1,257,088  shares  of
common  stock  prior  to th e offering  of  the  shares  being  registered  on  behalf  of  the  selling
stockholders and 1,051,008 after such offering. 
(8) Mr. Vallipuram Gireesa Venkit Eswaran may be deemed the control person of the shares
owned by Sreedeswar Holdings Inc. and has the power to vote and dispose of the common
shares being registered on behalf of the selling stockholder.
(9)Concordia Advisors are the investment managers for Concordia Partners LP. Lawrie Stobbs of
Concordia Advisors has the power to vote and dispose of the common shares on the selling
stockholder's behalf.
(10) Anglo Irish Bank is a subsidiary of Anglo Irish Bank (Suisse) SA, a bank organized under the
laws of Switzerland. Anglo Irish Bank (Suisse) SA has the power to vote and dispose of the
common shares being registered on behalf of the selling stockholder. Neville L.A. Cook and Tom
Browne are the President/Chairman and Vice President/Vice Chairman of Anglo Irish Bank
(Suisse) SA, and the power to vote and dispose of the common shares rests with a group of asset
managers and other executive officers reporting to Messrs. Cook and Browne.
(11) Centrum Bank, a bank organized under the laws of Switzerland, has the power to vote and
dispose of the common shares being registered on behalf of the selling stockholder. Marxer Peter
and Oberhuber Hubert are the President/Chairman and Vice President/Vice Chairman of
Centrum Bank, and the power to vote and dispose of the common shares rests with a group of
asset managers and other executive officers reporting to Messrs. Peter and Hubert.
(12) Bank Julius Baer & Co. Ltd., a bank organized under the laws of Switzerland, has the power
to vote and dispose of the common shares being registered on behalf of the selling stockholder.
Jean - Marc Mallard is the Senior Vice President of Bank Julius Baer & Co. Ltd, and the power to
vote and dispose of the common shares rests with a group of asset managers and other
executive officers reporting to Messr. Mallard.
17
DESCRIPTION OF CAPITAL STOCK
General
The following descriptions are summaries of material terms of our common stock, preferred stock,
certificate  of  incorporation  and  amended  and  restated  bylaws. This  summary  is  qualified  by
reference to our restated certificate of incorporation and amended and restated bylaws, copies of
which have been filed as exhibits to the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part,
and by the provisions of applicable law.
Our authorized capital stock consists of 325,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.01
per  share,  and  10,000,000  shares  of  preferred  stock,  par  value $1.00 per  share.  Of  the
10,000,000  shares  of  preferred  stock,  700,000  shares  have b e e n designated  Series  G1
Convertible  Preferred  Stock,  100,000  shares  have  been designated  Series  G2  Convertible
Preferred Stock, 150,000 shares have been designated Series G4 Convertible Preferred Stock,
65,000 shares have been designated Series J Convertible Preferred Stock, 65,000 have been
designated Series  L  Convertible  Preferred  Stock  and  50,000  have  been  designated  Series M
Convertible Preferred Stock.
Common Stock
Each share of common stock entitles the holder to one vote on all matters submitted to a vote of
stockholders. Subject to preferences that may be applicable to any outstanding preferred stock,
the holders of our common stock are entitled to dividends when, as and if declared by our board
of  directors  out  of  funds legally  available  for  that  purpose.  If  we  are  liquidated,  dissolved  or
wound up, the holders of our common stock will be entitled to a pro rata share in any distribution
to  stockholders,  but  only  after  satisfaction  of  all  of  our liabilities  and  of  the  prior  rights  of  any
outstanding series of our preferred stock. The common stock has no preemptive or conversion
rights. There are no redemption or sinking fund provisions applicable to the common stock. All
outstanding shares of our common stock are fully paid and nonassessable.
Preferred Stock
O u r board of  directors  has  the  authority,  without  stockholder  approval,  to  issue  shares of
preferred stock from time to time in one or more series, and to fix the number of shares and terms
of each such series. The board may determine the designation and other terms of each series,
including:
18
·   dividend rates,
·   redemption rights,
·   liquidation rights,
·   sinking fund provisions,
·   conversion rights,
·   voting rights, and
·   any other designations, preferences, rights, qualifications, limitations, or restrictions.
 
Series G1 Convertible Preferred Stock
The Series  G1  Convertible  Preferred  Stock  (the  “Series  G1  Preferred”),  which  was issued  in
October 2000, has a liquidation value of $100 per share, is non-voting, and is convertible at the
holder’s option into Harken common stock at a conversion price of $12.50 per share, subject to
adjustment in certain circumstances.
The Series G1 Preferred holders are entitled to receive dividends at an annual rate equal to $8
per share when, as and if declared by Harken’s Board of Directors. All dividends on the Series
G1  Preferred  are  cumulative  and  payable semi-annually  in  arrears,  payable  on  June  30  and
December  30.  At  Harken’s option,  dividends  may  also  be  payable  in  Harken  common  stock
valued at $12.50 per share. The dividend and liquidation rights of the Series G1 Preferred rank
junior  to  all  claims  of  creditors,  including  holders  of  outstanding  debt securities,  but  senior  to
Harken common stockholders and to any subsequent series of Harken preferred stock, unless
otherwise provided, except for Harken’s Series G2 Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series G2
Preferred”),  Series  G4 Convertible  Preferred  Stock  (the  “Series  G4  Preferred”),  the  Series  J
Preferred, the Series L Preferred, and the Series M Preferred which rank equal to the Series G1
Preferred.
19
During the year ended December 31, 2004, holders of 28,940 shares of the Series G1 Preferred
elected  to  exercise  their  conversion  option,  and  such  holders  were issued  231,651  shares  of
Harken common stock. In October 2004, in order to induce the holders to convert their preferred
stock  into  common  stock,  we entered  into  agreements  with  the  holders  of  the  Series  G1  and
Series  G2 Preferred  which  provided  a  20%  increase  in  the  number  of  shares  of  our  common
stock each Series G1 and Series G2 Preferred holder would receive upon voluntary conversion
under  the  original  terms  of  the  Series  G1  and  G2  Preferred agreements.  In  November  2004,
holders of approximately 281,447 shares of Series G1 Preferred out of the total of 295,375 Series
G1  Preferred  outstanding, elected  to  exercise  their  conversion  option  under  the  revised
agreement, and such holders were issued approximately 2.7 million shares of our common stock.
At June 30, 2005, there were 13,925 shares of Series G1 Preferred outstanding.
Series G2 Convertible Preferred Stock
In July 2001, Harken issued 95,800 shares of a new series of convertible preferred stock,  the
Series  G2  Preferred,  in  exchange  for  5%  European  Notes  in  the  face amount  of  $9,580,000.
Harken’s Board of Directors approved the authorization and issuance of up to 100,000 shares of
the Series G2 Preferred, which has a liquidation value of $100 per share, is non-voting, and is
convertible at the holder’s option into Harken common stock at a conversion price of $3.00 per
share,  subject  to  adjustment  in  certain  circumstances.  The  Series  G2  Preferred is  also
convertible  by  Harken  into  shares  of  Harken  common  stock  if  for  any period  of  twenty
consecutive  calendar  days,  the  average  of  the  closing  prices o f Harken  common  stock  during
such period shall have equaled or exceeded $3.75 per share.
The Series G2 Preferred holders are entitled to receive dividends at an annual rate equal to $8
per share when, as and if declared by the Harken Board of Directors. All dividends on the Series
G2  Preferred  are  cumulative  and  payable semi-annually  in  arrears,  payable  on  June  30  and
December 30. At Harken’s option, dividends may also be payable in Harken common stock at
$3.00  per  share of  Harken  common  stock.  The  Series  G2  Preferred  dividend  and  liquidation
rights rank junior to all claims of creditors, including holders of outstanding debt securities, but
senior to Harken common stockholders and to any subsequent series of Harken preferred stock,
unless otherwise provided.
During the year ended December 31, 2004, holders of 14,500 shares of the Series G2 Preferred
elected to exercise their conversion option, and such holders were issued 487,697 shares of our
common stock. In October 2004, in order to induce the holders to convert their preferred stock into
common  stock,  we  entered into agreements  with  the  holders  of  the  Series  G1  and  Series  G2
Preferred  which provided a 20% increase in the number of shares of our common stock each
Series G1 and Series G2 Preferred holder would receive upon voluntary conversion under the
original  terms  of  the  Series  G1  and  G2  Preferred  agreements.  In  November 2004,  holders  of
approximately  21,650  shares  of  G2  Preferred  out  of  the  total o f 24,150  Series  G2  Preferred
outstanding, elected to exercise their conversion option under the revised agreement, and such
holders  were  issued  approximately 900,000 shares of our common stock. In March 2005, 500
shares of our Series G2 Preferred were converted to common stock pursuant to the terms of the
original issuance. At June 30, 2005, there were 2,000 shares of Series G2 Preferred outstanding.
Series G3 Convertible Preferred Stock
During the nine months ended September 30, 2004, holders of the remaining 77,000 shares of
our Series G3 Preferred stock elected to exercise their conversion option, and these remaining
holders  were  issued  a  total  of  approximately  15.5  million shares  of  our  common  stock.  At
December 31, 2004, the Series G3 Preferred is no longer outstanding.
Series G4 Convertible Preferred Stock
In March 2004, our Board of Directors approved the authorization and issuance of up to 150,000
shares of a new series of convertible preferred stock, the Series G4 Preferred. In April 2004, we
issued 77,517 shares of the Series G4 Preferred in exchange for approximately 1,000 shares of
the Series G1 Preferred and 23,000 shares of the Series G2 Preferred and $2.4 million in cash.
The  Series  G4 Preferred  has  a  liquidation  value  of  $100  per  share,  is  non-voting  and  is
convertible at the holders’ option into our common stock at a conversion price of $2.00 per share,
subject to adjustments in certain circumstances. The Series G4 Preferred is also convertible by
us  into  freely  tradable  shares  of  our  common stock  if  for  any  period  of  twenty  consecutive
calendar days the average of the closing prices of our common stock has equaled or exceeded
$2.20  per  share, initially.  This  target  price  will  be  reduced  by  10  percent  of  the  immediately
preceding target price in December of each year, commencing December 31, 2004.
The holders of the Series G4 Preferred are entitled to receive dividends, when as and if declared
by the Board of Directors, at an annual rate equal to $8.00 per share. All dividends on the Series
G4  Preferred  are  payable  semi-annually  in arrears,  in  cash  or,  at  our  option,  in  shares  of  our
common stock, payable on June 30 and December 31, commencing December 31, 2004. At our
option,  the dividends  can  be  paid  in  shares  of  common  stock  valued  at  $2.00  per  share. The
Series G4 Preferred dividend and liquidation rights rank junior to all claims of creditors, including
holders of outstanding debt securities, but senior to our common stockholders and pari passu to
any other series of our preferred stock, unless otherwise provided.
We may also redeem the Series G4 Preferred in whole or in part for cash at any time at $100 per
share plus any accrued and unpaid dividends. In addition, on or after January 1, 2006, we may
further elect, in any six month period, to redeem up to 50% of the outstanding Series G4 Preferred
with  shares  of  our  common  stock valued at an average market price, and using a redemption
value of the Series G4 Preferred that includes a 5% premium based on our market capitalization
at the time of redemption.
Accounting for the Series G4 Preferred Stock Issuance— In April 2004 upon the issuance of the
Series  G4  Preferred,  we  reflected  the difference  between  the  face  amount  of  the  Series  G1
Preferred and the Series G2 Preferred, plus the $2.4 million in cash, less transaction fees, and
the  fair value  of  the  Series  G4  Preferred  shares  issued  as  Exchange  on  Preferred  Stock of
approximately  $337,000  in  the  Consolidated  Condensed  Statement  of  Operations for the  nine
months ended September 30, 2004, as an increase to Net Income Attributed to Common Stock.
The valuation of the Series G4 Preferred stock is supported by an appraisal, performed by RP&C
International  Inc. (“RP&C”),  and  is  based  on  the  market  value  of  the  underlying  conversion
shares of Harken common stock as of the date of the exchange along with a discounted value
associated with an assumed dividend yield.
20
Series J Convertible Preferred Stock and Warrants
In March 2004,  Harken’s  Board  of  Directors  approved  the  authorization  and  issuance  of  up to
65,000 shares of a new series of convertible preferred stock, the Series J Preferred. In April 2004,
in exchange for $5.0 million in cash, Harken issued
·   50,000 shares of Series J Preferred Stock,
·   2,873,563 warrants to purchase Harken common stock; and
·   10,000 unit purchase warrants
T h e Series  J  Preferred  has  a  liquidation  value  of  $100  per  share,  is  non-voting a n d was
convertible at the holders’ option into common stock at an original conversion price of $0.87 per
share, subject to adjustments in certain circumstances. In May 2004, as a result of the issuance
of the Series L Preferred, the conversion price of Series J Preferred was adjusted from $0.87 to
$0.85. The Series J Preferred is also convertible by Harken, into freely tradable shares of Harken
common stock at the conversion price, if for any period of twenty consecutive calendar days the
average  closing  price  of  Harken common  stock  has  equaled  or  exceeded  150%  of  the
conversion price.
Dividends - The holders of the Series J Preferred are entitled to receive dividends at an annual
rate equal to 5% per share. All dividends on the Series J Preferred stock are payable quarterly in
arrears, beginning on September 30, 2004 in cash or, at Harken’s option, in shares of Harken
common stock. The Series J Preferred dividend and liquidation rights rank junior to all claims of
creditors, including  holders  of  outstanding  debt  securities,  but  senior  to  the  holders o f Harken
common stock and pari passu to the holders of any other series of Harken preferred stock, unless
otherwise provided.
Additional Dividend Feature - If an additional dividend event occurs while the Series J Preferred
is outstanding, the holders will have the right to an annual additional dividend calculated at a rate
of 6.0% per annum of the issue price of any outstanding Series J Preferred, payable in cash, until
such additional dividend event has been remedied. Additional dividend events include the failure
of  Harken  common  stock  to  be listed  for  trading  on  any  principal  market,  Harken’s  failure  to
declare or pay in full any dividend payable on the shares of Series J Preferred on the applicable
dividend payment date, as well as other additional dividend events that are defined in the terms
of the Series J Preferred.
Optional Redemption Event - If an optional redemption event occurs while the Series J Preferred
is outstanding, each holder will have the right to require Harken to repurchase all or any portion
of such holder’s Series J Preferred at the greater of (x) 115% of the stated value of the Series J
Preferred,  or  (y)  the  market  value  of  Harken  common stock  as  if  the  Series  J  Preferred  were
converted  at  the  then  prevailing conversion  price  at  the  time  of  redemption.  An  optional
redemption  event includes the failure to declare and pay dividends on the Series J Preferred,
voluntary  liquidation,  a  fundamental  change  in  the  ownership  of  Harken,  failure of  Harken  to
generally pay its debts as they become due, as well as other events defined in the terms of the
Series J Preferred.
Accounting for the Series J Preferred Stock and Warrants - In accordance with EITF Topic D-98
“Classification  and  Measurement  of  Redeemable Securities”  (“EITF  D-98”),  the  Series  J
Preferred contain certain provisions whereby redemption is deemed to be out of our control.
 
21
Those optional redemption events for the Series J Preferred Shares include the following:
·   Our failure to declare or pay in full any dividend payable on the shares of Series J Preferred on
the dividend payment date and the failure is not cured within 30 days, or we fail to pay any
redemption price when due; and
·   Our commencement of a voluntary or other proceeding seeking liquidation, reorganization or
other relief with respect to our debts under any bankruptcy, insolvency or other similar law not
or hereafter in effect or seeking the appointment of a trustee receiver, liquidator, custodian or
other similar official of us or any substantial part of our property, or we consent to any similar
relief or to the appointment of or taking possession by any similar official in an involuntary case
or other proceeding commenced against us, or we make a general assignment for  the benefit
of  creditors,  or  fail  generally  to  pay  our  debts  as  they become due  or  admit  in  writing  our
inability to pay our debts as they become due.
Therefore the fair value of the Series J Preferred of approximately $4.7 million, is classified as
temporary equity in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2004.
In accordance with EITF 00-19 “Accounting for Derivative Financial Instruments Indexed to, and
Potentially Settled in, a Company’s Own Stock” (“EITF 00-19”), the common stock warrants were
initially  measured  at  fair  value  of  $287,000 b y an  independent  third  party  and  classified  as
permanent  equity  in  the Consolidated  Balance  Sheet  at  December  31,  2004.  The  fair  value
allocated to the unit purchase warrants is also classified as permanent equity in the Consolidated
Condensed Balance Sheet at December 31, 2004.
After allocating the net proceeds between the Series J Preferred, the common stock warrants,
and the unit purchase warrants, Harken determined no beneficial conversion feature existed.
Adjustment of Series J Conversion Price and Warrant Exercise Price - In May 2004, as a result of
our issuance of our Series L Convertible Preferred Stock, the conversion price of the Series J
Preferred was adjusted from $0.87 to $0.85. In accordance with EITF Issue 00-27, Issue 7, the
number of the additional shares issuable upon conversion of the Series J Preferred multiplied by
our stock price on the date of the original transaction is recorded as a Payment of Preferred Stock
Dividends of approximately $135,000 which is included as a decrease to Net Income Attributed
to Common Stock in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31,
2004. In addition, the original exercise price of the common stock warrants issued with the Series
J  Preferred was adjusted from $0.98 to $0.95. In August and October 2004, as a result of our
issuance of the 5% Notes and the Series M Convertible Preferred Stock, the exercise price of the
common stock warrants issued with the Series J Preferred was adjusted from $0.95 to $0.92. In
conjunction  with  SFAS  123  “Accounting for  Stock  Based  Compensation”  (SFAS 123),  the
incremental increase in the fair value of the warrant of approximately $26,000, is recorded as a
Payment of Preferred Stock Dividends which is included as a decrease to Net Income Attributed
to Common Stock in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31,
2004. If we issue any additional shares of our common stock or any common stock equivalent at
a  price per  share  less  than  the  exercise  price  of  the  common  stock  warrants  issued with the
Series  J  Preferred,  the  exercise  price  of  the  common  stock  warrants  is subject  to  additional
adjustment.
Series L Convertible Preferred Stock and Warrants
In March 2004, our Board of Directors approved the authorization and issuance of up to 65,000
shares of a new series of convertible preferred stock, the Series L Preferred. In May 2004, we
issued 50,000 shares of Series L Preferred stock and 3,676,471 warrants to purchase shares of
our common stock in exchange for $5 million in cash. Shares of the Series L Preferred have a
liquidation  value of $100 per share, are non-voting and were convertible at the holders’ option
into our common stock.
 
22
On October 7, 2004, we entered into a Conversion/Redemption Agreement with the holders of
the  Series  L  Preferred,  pursuant  to  which  we  reduced  the  conversion price  of  the  Series  L
Preferred in order to induce the holders to convert their Series L Preferred into common stock.
Pursuant to that agreement, each holder of the Series L Preferred agreed to convert at least 20%
of its holdings of Series L Preferred on each of October 8, 2004, November 2, 2004, December 1,
2004, December 30, 2004 and February 1, 2005, provided we met certain conditions. We agreed
that the conversion price would be the volume weighted average price of the our common stock
for the twenty consecutive trading days immediately preceding the applicable conversion date. In
2004,  a  total  of  $4  million,  plus accrued  dividends,  of  the  liquidation  value  of  the  Series  L
Preferred  was converted  into  7.4  million  shares  of  our  common  stock.  In  February  2005,  the
remaining $1 million, plus accrued dividends, of the liquidation value of the Series L Preferred
was converted into 2.1 million shares of our common stock. As of March 31, 2005, the Series L
Preferred is no longer outstanding.
Dividends  -  The holders  of  the  Series  L  Preferred  were  entitled  to  receive  dividends  at  an
increasing rate starting at 4% per share. All dividends on the Series L Preferred were payable
semi-annually on June 30 and December 30, beginning on June 30, 2004 and were payable in
cash or, at our option, in freely tradable shares of our common stock.
T h e dividend  and  liquidation  rights  of  the  Series  L  Preferred  ranked  junior  to a l l claims  of
creditors, including holders of outstanding debt securities, but senior to holders of our common
stock and pari passu to any other series of our preferred stock, unless otherwise provided.
Series M Convertible Preferred Stock and Warrants
In September 28, 2004, our Board of Directors approved the authorization and issuance of up to
50,000  shares  of  a  new  series  of  convertible  preferred  stock, the  Series  M  Preferred.  In
September 2004, we issued 50,000 shares of Series M Preferred stock and warrants to purchase
4,385,965 shares of our common stock in exchange for $5 million in cash. Shares of the Series M
Preferred have a liquidation value of $100 per share, are non-voting and were convertible at the
holders’ option into our common stock.
T h e Series  M  Preferred  has  a  liquidation  value  of  $100  per  share,  is  non-voting a n d is
convertible at the holders’ option into common stock at a conversion price of $0.59  per  share,
subject to adjustments in certain circumstances. If for any period of thirty consecutive days the
average closing price of our common stock during such period trades above $0.74 per share for
30  consecutive  days,  up to 25,000  shares  of  the  Series  M  Preferred  is  convertible  by  us  into
freely tradable shares of common stock at $0.59 per share. If the average daily volume weighted
average  price  of  our  common  stock  during  a  period  of  thirty  trading days  equals  or  exceeds
$0.89, we may convert all the Series M Preferred into freely tradable shares of our common stock
at $0.59 per share.
Accounting for the Classification of the Series M Preferred Stock and Warrants— In accordance
with EITF Topic D-98, the Series M Preferred does not contain provisions whereby redemption is
deemed  to  be  out  of  Harken’s  control.  Therefore the  Series  M  Preferred  is  classified  as
permanent equity in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2004 and March 31, 2005.
In accordance with EITF 00-19, the common stock warrants were initially measured at fair value
and are classified  as  permanent  equity  in  the  Consolidated  Balance  Sheet  at  December 31,
2004 and March 31, 2005.
Adjustment of Series M Conversion Price— In March  2005,  as  a  result  of  a  default  under  the
Registration  Rights  Agreement o f the  Series  M  Preferred,  the  original  conversion  price  of  the
Series M Preferred was adjusted from $0.60 to $0.59. In accordance with EITF Issue 00-27, Issue
7 , approximately  $90,000  is  recorded  as  a  Payment  of  Preferred  Stock  Dividends which  is
presented  as  an  increase  to  Net  Loss  Attributed  to  Common  Stock  in t h e Consolidated
Condensed Statement of Operations for the period ended March 31, 2005. As of May 10, 2005,
this default under the Series M Preferred Registration Rights Agreement has not yet been cured.
None of our other debt or equity instruments are affected by this Registration Rights Agreement
default.
 
23
Dividends  -  The holders  of  the  Series  M  Preferred  are  entitled  to  receive  dividends  at  an
increasing  rate  starting  at  4%  per  share.  On  the  third  anniversary  from  the date of  issuance
(October  7,  2007),  the  dividend  rate  increases  to  8%  per  share with 1%  annual  increases
thereafter to a maximum of 12% annually. All dividends on the Series M Preferred are payable
semi-annually on June 30 and December 30, beginning on June 30, 2004. Dividends may be
paid in cash or, at our option, in freely tradable shares of our common stock, until October 7, 2007
and  in  cash thereafter. The dividend rate may escalate to 12% under certain events of default,
including failure to declare and pay dividends.
The dividend  and  liquidation  rights  of  the  Series  M  Preferred  shall  rank  junior to all  claims  of
creditors, including holders of outstanding debt securities, but senior to holders of our common
stock and pari passu to any other series of our preferred stock, unless otherwise provided.
Warrants - The common  stock  warrants  issued  in  connection  with  the  Series  M  Preferred  are
exercisable for two years from issuance and had an original exercise price of $0.57.
Redemption Feature - We may redeem the Series M Preferred stock for cash, in whole or in part,
anytime after October 7, 2007, for liquidation value of $100 per share.
Anti-Takeover Effects Of Delaware Laws And Our Charter And Bylaw Provisions
Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws. Certain provisions in our Certificate of Incorporation and
Bylaws summarized below may be deemed to have an anti-takeover effect and may delay, deter
or  prevent  a tender offer or takeover attempt that a stockholder might consider to be in its best
interests, including attempts that might result in a premium being paid over the market price for
the shares held by stockholders.
Our Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws contain provisions that
·   permit us  to  issue,  without  any  further  vote  or  action  by  the  stockholders, up  to 10,000,000
shares of preferred stock in one or more series and, with respect to each such series, to fix the
number of shares constituting the series and the designation of the series, the voting powers (if
any) of the shares of the series, and the preferences and relative, participating, optional and
other special rights, if any, and any qualification, limitations or restrictions, of the shares of such
series; and
·   limit stockholders’ ability to call special meetings.
T h e foregoing  provisions  of  our  Certificate  of  Incorporation  and  Bylaws  could discourage
potential acquisition proposals and could delay or prevent a change in control. These provisions
are intended to enhance the likelihood of continuity and stability in the composition of the board
of  directors  and  in the policies  formulated  by  the  board  of  directors  and  to  discourage  certain
types o f transactions  that  may  involve  an  actual  or  threatened  change  of  control.  These
provisions are designed to reduce our vulnerability to an unsolicited acquisition proposal. The
provisions  also  are  intended  to  discourage  certain tactics  that  may  be  used  in  proxy  fights.
However, such provisions could have the effect of discouraging others from making tender offers
for our shares and, as a consequence, they also may inhibit fluctuations in the market price of our
common stock that could result from actual or rumored takeover attempts. Such provisions also
may have the effect of preventing changes in our management.
Delaware Takeover Statute. We are subject to Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation
Law, which, subject to certain exceptions, prohibits a Delaware corporation from engaging in any
“business combination” (as defined below) with any “interested stockholder” (as defined below)
for  a  period  of  three  years  following  the  date  that  such stockholder  became  an  interested
stockholder, unless: (i) prior to such date, the board of directors of the corporation approved either
the  business combination  or  the  transaction  that  resulted  in  the  stockholder  becoming  an
interested  stockholder;  (ii)  on  consummation  of  the  transaction  that  resulted i n the  stockholder
becoming an interested stockholder, the interested stockholder owned at least 85% of the voting
stock  of  the  corporation  outstanding  at  the time  the  transaction  commenced,  excluding  for
purposes of determining the number of shares outstanding those shares owned (x) by persons
who  are  directors  and also  officers  and  (y)  by  employee  stock  plans  in  which  employee
participants do not have the right to determine confidentially whether shares held subject to the
plan will be tendered in a tender or exchange offer; or (iii) on or subsequent to such date, the
business  combination  is  approved  by  the  board o f directors  and  authorized  at  an  annual  or
special meeting of the stockholders, and not by written consent, by the affirmative vote of at least
66 2/3% of the outstanding voting stock that is not owned by the interested stockholder.
24
Section 203  of  the  Delaware  General  Corporation  Law  defines  “business  combination”  to
include: (i) any merger or consolidation involving the corporation and the interested stockholder;
(ii) any sale, transfer, pledge or other disposition of 10% or more of the assets of the corporation
involving the interested stockholder; (iii) subject to certain exceptions, any transaction that results
in  the  issuance  or  transfer  by  the  corporation  of  any  stock  of  the  corporation to  the  interested
stockholder;  (iv)  any  transaction  involving  the  corporation that  has  the  effect  of  increasing  the
proportionate share of the stock of any class or series of the corporation beneficially owned by
the  interested stockholder; or (v) the receipt by the interested stockholder of the benefit o f any
loans,  advances,  guarantees,  pledges  or  other  financial  benefits  provided b y or  through  the
corporation. In general, Section 203 defines an “interested stockholder” as any entity or person
beneficially owning 15% or more of the outstanding voting stock of the corporation and any entity
or person affiliated with or controlling or controlled by such entity or person.
Limitation On Liability Of Directors
Our certificate of incorporation and by-laws indemnify our directors to the fullest extent permitted
by the Delaware General Corporation Law. The Delaware laws permit a corporation to limit or
eliminate  a  director’s  personal  liability  to the  corporation  or  the  holders  of  its  capital  stock  for
breach of duty. This limitation is generally unavailable for acts or omissions by a director which
were (i) in bad faith, (ii) were the result of active and deliberate dishonesty and were material to
the cause of action so adjudicated or (iii) involved a financial profit or other advantage to which
such  director  was  not  legally entitled.  The  Delaware  laws  also  prohibit  limitations  on  director
liability for acts or omissions which resulted in a violation of a statute prohibiting certain dividend
declarations, certain payments to stockholders after dissolution and particular types of loans. The
effect of these provisions is to eliminate the rights of our company and our stockholders (through
stockholders’ derivative suits on behalf of our company) to recover monetary damages against a
director for  breach  of  fiduciary  duty  as  a  director  (including  breaches  resulting  from grossly
negligent behavior), except in the situations described above. These provisions will not limit the
liability of directors under the federal securities laws of the United States.
Stockholder Rights Plan
Each share of common stock includes one right to purchase from us one one-thousandth of  a
share of Series E Junior Participating Preferred Stock at a price of $35.00 per unit, subject to
adjustment. The rights are issued pursuant to a rights agreement between us and ChaseMellon
Shareholder  Services  L.L.C.,  as  rights agent.  We  have  summarized  selected  portions  of  the
rights agreement and the rights below. For a complete description of the rights, we encourage
you to read the summary below and the rights agreement, as amended, filed as an exhibit to the
registration statement of which this prospectus is a part.
The rights are evidenced by the certificates representing our currently outstanding common stock
and all common stock certificates we issue prior to the “distribution date”. That date will occur,
except in some cases, on the earlier of:
·   ten days following a public announcement that a person or group of affiliated or  associated
persons, who we refer to collectively as an “acquiring person”, has acquired, or obtained the
right to acquire, beneficial ownership of 15% or more of the outstanding shares of our common
stock, or
25
·   ten business days following the start of a tender offer or exchange offer that would result in a
person becoming an acquiring person. Our board of directors may defer the distribution date in
some circumstances. Also, some inadvertent acquisitions of our common stock will not result in
a  person  becoming  an  acquiring  person  if  the  person  promptly  divests itself of  sufficient
common stock.
Until the distribution date:
·   common stock certificates will evidence the rights,
·   the rights will be transferable only with those certificates,
·   new common  stock  certificates  will  contain  a  notation  incorporating the  rights agreement  by
reference, and
·   the surrender for transfer of any common stock certificate will also constitute the transfer of the
rights associated with the common stock represented by the certificate.
The rights are not exercisable until the distribution date and will expire at the close of business
on April 6, 2008, unless we redeem or exchange them at an earlier date as described below or
we extend the expiration date prior to April 6, 2008.
A s s o o n as  practicable  after  the  distribution  date,  the  rights  agent  will  mail certificates
representing the rights to holders of record of common stock as of the close of business on the
distribution date. From that date on, only separate rights certificates will represent the rights. We
will issue rights with all shares of common stock issued prior to the distribution date. We will also
issue rights  with  shares  of  common  stock  issued  after  the  distribution  date  in connection  with
some  employee  benefit  plans  or  upon  conversion  of  some securities.  Except  as  otherwise
determined by our board of directors, we will not issue rights with any other shares of common
stock issued after the distribution date.
Shares of preferred stock purchasable upon exercise of the rights will not be redeemable. Each
share of preferred stock will be entitled, when and if declared, to a minimum preferential quarterly
dividend payment of $10.00 per share but will be entitled to an aggregate dividend of 1,000 times
the dividend declared per share of common stock. In the event of our liquidation, dissolution or
winding up, the holders of the preferred stock will be entitled to a minimum preferential liquidation
payment of $1,000.00 per share (plus any accrued but unpaid dividends) but will be entitled to an
aggregate payment of 1,000 times the payment made per share of common stock. Each share of
preferred stock will have 1,000 votes, voting together with the common stock. Finally, in the event
of any merger, consolidation or other transaction in which outstanding shares of common stock
are converted or exchanged, each share of preferred stock will be entitled to receive 1,000 times
the  amount  received  per  share  of  common  stock.  These rights  are  protected  by  customary
antidultion provisions.
Because of the nature of the preferred stock’s dividend, liquidation and voting rights, the value of
the one one-thousandth interest in a share of preferred stock purchasable upon exercise of each
right should approximate the value of one share of common stock.
In the event that any person or group of affiliated or associated persons becomes a n acquiring
person,  each  holder  of  a  right,  other  than  rights  beneficially  owned by  the  acquiring  person
(which  will  become  void),  will  thereafter  have  the right to receive upon exercise of a right that
number of shares of common stock having a market value of two times the exercise price of the
right.
In the event that, after a person or group has become an acquiring person, we are acquired in a
merger or other business combination transaction or 50% or more of our consolidated assets or
earning power are sold, proper provisions will be made so that each holder of a right (other than
rights beneficially owned by an acquiring person) will have the right to receive upon the exercise
of a right that number of shares of common stock of the person with whom we have engaged in
the foregoing transaction (or its parent) which at the time of such transaction have a market value
of two times the exercise price of the right.
26
At any time after any person or group becomes an acquiring person and prior to the earlier of one
of the events described in the pervious paragraph or the acquisition by such acquiring person of
50% or more of the outstanding shares of common stock, the board of directors may exchange
the  rights  (other  than  rights owned  by  the  acquiring  person),  in  whole  or  in  part,  for  shares  of
common  stock or  preferred  stock  (or  a  series  of  preferred  stock  having  equivalent  rights,
preferences and privileges), at an exchange ratio of one share of common stock, or a fractional
share of preferred stock (or other preferred stock) equivalent in value thereto, per right.
With certain  exceptions,  no  adjustment  in  the  purchase  price  will  be  required  until cumulative
adjustments require an adjustment of at least 1% in that purchase price. No fractional shares of
preferred stock or common stock will be issued (other than fractions of preferred stock which are
integral multiples of one one-thousandth of a share of preferred stock, which may, at our election,
b e evidenced  by  depositary  receipts),  and  in  lieu  thereof  an  adjustment  in  cash will  be  made
based on the current market price of the preferred stock or the common stock.
At any time until the time a person becomes an acquiring person, we may redeem the rights in
whole,  but  not  in  part,  at  a  price  of  $.01  per  right,  payable,  at our option,  in  cash,  shares  of
common stock or such other consideration as our board of directors may determine. Upon such
redemption, the rights will terminate and the only right of the holders of rights will be to receive
the $.01 redemption price.
Until a right is exercised, a holder of rights will have no rights to vote or receive dividends or any
other  rights  as  a  stockholder  of  our  common  stock.  Stockholders may,  depending  upon  the
circumstances, recognize taxable income in the event that the rights become exercisable for our
common stock, or other consideration, or for the common stock of the acquiring company or are
exchanged as described above.
ChaseMellon Shareholder Services serves as rights agent with regard to the rights.
The rights will have anti-takeover effects. They will cause substantial dilution to any person or
group that attempts to acquire us without the approval of our board of directors. As a result, the
overall effect of the rights may be to make more difficult or discourage any attempt to acquire us
even if such acquisition may be favorable to the interests of our stockholders. Because our board
of directors can redeem the rights or approve a permitted offer, the rights should not interfere with
a merger or other business combination approved by our board of directors.
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
W e a re registering  the  common  stock  covered  by  this  prospectus  on  behalf  of  the  selling
stockholders. As used herein, “selling stockholders” include donees and pledgees selling shares
received  from  a  named  selling  stockholder  after  the  date  of this prospectus.  We  will  bear  all
costs, expenses and fees in connection with the registration of the common stock offered hereby.
Brokerage commissions and similar selling expenses, if any, attributable to the sale of shares of
common stock will be borne by the selling shareholders.
Each of the selling stockholders and any of their pledgees, assignees and successors-in-interest
may, from time to time, sell any or all of their shares of common stock on any stock exchange,
market or trading facility on which the shares are traded or in private transactions. These sales
may be at fixed or negotiated prices. Each of the selling stockholders may use any one or more of
the following methods when selling shares:
 
27
·   ordinary brokerage  transactions  and  transactions  in  which  the  broker  dealer  solicits
purchasers;
·   block trades in which the broker dealer will attempt to sell the shares as agent but may position
and resell a portion of the block as principal to facilitate the transaction;
·   purchases by a broker dealer as principal and resale by the broker dealer for its account;
 
·   an exchange distribution in accordance with the rules of the applicable exchange;
·   privately negotiated transactions;
·   settlement of short sales created after the date of this prospectus;
·  broker dealers  may  agree  with  the  selling  stockholders  to  sell  a specified  number of  such
shares at a stipulated price per share;
·   a combination of any such methods of sale; and
·   any other method permitted pursuant to applicable law.
Each of the selling stockholders may also sell shares under Rule 144 under the Securities Act, if
available, rather than under this prospectus. Broker dealers engaged by the selling stockholders
may  arrange  for  other  brokers  dealers  to participate  in  sales.  Broker  dealers  may  receive
commissions or discounts from the selling stockholders (or, if any broker dealer acts as agent for
t h e purchaser  of  shares,  from  the  purchaser)  in  amounts  to  be  negotiated.  The selling
stockholders do not expect these commissions and discounts to exceed what is customary in the
types of transactions involved.
Each of the selling stockholder may from time to time pledge or grant a security interest in some
or  all  of  the  shares  or  common  stock  or  warrants  owned  by them and,  if  they  default  in  the
performance of their secured obligations, the pledgees or secured parties may offer and sell the
shares of common stock from time to time under this prospectus, or under an amendment to this
prospectus under  Rule  424(b)(3)  or  other  applicable  provision  of  the  Securities  Act  of 1933
amending the list of selling stockholders to include the pledgee, transferee or other successors in
interest as selling stockholders under this prospectus.
The selling stockholders also may transfer the shares of common stock in other circumstances, in
which case the transferees, pledgees or other successors in interest will be the selling beneficial
owners for purposes of this prospectus.
The selling stockholders and any broker dealers or agents that are involved in selling the shares
may be deemed to be “underwriters” within the meaning of the Securities Act in connection with
such sales. In such event, any commissions received by such broker dealers or agents and any
profit  on  the  resale  of  the shares  purchased  by  them  may  be  deemed  to  be  underwriting
commissions  or discounts under the Securities Act. The selling stockholders have informed us
that none of them have any agreement or understanding, directly or indirectly, with any person to
distribute the common stock.
We have agreed to indemnify the selling stockholders against certain losses, claims, damages
and liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act.
 
28
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
W e are subject  to  the  informational  reporting  requirements  of  the  Securities  Exchange Act  of
1934, which requires us to file annual, quarterly and special reports, proxy statements and other
information  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange Commission.  You  may  read  and  copy  any
document  that  we  file  at  the  Public Reference  Room  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange
Commission at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. Information on the operation of the
Public Reference Room may be obtained by calling the Securities and Exchange Commission at
1-800-SEC-0330. You may also inspect our filings at the regional offices of the Securities and
Exchange  Commission  or  over  the  Internet  at  the Securities  and  Exchange  Commission’s
website at http://www.sec.gov. Our common shares are listed on the American Stock Exchange
under  the  symbol  “HEC.”  Our reports,  proxy  statements  and  other  information  may  also  be
obtained from the American Stock Exchange.
The Securities and Exchange Commission allows us to incorporate by reference the information
we file with them, which means that we can disclose important information to you by referring you
to  those  documents.  The  information incorporated  by  reference  is  an  important  part  of  this
prospectus, and information that we file later with the Securities and Exchange Commission will
automatically  update  and  supercede  this  information.  We  incorporate  by  reference the
documents  listed  below  and  any  future  filings  made  with  the  Securities a n d Exchange
Commission under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 until
we sell all of the securities that we have registered under the registration statement of which this
prospectus forms a part:
·   Annual Report  on  Form  10-K  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2004,  as amended by  the
Annual Reports on Form 10-K/A for the same period
·   Quarterly Report  on  Form  10-Q  for  the  quarter  ended  March  31,  2005,  as  amended b y the
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q/A for the same period, and Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for
the quarter ended June 30, 2005;
·   Definitive Proxy Statement on Schedule 14A filed on April 22, 2005;
·   Current Reports on Form 8-K filed on March 18, 2005, March 23, 2005, March 29, 2005, April
5, 2005, April 12, 2005, April 14, 2005, April 21, 2005, April 29, 2005, May 11, 2005, May 31,
2005, June 3, 2005, June 10, 2005,  June 20, 2005, June 23, 2005, June 27, 2006, June 28,
2005,  August 31,  2005, September  8,  2005,  September  12,  2005,  September  16,  2005,
September 21, 2005; September 23, 2005 and November 1, 2005 and on Form 8-K/A filed on
June 28, 2005.
You may request a copy of these filings at no cost, by writing or telephoning us at the following
address:
Secretary and General Counsel
Harken Energy Corporation
180 State Street, Suite 200
Southlake, TX 76092
LEGAL MATTERS
Certain matters with respect to the validity of the shares of common stock offered hereby will be
passed upon for us by McGuireWoods LLP, New York, New York.
EXPERTS
T h e consolidated  financial  statements  of  Harken  Energy  Corporation  for  the  year ended
December 31, 2004 on Form 10-K/A Amendment No. 3) for the year ended December 31, 2004,
incorporated by reference in this Prospectus have been audited by Hein & Associates LLP, an
independent  registered  public accounting firm, to the extent and for the period set forth in their
report incorporated herein by reference, and are incorporated herein in reliance upon such report
given upon the authority of said firm as experts in auditing and accounting.
 
29
The consolidated financial statements of Harken Energy Corporation as of December 31, 2003
and for the year then ended incorporated by reference in this Prospectus have been audited by
BDO Seidman, LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, to the extent and for the
period set forth in their report incorporated herein by reference, and are incorporated herein in
reliance upon  such  report  given  upon  the  authority  of  said  firm  as  experts  in  auditing and
accounting.
I n June 2004,  our  Audit  Committee  accepted  the  resignation  of  BDO  Seidman,  LLP  as  our
independent  accountant.  BDO’s  report  on  our  consolidated  financial  statements for  the  year
ended December 31, 2003 did not contain an adverse opinion or disclaimer of opinion, nor was
such report qualified or modified as to uncertainty, audit scope or accounting principles. During
the year ended December 31, 2003 and the six month period ending June 30, 2004, there were
reportable  events  requiring  disclosure  pursuant  to  Item  304(a)(1)(v)  of Regulation  S-K.  For
additional detail, please refer to our Form 10-K/A filed on April 13, 2005.
T h e consolidated  financial  statements  of  Harken  Energy  Corporation  for  the  year ended
December 31, 2002, appearing in Harken Energy Corporation’s Annual Report on Form 10-K/A
(Amendment No. 3) for the year ended December 31, 2004, have been audited by Ernst & Young
LLP, independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their report thereon, included
therein,  and  incorporated  herein by  reference.  Such  consolidated  financial  statements  are
incorporated herein by reference in reliance upon such report given on the authority of such firm
as experts in accounting and auditing.
Our oil and gas reserves in the United States have been reviewed by our independent reserve
engineers,  Netherland,  Sewell  &  Associates,  Inc.,  as  stated  in  their report  thereon.  Our
disclosures of our domestic oil and gas reserves included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for
the year ending December 31, 2004, have been presented in reliance upon the authority of such
firm as experts in petroleum engineering.
O u r o i l and  gas  reserves  in  Colombia  have  been  reviewed  by  our  independent  reserve
engineers,  Ryder  Scott  Company.,  as  stated  in  their  report  thereon.  Our disclosures  of  our
domestic oil and gas reserves in Colombia included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
year ending December 31, 2004, have been presented in reliance upon the authority of such firm
as experts in petroleum engineering.
 
 
30
20,197,246 Shares
____________________
PROSPECTUS
, 2005
____________________
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 14. Other Expenses of Issuance and Distribution.
The table below sets forth the expenses to be incurred by us in connection with the issuance and
distribution of the shares registered for offer and sale hereby, other than underwriting discounts
and commissions. All amounts shown represent estimates except the Securities Act registration
fee.
Registration fees under the Securities Act
Accountants’ fees and expenses
Legal fees and expenses
Miscellaneous
Total
Item 15. Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
$
   
   
   
  $
1,359 
20,000 
50,000 
0 
71,359
Under Section 145 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (“Delaware Law”), a
Delaware  corporation  may  indemnify  its  directors,  officers,  employees and  agents  against
expenses  (including  attorneys  fees),  judgments,  fines  and settlements  in  nonderivative  suits,
actually and reasonably incurred by them i n connection with the defense of any action, suit or
proceeding in which they or any of them were or are made parties or are threatened to be made
parties  by reason  of  their  serving  or  having  served  in  such  capacity.  Delaware  law, however,
provides  that  such  person  must  have  acted  in  good  faith  and  in  a  manner they  reasonably
believed  to  be  in  or  not  opposed  to  the  best  interests  of  the corporation, and in the case of a
criminal action, such person must have had no reasonable cause to believe his or her conduct
was unlawful. Section 145 further provides that in connection with the defense or settlement of
any action by or in the right of the corporation, a Delaware corporation may indemnify its directors
and officers against expenses actually and reasonably incurred by them if, in connection with the
matters in issue, they acted in good faith, in a manner they reasonably believed to be in or not
opposed to the best interests of the corporation, except that no indemnification may be made with
respect  to any claim,  issue  or  matter  as  to  which  such  person  has  been  adjudged  liable  for
negligence or misconduct unless the Court of Chancery or the court in which such action or suit
is brought approves such indemnification. Section 145 further permits a Delaware corporation to
grant its directors and officers additional rights of indemnification through bylaw provisions and
otherwise,  and 
to purchase  indemnity  insurance  on  behalf  of  its  directors  and  officers.
Indemnification  is  mandatory  to  the  extent  a  claim,  issue  or  matter  has  been successfully
defended.
Article Ten of our certificate of incorporation and Article VII of our bylaws provide, in general, that
we  shall  indemnify  our  directors  and  officers  under  certain o f the  circumstances  defined  in
Section  145.  We  have  entered  into  agreements  with each  member  of  our  board  of  directors
pursuant  to  which  it  will  advance  to each director  costs  of  litigation  in  accordance  with  the
indemnification provisions of our Certificate of Incorporation and bylaws.
Item 16. Exhibits.
Exhibit
3.1  Certificate of  Incorporation  of  Harken  Energy  Corporation  (filed  as  Exhibit 3.1  to
Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003, File No. 1-10262, and
incorporated by reference herein).
3.2  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
(filed as Exhibit 3.2 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003,
File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by reference herein).
II-1
3.3  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
(filed as Exhibit 3.3 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003,
File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by reference herein).
3.4  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
(filed as Exhibit 3.4 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003,
File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by reference herein).
3.5  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
(filed as Exhibit 3.5 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003,
File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by reference herein).
3.6  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
(filed as Exhibit 3.6 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003,
File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by reference herein).
3.7  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
dated August 4, 2004 (filed as Exhibit 3.7 to Harken’s Annual Report on Form 10-K/A
for the period ended December 31, 2004, File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by
reference herein).
3.8  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
dated February 22, 2005 (filed as Exhibit 3.8 to Harken’s Annual Report on Form 10-
K/A for the period ended December 31, 2004, File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by
reference herein).
4.1  Form of certificate representing shares of Harken common stock, par value $.01 per
share (filed as Exhibit 1 to Harken’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A, File No. 1-
10262, filed with the SEC on June 1, 1989 and incorporated by reference herein).
4.2  Rights Agreement, dated as of April 6, 1998, by and between Harken Energy
Corporation and ChaseMellon Shareholder Services L.L.C., as Rights Agent (filed as
Exhibit 4 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated April 7, 1998, file No. 1-10262,
and incorporated by reference herein).
4.3  Amendment to  Rights  Agreement  by  and  between  Harken  Energy  Corporation and
American Stock Transfer and Trust Company (successor to Mellon Investor Services
LLC, (formerly known as ChaseMellon Shareholder Services L.L.C.), as Rights Agent,
dated June 18, 2002 (filed as Exhibit 4.11 to Harken’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
for  the  period  ended  September 30,  2002, File  No.  1-10262,  and  incorporated  by
reference herein).
*5.1  Opinion of McGuireWoods LLP
*23.1  Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm - Ernst & Young LLP
*23.2  Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm - BDO Seidman, LLP
*23.3  Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm - Hein & Associates, LLP
*23.4  Consent of Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (Independent Reserve Engineers)
*23.5  Consent of Ryder Scott Company (Independent Reserve Engineers)
23.6  Consent of McGuireWoods LLP (contained in Exhibit 5.1)
*24
  Powers of Attorney (included in signature page)
* Previously Filed
II-2
Item 17. Undertakings.
The undersigned registrants hereby undertake:
(1)  T o file,  during  any  period  in  which  offers  or  sales  are  being  made, a  post-effective
amendment to this registration statement:
(i)  To include any prospectus required by Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
 
(ii)  T o reflect  in  the  prospectus  any  facts  or  events  arising  after  the  effective date  of  the
registration  statement  (or 
the  most  recent  post-effective amendment  thereof)  which,
individually or in the aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in
the registration statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume
of securities offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which
was registered) and any deviation from the low or high and of the estimated maximum offering
range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b), if,
in  the  aggregate,  the  changes  in  volume  and  price  represent n o more  than  a  20  percent
change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration
Fee” table in the effective registration statement.
(iii)  T o include  any  material  information  with  respect  to  the  plan  of  distribution not  previously
disclosed  in  the  registration  statement  or  any  material change  to  such  information  in  the
registration statement; provided, however, that paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (a)(1)(ii) do not apply
if the information required to be included in a post-effective amendment by those paragraphs
is contained in periodic reports filed with or furnished to the SEC by the registrants pursuant
to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 that are incorporated by
reference in this registration statement.
(2)  That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such
post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the
securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to
be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3)  T o remove  from  registration  by  means  of  a  post-effective  amendment  any of  the securities
being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4)  For purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each filing of each
such registrant’s annual report pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934 (and, where applicable, each filing of an employee benefit plan’s annual report
pursuant  to  Section  15(d)  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of 1934) that  is  incorporated  by
reference in the  registration  statement  shall b e deemed to be a new registration statement
relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall
be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(5)  Insofar as  indemnification  for  liabilities  arising  under  the  Securities  Act o f 1933  may  be
permitted  to  directors,  officers  and  controlling persons  o f each  registrant  pursuant  to  the
foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the registrants have been advised that in the opinion of
the  Securities and Exchange  Commission  such  indemnification  is  against  public  policy as
expressed  in  the  Act  and  is,  therefore,  unenforceable.  In  the  event that  a claim  for
indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by a registrant of expenses
incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of such registrant in the successful
defense  of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer o r controlling
person in connection with the securities being registered, each registrant agrees that it will,
unless  in  the  opinion  of  its counsel the  matter  has  been  settled  by  controlling  precedent,
submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is
against public policy as expressed in the Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of
such issue.
II-3
(6)
(i)  For purposes  of  determining  any  liability  under  the  Securities  Act  of 1933, the  information
omitted from the form of prospectus filed as part of this registration statement in reliance upon
Rule  430A  and  contained  in a  form of  prospectus  filed  by  such  registrant  pursuant  to  Rule
424(b)(1) or  (4) or  497(h)  under  the  Securities  Act  shall  be  deemed  to  be  part  of this
registration statement as of the time it was declared effective.
(ii)  For the  purpose  of  determining  any  liability  under  the  Securities  Act of  1933, each  post-
effective  amendment  that  contains  a form  o f prospectus  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  new
registration  statement  relating t o the  securities  offered  therein,  and  the  offering  of  such
securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
II-4
Signatures
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, Harken Energy Corporation certifies
that it has reasonable grounds to believe that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form S-
3 and has duly caused this amendment to the registration statement to be signed on its behalf by
the  undersigned,  thereunto duly  authorized,  in  the  City  of  Southlake,  State  of  Texas,  on
November 4, 2005.
HARKEN ENERGY CORPORATION
By: /s/ Mikel D. Faulkner
Mikel D. Faulkner
Chief Executive Officer
Pursuant to  the  requirements  of  the  Securities  Act  of  1933,  this  amendment  to  the registration
statement has been signed by the following persons in the capacities indicated on November 4,
2005.
Name
/s/ Mikel D. Faulkner
Mikel D. Faulkner
/s/ Anna M. Williams
Anna M. Williams
/s/ *
Alan G. Quasha
/s/ *
Michael M. Ameen,
Jr.
/s/ *
Dr. J. William Petty
H. A. Smith
/s/ *
* By: /s/ Anna M.
Williams
Anna M. Williams,
attorney-in-fact
 
 
 
II-5
Title
Chief Executive Officer and
Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
 
Vice President and Chief
Financial
(Principal financial Officer and
Principal Accounting Officer)
 
 
Chairman of the Board of Directors
and Director
 
 
Director
Director
 
 
Director
Exhibit
Exhibit Index
3.1  Certificate of  Incorporation  of  Harken  Energy  Corporation  (filed  as  Exhibit 3.1  to
Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003, File No. 1-10262, and
incorporated by reference herein).
3.2  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
(filed as Exhibit 3.2 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003,
File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by reference herein).
3.3  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
(filed as Exhibit 3.3 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003,
File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by reference herein).
3.4  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
(filed as Exhibit 3.4 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003,
File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by reference herein).
3.5  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
(filed as Exhibit 3.5 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003,
File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by reference herein).
3.6  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
(filed as Exhibit 3.6 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 13, 2003,
File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by reference herein).
3.7  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
dated August 4, 2004 (filed as Exhibit 3.7 to Harken’s Annual Report on Form 10-K/A
for the period ended December 31, 2004, File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by
reference herein).
3.8  Certificate of Amendment to Certificate of Incorporation of Harken Energy Corporation
dated February 22, 2005 (filed as Exhibit 3.8 to Harken’s Annual Report on Form 10-
K/A for the period ended December 31, 2004, File No. 1-10262, and incorporated by
reference herein).
4.1  Form of certificate representing shares of Harken common stock, par value $.01 per
share (filed as Exhibit 1 to Harken’s Registration Statement on Form 8-A, File No. 1-
10262, filed with the SEC on June 1, 1989 and incorporated by reference herein).
4.2  Rights Agreement, dated as of April 6, 1998, by and between Harken Energy
Corporation and ChaseMellon Shareholder Services L.L.C., as Rights Agent (filed as
Exhibit 4 to Harken’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated April 7, 1998, file No. 1-10262,
and incorporated by reference herein).
4.3  Amendment to  Rights  Agreement  by  and  between  Harken  Energy  Corporation and
American Stock Transfer and Trust Company (successor to Mellon Investor Services
LLC, (formerly known as ChaseMellon Shareholder Services L.L.C.), as Rights Agent,
dated June 18, 2002 (filed as Exhibit 4.11 to Harken’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
for  the  period  ended  September 30,  2002, File  No.  1-10262,  and  incorporated  by
reference herein).
*5.1  Opinion of McGuireWoods LLP.
II-6
*23.1  Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm - Ernst & Young LLP
*23.2  Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm - BDO Seidman, LLP
*23.3  Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm - Hein & Associates, LLP
*23.4  Consent of Netherland, Sewell & Associates, Inc. (Independent Reserve Engineers)
*23.5  Consent of Ryder Scott Company (Independent Reserve Engineers)
23.6  Consent of McGuireWoods LLP (contained in Exhibit 5.1)
*24  Powers of Attorney (included in signature page)
* Previously Filed
 
 
II-7