
EXECUTION Corv
US$* LOAN AGREEMENT
among
INCO LIMITED
as Borrower
and.
MORGAN STANLEY SENIOR FUNDING (NOVA SCOTIA) C0. and
RBC CAPITAL MARKETS
as Jain! Bank Running Managers
- and A
MORGAN STANLEY SENIOR FUNDING (NOVA SCOTIA) CO.,
RBC CAPITAL MARKETS,
GOLDMAN SACHS CANADA CREDIT PARTNERS C0. and
THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA
As Lead Arrangers
— and -
MORGAN STANLEY SENIOR FUNDING (N OVA SCOTIA) C0.,
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA,
GOLDMAN SACHS CANADA CREDIT PARTNERS CO.,
THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA and
THE BANKS AND OTHER FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS PARTY HERETO
as Lenders
.and.
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA
as Administrative A gem
.ami.
MORGAN STANLEY SENIOR FUNDING (NOVA SCOTIA) CO.
as Syndication Agent
and.
GOLDMAN SACHS CANADA CREDIT PARTNERS C0. and
THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA
as Co-Documentation Agents
DATED AS OF DECEMBER 22, 2005


TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

ARTICLE 1
Section 1.01 1
Section 1.02 Determination ofRatios and  14
SeCtion 1.03 Payment on Day Other than Business  14
Section 1.04 References to  14
Section 1.05  14

ARTICLE 2
AMOUNTS AND TERMS OF THE LOAN FACILITIES 15
Section 2.01 Establishment ofTerm Loan Facility 15
Section 2.02 Establishment ofBiidge Loan Facility 15
Section 2.03 Types, Availability, Amounts, and Purposes of Advances....i........... 15
Section 2.04 Computations ofInterest and  16
Section 205 Making the Advances 16
Section 2.06  17
Section 2.07 Interest Rate/Applicable Margins  18
Section 2.08 Optional Reduction or Termination of the Total Commitment  21
Section 2.09 Mandatory Prepayments and Reductions............................,...,,......... 22
Section 2.10 No Reborrowing; Repayment  24
Section 2.11 Increased Costs; Capital Adequacy; Illegality,.........,i..i.........,.......... 24
Section 2.12  26
Section 2.13 Evidence  28
Section 2.14 Commitment 29

ARTICLE 3
CONDITIONS OF LENDING/BORROWING  30
Section 3.01 Deliveries for Effective Date 30
Section 3.02 Conditions Precedent to the Initial Advance  31
Section 3.03 Conditions Precedent to the Subsequent  32
Section 3.04 Income Tax Act (Canada) Certiﬁcate of Bridge Loan Lenders......... 32

ARTICLE 4
REPRESENTATIONS AND  32
Section 4.0] Representations and Wananties of Inco  32

ARTICLE 5
COVENANTS OF THE  35
Section 5.01  35
Section 5.02 Afﬁrmative  36
Section 5.03 Financial 37
Section 5.04 Negative Covenants  38
Section 5.05 Transaction  42

.1.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
(continued)
Page
ARTICLE 6
SUBSIDIARY  43
Section 6.01 Paii Passu Obligations 43
Section 6.02 lnco  43
Section 6.03 Designation ofSubsidiary  43
ARTICLE 7
Section 7.01 Events ofDefault  44
Section 7.02 Subsidiary Borrower Events ofDefault.u........i..........i.i...............i.... 47
ARTICLE 8
THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT AND THE  48
Section 8.01 Authorization and  48
Section 8.02 No 
Section 8.03 Accommodations by Administrative  49
Section 8.04 Holding ofSecurity; Sharing ofPayments,  50
Section 8.05 Lender Credit Decisions  50
Section 8.06  50
Section 8.07 Liability ofthe  51
Section 8.08 Successor Administrative  51
Section 8.09 Reliance Upon Administrative  51
Section 8.10 Conﬁdentiality 52
ARTICLE 9
Section 901 Amendments,  53
Section 9.02 Notices,  53
Section 9.03 No Waiver;  54
Section 904 Accounting  54
Section 9.05 Costs and  54 _
Section 9.06 Judgment  55
Seetion 9.07 Descriptive  56
Section 9.08  56
Section 9.09 Survival 56
Section 9.10 Binding Effect; Governing  56
Section 9.11 Assignments and Participations  56
Section 9.12  60
Section 9.13  60
SCHEDULES
Schedule A Commitments of Lenders
Schedule B Form of Assignment and Acceptance
.11.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
(continued)
Page

Schedule C Form of Drawing Notice
Schedule D Form of Conversion Notice
Schedule E Form of Rollover Notice
Schedule F Conditions to Tender Offer
Schedule G Form of Certiﬁcate of Lenders
Schedule H Restricted Subsidiaries
Schedule I Form of Opinion of Borrowers’ Counsel
Schedule J Form of Opinion of low In-house Counsel
Schedule K Form of Opinion of Ogilvy Renault LLP
Schedule L Form of Opinion of Borrowers’ Counsel — Subsidiary Borrower
Schedule M Form of Opinion of lnco [n-house Counsel — Subsidiary Borrower
Schedule N Form of Opinion of Borrowers’ Counsel 7 Inco Guarantee
Schedule 0 Form of Opinion of Inco In-house Counsel — Inco Guarantee
Schedule F Form of Inco Guarantee
Schedule Q Documents to be Delivered
Schedule R Form of Supplement
* Indicates redacted provisions.

-iii-


CREDIT AGREEMENT
Dated as of December 22, 2005
lNCO LIMITED, a corporation organized and existing under the laws of Canada, and those
Subsidiary Borrowers designated from time to time hereunder, as Borrowers, ROYAL BANK
OF CANADA, as Administrative Agent, and MORGAN STANLEY SENIOR FUNDING
(NOVA SCOTIA) CO., ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, GOLDMAN SACHS CANADA
CREDIT PARTNERS C0,, THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA and the other banks and other
ﬁnancial institutions which are or become party hereto as Lenders, agree as follows:
ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS
Section 1.01 Deﬁnitions
The terms deﬁned in this Section 1.01 for all purposes of this Agreement shall have the
respective meanings speciﬁed below (such meanings to be equally applicable to both the singular
and plural forms of the terms deﬁned except as the context shall otherwise require):

“1934 Act” means the US. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.

“Accumulated Funding Deﬁciency” means an accumulated funding deﬁciency as
deﬁned in Section 302 of ERISAi

“Acquired Entity" shall mean Diamond Field Resources Inc., and Voisey’s Bay Nickel
Company Limited, together with any Person all or a portion of whose stock or assets shall have
been acquired by Inco or by any consolidated Subsidiary of Inoo after March 31, 2000, and/or
any of their respective rights, property or assets.

“Administrative Agent” shall mean Royal Bank of Canada, in its capacity as
administrative agent, or its permitted successors and assigns in such capacity.

“Advance” shall mean an advance by a Lender to a Borrower under the Bridge Loan
Facility or the Term Loan Facility, as applicable, and refers to a Canadian Prime Rate Advance,
3 USBR Advance, or a LIBOR Advance (each of which shall be a “Type” of Advance).

“Afﬁliate” shall mean any Person directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or
under direct or indirect common control with, another Person.

“Agent’s Account” shall mean any of the accounts of the Administrative Agent of which
the Borrowers and the Lenders are, from time to time, notiﬁed by the Administrative Agent for
purposes of transactions under this Agreement.

“Agreement” shall mean this credit agreement together with all schedules hereto as
amended, supplemented, restated, or replaced from time to time.

“Applicable Commitment Fee Rate" shall have the meaning attributed thereto in
Section 2.14(c).


_ 2 _

“Assignment and Acceptance” shall mean the form of assignment and acceptance
agreement substantially in the form of Schedule B to be executed by an assignee pursuant to the
provisions of Section 9.11.

“Attributable Debt” shall mean as to any particular lease under which any Person is at
the time liable as lessee, and at any date as of which the amount thereof is to be determined, the
total net amount of rent required to be paid by such Person under such lease during the remaining
term thereof (including any period for which such lease has been extended or may, at the option
of the lessor, be extended), discounted ﬁom the respective due dates thereof to such date at a rate
per annum equivalent to the rate inherent in such lease (as determined in good faith by such
Person) compounded semi-annually. The net amount of rent required to be paid under any such
lease for any such period shall be the aggregate amount of the rent payable by the lessee with
respect to such period after excluding amounts required to be paid on account of or attributable
to operating costs, maintenance and repairs, insurance, taxes, assessments, water and other utility
rates and similar charges. In the case of any lease which is terminable by the lessee upon the
payment of a penalty in an amount which is less than the total discounted net amount of rent
required to be paid from the later of the ﬁrst date upon which such lease may be so terminated or
the date of the determination of such net amount of rent, as the case may be, such net amount
shall also include the amount of such penalty, but no rent shall be considered as required to be
paid under such lease subsequent to the ﬁrst date upon which it may be so terminated.

“BA Advance" shall mean issuance of Bankers’ Acceptance by a Borrower which is
accepted and purchased by a BA Lender as contemplated by Section 2.03(a) bearing interest at
the CDOR Rater

“BA Equivalent Rate" means, in respect of any interest period applicable to a BA
Equivalent Rate Advance, the lesser of (i) the average of the rates shown on the display referred
to as the “CDOR Page” (or any display substituted therefor) on Reuters Domestic Money Service
(or any successor source from time to time) at or about 10:00 am on the ﬁrst day of such
interest period, for Bankers’ Acceptances with a term comparable to such interest period as
determined by the Administrative Agent plus 0.10% per annum and (ii) the average of the bid
rates (rounded upwards to the nearest 1/100“1 of 1%) quoted by the Non Schedule I Reference
Banks as being the discount rate of such Lender calculated on the basis of a year of 365 days and
determined in accordance with normal market practice for an advance equivalent to a bankers’
acceptance having a face amount comparable to the amount of such BA Equivalent Rate
Advance for the applicable interest period as of 10:00 am. on such day, as determined by the
Administrative Agent.

“BA Equivalent Rate Advance” shall mean an advance by a Lender to a Borrower
under the Bridge Loan Facility or the Term Loan Facility, as applicable, denominated in
Canadian Dollars bearing interest at the BA Equivalent Rate, as contemplated by Section 203(a).

“BA Lender” shall mean any Lender that accepts and stamps Bankers’ Acceptances.

“Bankers’ Acceptance” shall mean a depository bill, as deﬁned in the Depositary Bills
and Notes Act (Canada), in Canadian Dollars that is in the form of a draft signed by or on behalf
of a debtor and accepted by a creditor.


. 3 .
“Benefit Plan" means any plans, arrangements, agreements, programs, policies, practices
or undertakings, whether oral or written, formal or informal, funded or unfunded, registered or
unregistered to which any Borrower or any Restricted Subsidiary is a party or by which any
Borrower or any Restricted Subsidiary is bound or under which any Borrower or any Restricted
Subsidiary has any liability or contingent liability, relating to: (i) Canadian Pension Plans, (ii)
plans, providing for employment beneﬁts relating to disability or wage or beneﬁts continuation
during periods of absence from work, and any and all employment beneﬁts relating to
hospitalization, healthcare, medical or dental treatments or expenses, life insurance, accidental
death and dismemberment insurance, death or survivor’s beneﬁts and supplementary
employment insurance, in each case regardless of whether such beneﬁts are insured or self-
insured, or (iii) plans in the nature of compensation plans; in each case with respect to any of any
Borrower’s or any Restricted Subsidiary’s employees or fonner employees, directors or ofﬁcers,
and individuals working on contract with any Borrower or any Restricted Subsidiary relating to
their respective businesses, excluding statutory plans.
“Bond Debt” shall mean any public or private issuance of debt (excluding debt incurred
pursuant to any * or the Loan Facilities) raised to ﬁnance the Transactions, any repayment or
reﬁnancing of debt or redemption of preferred shares in connection therewith, payment of fair
value for Falconbridge Common Shares acquired pursuant to any dissent or appraisal rights, and
all payments of fees, commissions, and expenses in connection therewith.
“Borrower Obligations” has the meaning attributed thereto in Section 2.15.
“Borrowers” shall mean Inco and each Subsidiary Borrower designated by lnoo from
time to time in accordance with the terms of this Agreement, or their respective permitted
successors and assigns, and “a Borrower” shall mean any one of them.
“Borrowers’ Counsel” shall mean Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, and such other
counsel as may be appointed by loco or a Subsidiary Borrower from time to time.
“Borrowing” shall mean a borrowing consisting of simultaneous Advances by each
Lender of the same Type made by (i) each of the Term Loan Lenders pursuant to Section 2.01 , or
(ii) each of the Bridge Loan lenders pursuant to Section 2.02, as applicable.
“Bridge Loan Advance” shall mean a Borrowing under the Bridge Loan Facility.
“Bridge Loan Commitment” shall mean, for any Lender, such Lender’s Commitment in
respect of the Bridge Loan Facility.
“Bridge Loan Facility” shall mean the committed non-revolving US$* bridge loan
facility established in Section 2.02 on the terms and conditions set forth in ARTICLE 2.

“Bridge Loan Facility Commitment Fee” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in
Section 2.140)).

“Bridge Loan Lender” shall mean any Lender having a Bridge Loan Commitment.

“Bridge Loan Mandatory Prepayment Amount” shall have the meaning attributed
thereto in Section 2.09(a).


_ 4 .

“Bridge Loan Mandatory Reinvestment Amount” shall have the meaning attributed
thereto in Section 2.09(a).

“Business Day” shall mean a day other than a Saturday or Sunday or a day on which
banks in Toronto or in New York City are authorized or required to be closed and which, in the
case of LIBOR Advances, is also a day on which banks are open for business in London
England.

“Canadian Dollars” or “CDS” shall mean the lawful currency of Canada.

“Canadian Pension Plan” means a “pension plan” or “plan” which is subject to the
funding requirements of the Pension Beneﬁts Act (Ontario) or applicable pension beneﬁts
legislation in any other Canadian jurisdiction and is applicable to employees or former
employees of any Borrower or any Restricted Subsidiary resident in Canada.

“Canadian Prime Rate Advance" shall mean an Advance in Canadian Dollars bearing
interest at Canadian Prime Rate.

“Canadian Prime Rate” shall mean, at any time, the rate of interest per annum equal to
the greater of (i) the lending rate which the principal ofﬁce of the Administrative Agent quotes,
publishes and refers to as its “prime rate” and which is its reference rate of interest for
commercial loans in Canadian Dollars made by it in Canada, adjusted automatically with each
change in such rates, and (ii) an interest rate equal to the sum of (x) the CDOR Rate, and (y) 1%
per annum,

“Capital Adequacy Requirement” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section
2.11(a).

“CDOR Rate” shall mean, on any date, with respect to:

(i) a Canadian Prime Rate Advance, the average of the rates shown on
the display referred to as the “CDOR Page” (or any display
substituted therefor) on Reuters Domestic Money Service (or any
successor source from time to time) with respect to the banks and
other ﬁnancial institutions named in such display at or about 10:00
am. on such date for Bankers’ Acceptances having a term of thirty
(30) days, or if such day is not a Business Day, then on the
immediately succeeding Business Day; provided, however, that if
such rates are not available, then the CDOR Rate with respect to
Canadian Prime Rate Advances for any day shall be calculated as
the average of the bid rates (rounded upwards to the nearest 1/100m
of 1%) quoted by each of the Schedule I Reference Banks for its
own Bankers’ Acceptances for the applicable period as of 10:00
am, on such day, as determined by the Administrative Agent; and

(ii) any Bankers’ Acceptance, the average of the rates shown on the
display referred to as the “CDOR Page" (or any display substituted
therefor) on Reuters Domestic Money Service (or any successor
source from time to time) with respect to the banks and other


_ 5 .
ﬁnancial institutions named in such display at or about 10:00 am
on such day for hankers’ acceptances having an identical maturity
date to the maturity date of such Bankers’ Acceptance as
determined by the Administrative Agent, or if such day is not a
Business Day, then on the immediately succeeding Business Day;
provided, however, that if such rates are not available, then the
CDOR Rate with respect to any Bankers’ Acceptance for any day
shall be calculated as the average of the bid rates (rounded
upwards to the nearest 1/100"‘ of 1%) quoted by each of the
Schedule I Reference Banks for its own bankers’ acceptances for
the applicable period as of 10:00 am. on such day, as determined
by the Administrative Agent.
“Change of Control” shall be deemed to have occurred at such time as:

(i) any person or group (as such terms are used in Section 13(d) or
Section 14(d) of the 1934 Act), other than Inco or any Subsidiary
of lnco or their Afﬁliates (or their legal representatives) or any
employee beneﬁt plan of Inco or any Subsidiary of Inco ﬁles or is
required to ﬁle a Schedule 13D or Schedule T0 (or any successor
schedule form, or report under the 1934 Act) disclosing that such
person has become the beneﬁcial owner (as the term “beneﬁcial
owner” is used in Rule 13d-3 under the 1934 Act) of more than
50% of the total number of votes attached to all voting securities of
Inco then outstanding,

(ii) any offeror (as the term “offeror” is deﬁned in Section 89(1) of the
OSA for the purpose of Section 101 of the OSA, or any successor
provision to either of the foregoing) ﬁles or is required to ﬁle a
report with any securities commission or securities regulatory
agency in Canada, disclosing that the offeror has acquired
beneﬁcial ownership (within the meaning of the OSA) of, or the
power to exercise control or direction over, or securities
convertible into, any voting or equity shares of Inco that, together
with such offeror’s securities (as the term “offeror’s securities” is
deﬁned in Section 89(1) of the OSA or any successor provision
thereto in relation to the voting or equity shares of Inco) would
constitute voting or equity shares of Inoo representing more than
50% of the total number of votes attached to all voting securities of
Inco then outstanding;

(iii) there is consummated any consolidation, merger, amalgamation,
statutory arrangement (involving a business combination),
amendment to articles, or similar transaction of Inco (A) in which
Inco is not the continuing or surviving corporation, or (B) pursuant
to which the common shares of Inco would be redeemed, changed,
or converted into or exchanged for cash, securities, or other
property; or


. 6 .
(iv) a majority of the members of the board of directors of [non cease
to be, for at least 90 days, Continuing Directors;

other than (in each of the cases set out in paragaphs (i), (ii), and (iii) above) (x) an
amalgamation, consolidation, statutory arrangement (involving a business combination),
amendment to articles, merger, or similar transaction of lnco in which the holders of the voting
securities of Inco immediately prior to the amalgamation, consolidation, statutory arrangement,
merger, or similar transaction have, directly or indirectly, more than 50% of the voting securities
of the continuing or surviving corporation immediately aﬁer such transaction is consummated, or
(y) in connection with any of the Transactions or any Subsequent Amalgamation.

“Circular” means the takeover bid circular dated October 24, 2005 prepared by Inco
relating to the Tender Offer,

“Commitment” shall mean, in respect of each Lender from time to time, the maximum
commitment of such Lender in respect of (i) the Bridge Loan Facility and (ii) the Term Loan
Facility, in each case as amended from time to time, as set forth in Schedule A or in the most
recent Assignment and Acceptance executed by such Lender, less any reductions pursuant to
Section 208 or Section 209

“Commitment Fee" shall mean the Term Loan Facility Commitment Fee or the Bridge
Loan Facility Commitment Fee, as applicable.

“Commitment Reduction Date” shall mean the date that is 140 days next following the
date of the initial Advance under the Loan Facilities.

“Confidential Information” means any information relating to lnco or its Subsidiaries,
the Loan Facilities, or the Loan Documents, including, without limitation, any conﬁdential
information memoranda provided to the Administrative Agent or the Lenders by Inco or any of
its Afﬁliates or advisers, in whatever form, and includes, Without limitation, information given
by Morgan Stanley Senior Funding (Nova Scotia) Co., RBC, Goldman Sachs Canada Credit
Partners Co., or The Bank of Nova Scotia or any other Lender to any potential participant in the
Loan Facilities and information given orally and any document, electronic ﬁle or any other way
of representing or recording information which contains or is derived or copied from such
information but excluding information that (i) is afﬁrmatively disclosed by Inco or its Afﬁliates
through press release, posting on their websites or other act intended to make such information
widely available to the public or (ii) is known by the recipient before the date the information is
disclosed to the recipient by Inco or any of its Affiliates or advisers or is lawfully obtained by the
recipient after that date, other than from a source which is connected with Inco or its Affiliates
and which, in either case, has not been obtained in violation of, and is not otherwise subject to,
any obligation of conﬁdentiality owed to Inco or any of its Subsidiaries.

“Consolidated Indebtedness” shall mean the Debt of Inco and its consolidated
Subsidiaries,

“Consolidated Net Tangible Assam” shall mean the aggregate amount of assets (less
applicable reserves and other properly deductible items) after deducting therefrom (i) all current
liabilities (excluding any portion thereof constituting Funded Debt), and (ii) all goodwill, trade
names, trademarks, patents, unamortized debt discount and expense and other like intangibles


_ 7 _
(except intangible assets and deferred charges in respect of an Acquired Entity), all as set forth
on or incorporated in the consolidated balance sheet of Inco contained in the latest annual report
to shareholders of lnco and computed in accordance with GAAP.

“Continuing Director” means, as of any date of determination, any member of the board
of directors of Inco who:

(i) was a member of such board of directors as at the close of business
on October 11, 2005;
(ii) was nominated for election or elected to such board of directors
(either by a speciﬁc vote or by approval of the proxy statement and
circular of Inco in which such member is named as nominee for
director, without objection to such nomination) with the approval
of at least two-thirds of the Continuing Directors who were
members of such board of directors at the time of such nomination
or election; or
(iii) was elected or nominated as a member of such board of directors
as contemplated in Section 1.8 of the Support Agreement or
otherwise in connection with any of the Transactions;
provided, however, that no individual initially elected or nominated as a member of such board
of directors as a result of an actual or threatened election contest with respect to directors or as a
result of any other actual or threatened solicitation of proxies or consents by or on behalf of any
person other than such board of directors or Inco, F alconbridge, or any of their respective
Subsidiaries, shall be deemed to be a Continuing Director.

“control” means the right, directly or indirectly, to direct or cause the direction of the
management of the affairs of a Person, whether by ownership of capital or otherwise, and
“controlling” and “controlled” each have a corresponding meaning.

“Conversion Notice” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section 2.07(h).

“Debt” of any Person shall mean the aggregate sum of (i) any principal indebtedness
created, issued, incurred or assumed by such Person (whether secured or unsecured and whether
or not widenced by a promissory note or similar instrument), which in each case is for borrowed
money (including the principal amount of any borrowing of gold, silver or any other commodity)
all of the above determined in accordance with GAAP; (ii) the capitalized portion under lease
ﬁnancing transactions which, in accordance with GAAP, are recorded as capital leases on the
Person’s balance sheet; and (iii) the amount of the Person’s obligation with respect to
Guarantees.

“Debt/Equity Ratio” shall mean the ratio of Consolidated Indebtedness to Tangible Net
Worth, calculated and rounded down to one decimal place.

“Designated Account” shall mean an account of a Borrower of which ﬂie Administrative
Agent is notiﬁed by such Borrower from time to time for the purposes of transactions under this
Agreement.


_ 3 .

“Drawing Notice” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section 2.05.

“Effective Date" shall mean the date that the conditions set forth in Section 3.01 are
satisﬁed.

“Eligible Assignee” shall mean, in respect of an assignment of all or any portion of the
Bridge Loan Facility, a Person that is (i) either (x) not a non-resident of Canada for purposes of
the ITA, or (y) an authorized foreign bank deemed to be resident in Canada for purposes of the
ITA in respect of all amounts paid or credited to such Person under or in respect of this
Agreement, and which has provided to him the certiﬁcate contemplated in Section 304, if
applicable, in each case approved in writing by the Administrative Agent and Inco, or (ii)
approved in writing by the Administrative Agent and by Inco (each such approval not to be
unreasonably withheld or delayed; provided that it is not unreasonable for Inco to withhold its
approval of an Eligible Assignee if such approval would result in an increase in cost, expense or
other payment payable by any Borrower).

“Environmental Law" shall mean any applicable statute, code, ordinance, decree, rule,
or regulation, as the same may be amended from time to time, governing or pertaining to the
protection or pollution of the environment or to the generation, treatment, storage or disposal of
Hazardous Substances.

“Equivalent Amount” shall mean, on any date and with respect to the conversion of any
currency (for the purposes of this deﬁnition, the “First Currency”) into another currency (for
the purposes of this deﬁnition, the “Other Currency”), the equivalent amount of the First
Currency in the Other Currency, aﬁer giving effect to a conversion of a speciﬁed amount of the
First Currency into the Other Currency at the Exchange Rate.

“ERISA” means the Employee Retirement Income Security/let of 1974, as amended
from time to time, and any successor thereto.

“ERISA Affiliate“ means, as applied to any Person, (i) any corporation which is a
member of a controlled group of corporations within the meaning of Section 414(b) of the
Internal Revenue Code of which that Person is a member; (ii) any trade or business (whether or
not incorporated) which is a member of a group of trades or businesses under common control
Within the meaning of Section 414(0) of the Internal Revenue Code ofwhich that Person is a
member; and (iii) any member of an afﬁliated service group within the meaning of Section
414(m) or (o) of the Internal Revenue Code of which that Person, any corporation described in
clause (i) above or any trade or business described in clause (ii) above is a member.

“Event of Default” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section 7.01,

“Exchange Rate“ shall mean, on any day, with respect to the exchange of one currency
(the “First Currency”) into another currency (for the purposes of this definition, the “Other
Currency”), (i) Where the First Currency and the Other Currency are either Canadian Dollars or
U.S. Dollars, the noon spot rate of the Bank of Canada on that day for purchases of the First
Currency with the Other Currency, or if such rate is not or has not yet been quoted on such day,
the last preceding noon spot rate of the Bank of Canada, and (b) in all other cases, the rate of
exchange used shall be that at which in accordance with normal banking procedures the
Administrative Agent could purchase the First Currency with the Other Currency.


_ 9 _

“Excluded Taxes” means taxes, levies, imposts, deductions, or withholdings imposed on
or measured by net income or net proﬁts of the relevant Lender or the Administrative Agent,
capital times or franchise taxes, and any branch proﬁts taxes or any similar tax imposed by any
jurisdiction on such Lender or the Administrative Agent,

“Existing Credit Agreements" shall mean (i) the term loan agreement dated
December 23, 2004 between Inco Limited, as borrower, The Bank of Nova Scotia, as
administrative agent, and The Bank of Nova Smtia, Royal Bank of Canada and the banks and
other ﬁnancial institutions named as lenders on the signature pages mereto, and (ii) the revolving
credit facility dated May 28, 2004 among Inco Limited as borrower, Citibank, N.A., Canadian
Branch and Royal Bank of Canada as cry-administrative agents, and Citibank, NA, Canadian
Branch, Royal Bank of Canada and the banks and other ﬁnancial institutions named as lenders
on the signature pages thereto, in each case, as such agreements may be amended, supplemented,
changed, or replaced from time to time.

“Falconhridge” shall mean Falconbridge Limited, a corporation organized and existing
under the laws of Ontario, and its successors,

“Falconbridge Common Shares” shall mean the issued and outstanding common shares
of Falconbridge, together with associated rights issued and outstanding under the shareholder
rights plan of Falconbridge, and includes any common shares of F alconbridge that may before
the Expiry Time (as deﬁned in the Support Agreement) become issued and outstanding upon the
conversion, exercise, or exchange of any securities of F alconblidge that are convertible into or
exchangeable or exercisable for common shares of Falconbridge.

“Federal Funds Rate” shall mean on any day a ﬂuctuating interest rate per annum equal
to the weighted average of the rates on overnight United States federal ﬁinds transactions with
members of the Federal Reserve System arranged by United States federal funds brokers, as
published for such day (or, if such day is not a Business Day, for the next preceding Business
Day) by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or, if such rate is not so published for any day
which is a Business Day, the average of the quotations for such day on such transactions
received by the Administrative Agent from three United States federal funds brokers of
recognized standing selected by it.

“First Advance Expiry Date” shall mean May 8, 2006.

“Funded Debt”, as applied to any Person, shall mean all indebtedness for money
borrowed, created or assumed by such Person maturing aﬁer, or renewable or extendable at the
option of such Person beyond twelve months from the date of creation thereof.

“GAAP” shall mean such accounting principles as are generally accepted in Canada in
respect of the date or period for any computation or statement hereunder; provided, however, that
in the event that the audited ﬁnancial statements of Inco set forth in its annual report to
shareholders in respect of any ﬁscal year shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted
United States accounting principles, then “GAAP” shall mean such principles for the purpose of
any computation or statement hereunder made during, or in respect of, such ﬁscal year (or
portion thereof).


_ 10 _

“Guarantee” of any Person shall mean any direct obligation of such Person pursuant to
the terms of a written agreement whereby (i) there is no provision of force majeure or a similar
limitation on the obligations of such Person thereunder and (ii) such Person has guaranteed,
Without any stated conditions (except for a condition of non-payment by another Person),
thereunder to make payment when due of Debt (which, for purposes of this deﬁnition of
Guarantee only, the term “Debt” shall not include paragraph (iii) of the deﬁnition of Debt) owed
or incurred by another Person; provided that there shall be excluded from the calculation of the
Debt/Equity Ratio and Consolidated Indebtedness (x) Guarantees by Inco of Debt owed or
incurred by any of its consolidated Subsidiaries and (y) Guarantees by a consolidated Subsidiary
of Inco of Debt owed or incurred by another consolidated Subsidiary of Inco.

“Hazardous Substance" shall mean any substance which is or is deemed to he, alone or
in any combination, hazardous, toxic, radioactive, a contaminant or pollutant or a source of
contamination or pollutants under any applicable Environmental Law.

“Increased Cost Lender” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section 2.11(d).

“Indemniﬁed Party” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section 9,05(c).

“Indemnitee” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section 2. 12(c).

“Inco” shall mean Inco Limited or its permitted successors and assigns

“Inco Guarantee” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section 6.0].

“Initial Period” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section 401,

“Interest Period" shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section 2‘07(e).

“ITA” shall mean the Income Tax Act (Canada), as amended.

“Lead Arrangers" shall mean Morgan Stanley Senior Funding (Nova Scotia) Co., RBC
Capital Markets, Goldman Sachs Canada Credit Farmers Co. and The Bank of Nova Scotia, in
their respective capacities as lead arrangers, or their respective permitted successors and assigns
in such capacities.

“Lenders” shall mean Morgan Stanley Senior Funding (Nova Scou'a) Co., Royal Bank of
Canada, Goldman Sachs Canada Credit Partners 00., The Bank of Nova Scotia and the other
banks and other ﬁnancial institutions which are or become party hereto as lenders, or their
respective permitted successors and assigns.

“Lending Office” shall mean, with respect to any Lender, the ofﬁce of such Lender
located at its address speciﬁed on the signature pages of this Agreement or any other ofﬁce of
such Lender hereaﬂer selected and notiﬁed to Inco and the Administrative Agent ﬁ'om time to
time by such Lenderi

“LIBOR” shall mean, with respect to the Interest Period for any LIBOR Advance, a rate
per annum expressed on the basis of a 360 day year (rounded upwards, if necessary, to the
nearest 1/ 16‘h of 1%) equal to the annual interest rate for deposits of US, Dollars in an amount
comparable to the amount of such LIBOR Advance for a maturity most nearly comparable to


_ 11 .

such Interest Period which appears on page 3750 of the Telerate screen as of 1 1:00 am. (London
time) on the second Business Day prior to the commencement of such Interest Period; provided
that if such Telerate screen is not available on such day, then “LIBOR” shall mean, with respect
to the Interest Period for any LIBOR Advance, the average interest rate at which each Reference
Bank offers U.S. Dollar deposits in an amount comparable to the amount of such LIBOR
Advance for a maturity most nearly comparable to such Interest Period to leading banks in the
London interbank market as of 11:00 am. (London time) on the second Business Day prior to
the commencement of such Interest Period.

“LIBOR Advance” shall mean an Advance in U.S. Dollars bearing interest at LIBOR.

“Loan Documents” shall mean this Agreement, any Supplement, the Inca Guarantee (if
any). any Other agreements, documents or instruments to be executed and delivered to the
Lenders or the Administrative Agent by the Borrowers and/or the Restricted Subsidiaries or any
of them hereunder or pursuant hereto (including any guarantees or security agreements delivered
to the Lenders or the Administrative Agent pursuant to Section 5.04(a)) and any amendments,
supplements or changes thereto or replacements thereof.

“Loan Facilities” shall mean, collectively, the Term Loan Facility and the Bridge Loan
Facility.

“Majority Lenders” shall mean those Lenders the aggregate amount of whose
Commitments shall be not less than 51% of the Total Commitment or, if the Commitments have
been terminated, those Lenders holding not less than 51% of the aggregate Advances then
outstanding.

“Margin Stock” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Regulation U of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System as in effect from time to time.

“Material Adverse Change” means a material adverse change which would reasonably
be expected to result in an inability of Inco to perform the payment obligations under this
Agreement (or the Inoo Guarantee, if any).

“Material Adverse Effect” means a material adverse effect on the ﬁnancial condition or
operations of Inco and its consolidated Subsidiaries, considered as a Whole, which would
reasonably be expected to result in an inability of Inco to perform the payment obligations under
this Agreement (or the [moo Guarantee, if any).

Maturity Date” shall mean, (i) with respect to the Bridge Loan Facility, the date that is
one (1) year next following the earlier of (A) the last date upon which an Advance is made under
the Bridge Loan Facility, and (B) the Commitment Reduction Date; and (ii), with respect to the
Term Loan Facility, shall mean the date that is ﬁve (5) years plus one ( 1) day next following the
earlier of (A) the last date upon which an Advance is made under the Term Loan Commitment,
and (B) the Commitment Reduction Date.

“Minimum Assignment Amount” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section
9‘ 1 1 (a)(iii).


_ 1 z .

“Multiemployer Plan” means any US. Plan which is a “multiemployer plan” as deﬁned
in Section 3(37) of ERISA,

“Net Proceeds” means any one or more of the following:

(i) with respect to any disposition or sale of assets by Inco or any of
its Wholly-Owned Subsidiaries (*), the net amount equal to the
aggregate amount recsived in cash (including any cash received by
way of deferred payment pursuant to a note receivable, other
non-cash consideration or otherwise, but only as and when such
cash is so received) in connection with such sale or other
disposition;

(ii) with respect to any issuance of Sweep Debt, the net amount equal
to the aggregate amount received in cash in connection with such
issuance; and

(iii) *;

less, in each case, the sum of (y) the reasonable fees (including, without limitation, legal fees),
commissions, and other reasonable out of pocket expenses incurred or paid for by Ineo, any of its
Subsidiaries, or *, as applicable, in connection with such disposition, sale, issuance, or receipt
and (2) taxes incurred in connection with such disposition, sale, issuance, or receipt, whenever
payable.

*

at:

*

“Non Schedule 1 Reference Banks" shall mean, collectively, BNP Parist (Canada) and
SLnnitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation of Canada

“05A” shall mean the Securities Act (Ontario), as amended.

“Other Taxes” means any present or future transfer, mortgage, stamp or documentary
taxes or any other excise or property taxes, charges, or similar levies imposed by Canada, or any
province or territory thereof, the United States of America or any other jurisdiction, other than
such taxes, charges or levies that are Excluded Taxes.

“Participating Security” shall mean any common share of Inco and any share of any
other corporation having attached thereto rights, privileges, restrictions and conditions
substantially the same as the rights, privileges, restrictions and conditions attaching to the shares
of Inco designated as its common shares in its Restated Articles of Incorporation effective May
7, 2004 as amended, and any security which is convertible into or exchangeable for, or carries
the right to purchase, any such common shares. In the event of any subdivision, re—division,
reduction, combination or consolidation of Inco’s common shares, or successive subdivisions, re-
divisions, reductions, combinations or consolidations, then the references to Inco’s common


. 13 .
shares herein shall refer to the shares resulting from such subdivision, reldivisiou, reduction,
combination or consolidation.

“PBGC” means the Pension Beneﬁt Guaranty Corporation or any successor thereto.

“Person” shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, association,
joint-stock company, trust, unincorporated organization or any other form of business entity.

“Principal Property” shall mean any (i) mineral property, or (ii) manufacturing or
processing plant, building, structure or other facility, together with the land upon which it is
erected and ﬁxtures comprising a part thereof, in each case set out in items (i) and (ii) above
whether owned as of the date hereof or hereaﬁer acquired or constructed by Inco or any
Restricted Subsidiary, which is located in the United States or Canada, the gross book value
(Without deduction of any reserve for depreciation) of which, in each case, on the date as of
which the determination is being made is an amount which exceeds 0.25% of Consolidated Net
Tangible Assets, except any such plant, building, structure or facility or any portion thereof
(together with the land upon which it is erected and ﬁxtures comprising a part thereof) (i)
acqun'ed or constructed principally for the purpose of controlling or abating atmospheric
pollutants or contaminants, or water, noise, odour or other pollution, or (ii) which the board of
directors of Inco (or any committee thereof duly authorized to act) by resolution declares is not
of material importance to the total business conducted by lace and its Restricted Subsidiaries
considered as one enterprise.

“Pro Rata Share” shall mean, for any Lender, at any time, the ratio, expressed as a
percentage, of (in the case of a Bridge Loan Lender) such Lender’s Bridge Loan Commitment to
the Total Bridge Loan Commitment at such time or (in the case of a Term Loan Lender) such
Lender’s Term Loan Commitment to the Total Term Loan Commitment at such time.

“Rating” shall mean, as of any date, the rating maintained by a Rating Agency of lnco’s
senior unsecured indebtedness as of the close of business on such date. In the event that one
Rating Agency shall maintain a rating for 11100 (according to its ratings system) which shall
differ from the rating maintained by the other Rating Agency (according to its ratings system),
the rating which is higher shall be deemed to constitute the applicable Rating, provided that in
the event that the lower rating is more than one level below the higher rating then the Rating
shall be deemed to be one level higher than the lower of the two ratings. If at any time Inco has
no Rating Agency rating, such ratings will be assumed to be </= Ba2/BB.

“Rating Agencies” shall mean, collectively, Standard & Poor’s, a division of The
McGraw-Hill Companies, and its successors, and Moody’s Investor Services, Inc, and its
successors, and in the singular, any one of them.

“Ratings Change” shall mean any adjustment as set forth in Section 2.07(a) in the
Rating of Inco.

“Relevant Date" means (i) in the case of representations and warranties made as at the
Effective Date, the Effective Date, and (ii) in the case of representations and warranties made as
at the date of the applicable Drawing Notice and on the date of the Borrowing under such
Dradewn Notice, each such date.


_ 14 .

“Restricted Subsidiary“ shall mean (i) any Subsidiary of Inco (A) substantially all of the
property of which is located, or substantially all of the business of which is carried on, within
Canada or the United States or its territories or possessions and (B) which owns or leases a
Principal Property, and (ii) any Subsidiary of Inco engaged primarily in the business of owning
or holding securities of Restricted Subsidiaries.

“Rollover Notice” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section 2.07(h).

“Sale and Leaselmck Transaction" shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section
5.04(b).

“Schedule I Reference Banks” shall mean, collectively, Royal Bank of Canada and The
Bank of Nova Sootia.

“Shareholders’ Equity” shall mean “Total Shareholders Equity” as set forth in the most
recent quarterly unaudited consolidated balance sheet or annual consolidated audited ﬁnancial
statements ofInco, as the case may be.

“Subsequent Amalgamation” shall mean any amalgamation subsequent to any
Compulsory Acquisition (as deﬁned in the Support Agreement) or Subsequent Acquisition
Transaction (as deﬁned in the Support Agreement) of Inco or any of its Subsidiaries with
Falconbridge (or any successor to Falconbridge) or any of their respective Subsidiaries.

“Subsidiary” of any Person shall mean (i) any corporation of which at least a majority of
the outstanding stock having voting power under ordinaw circumstances to elect a majority of
the board of directors of said corporation shall at the time be beneﬁcially owned by such Person
or by such Person and one or more Subsidiaries of such Person or by one or more Subsidiaries of
such Person, and (ii) any partnership (including, for the avoidance of any doubt, a limited
partnership) in which such Person and/or one or more Subsidiaries of such Person shall have an
interest (whether in the form of voting or participation in proﬁts or capital contribution) of more
than 50%, or of which any such Person (or a Subsidiary of such Person) is a general partner or
may exercise the powers of a general partner.

“Subsidiary Borrower” shall mean any Subsidiary of Inco which is designated by Inco
as a Subsidiary Borrower from time to time in accordance with ARTICLE 6, or any permitted
successors and assigns of such Subsidiary Borrower.

"Supplement" has the meaning speciﬁed in Section 6,02(c)(i).

“Support Agreement” shall mean the support agreement dated as of October 10, 2005
between Inco and F alconbridge in respect of the Tender Offer, as supplemented by two letters
dated October 10, 2005 (copies of which have been provided to Lenders’ counsel) exchanged
between Inco and Falconbridge containing certain disclosure, together with such amendments,
supplements, or changes as are approved in accordance with Section 5.05 or which do not
require such approval; provided, however, that terms deﬁned with reference to the “Support
Agreement” refer to such support agreement as at the date hereof.

“Sweep Debt” shall mean any public or private issuance of debt in the private or public
capital or banking markets or otherwise, other than any:


. 15 _

(i) debt of non Wholly-Owned Subsidiaries of Inco which is not
guaranteed by and does not otherwise have the beneﬁt, directly or
indirectly, of any credit support from Inco;

(ii) borrowings (1) under the Loan Facilities and the Existing Credit
Agreements or any credit facility entered in replacement thereof or
any revolver supplemental thereto, or (2) in the ordinary course of
business (including, without limitation, in connection with sales of
receivables, letters of credit, asset based ﬁnancing, hedging,
overdraﬁ facilities, and leasing); and

(iii) *,

and, for greater certainty, includes Bond Debt.

“Tangible Net Worth” of Inco and its consolidated Subsidiaries shall mean the sum of
the following, all calculated on a consolidated basis: (i) Shareholders’ Equity, provided that
preferred stock subject to retraction, redemption or similar privileges vested with the holder of
such stock shall not be included, less (ii) the sum of intangible assets and deferred chargm
(except intangible assets and deferred charges in respect of an Acquired Entity), plus (iii) any
minority interest in a Person owned by Inco or by one or more of its consolidated Subsidiaries
(as reﬂected in lnco’s consolidated balance sheet), each of the above determined in accordance
with GAAP.

“Taxes” means all taxes, levies, and imposts, including deductions, charges or
withholdings on account of taxes.

“Tender Offer” means the acquisition by way of takeover bid by Inco or one of its
Subsidiaries of up to 100% of the Falconbridge Common Shares not currently owned by Inco, as
described in the Support Agreement.

“Term Loan Advance” shall mean a Borrowing under the Term Loan Facility.

“Term Loan Commitment” shall mean, for any Lender, such Lender’s Commitment in
respect of the Term Loan Facility.

‘Term Loan Facility” shall mean the committed non-revolving US$* term loan facility
established in Section 2.01 on the terms and conditions set forth in ARTICLE 2.

“Term Loan Facility Commitment Fee“ shall have the meaning attributed thereto in
Section 2. 14(a)i

“Term Loan Lender“ shall mean any Lender having at Term Loan Commitment.

“Term Loan Mandatory Prepayment Amount“ shall have the meaning attributed
thereto in Section 2.090)).

“Term Loan Mandatory Reinvestment Amount” shall have the meaning attributed
thereto in Section 2.09(b).


_ 15 _

“Total Bridge Loan Commitment” shall mean the aggregate Bridge Loan
Commitments of all of the Lenders, as such Bridge Loan Commitments may be amended from
time to time.

“Total Commitment" shall mean the aggregate Commitments of all the Lenders, as such
Commitments may be amended from time to time.

“Total Term Loan Commitment” shall mean the aggregate Term Loan Commitments
of all of the Lenders, as such T erm Loan Commitments may be amended from time to time

“Transactions” shall mean the consummation of the Tender Offer, any Compulsory
Acquisition (as deﬁned in the Support Agreement), any Subsequent Acquisition Transaction (as
defined in the Support Agreement), and all other transactions and reorganizations required to
acquire the Falconbridge Common Shares

“Unused Bridge Loan Commitment” shall mean, with respect to any Bridge Loan
Lender at any time, such Lender’s Bridge Loan Commitment at such time minus the sum of the
aggregate principal amount of all Bridge Loan Advances made by such Bridge Loan Lender and
outstanding at such time.

“Unused Commitments” shall mean1 at any time, collectively, the Unused Term Loan
Commitments and Unused Bridge Loan Commitments as at such time.

“Unused Term Loan Commitment” shall mean, with respect to any Term Loan Lender
at any time, such Term Loan Lender‘s Commitment at such time minus the sum of the aggregate
principal amount of all Term Loan Advances made by such Term Loan Lender and outstanding
at such time.

“USER” shall mean, at any time, the rate of interest per annum equal to the greater of (i)
the lending rate which the principal ofﬁce of the Administrative Agent announces from time to
time as the reference rate of interest for commercial loans in US. Dollars made by it in Canada
to its Canadian borrowers, adjusted automatically with each change in such rates, and (ii) an
interest rate equal to the sum of (x) the Federal Funds Rate (expressed as a 365 day rate) and (y)
0.50% per annum

“USBR Advance” shall mean an Advance in US. Dollars hearing interest at the USBR.

“US Dollars" or “US$” shall mean the lawful currency of the United States of America.

“U.S. Pension Plan” means any US Plan, other than a Multiemployer Plan.

“U.S. Plan” means, at any time, any employee pension plan that is covered by Title IV of
ERISA or subject to the minimum funding standards of Section 412 of the Internal Revenue
Code or Section 302 of ERISA and is either (i) maintained by Inco, any Subsidiary or any
ERISA Afﬁliate thereof or (ii) maintained pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement or any
other arrangement under which more than one employer makes contributions and to which Inco,
any Subsidiary or any ERISA Afﬁliate thereof is then making or accruing an obligation to make
contributions or has within the preceding six plan years made contributions.


_ 17 _

“Wholly-Owned Subsidiary“ means any Subsidiary all of the then outstanding common
shares of which (in the case of a Subsidiary which is a corporation) or all of the partnership
interests of which (in the case of a Subsidiary which is a partnership), other than directors’
qualifying shares and/or nominal amounts of connnon shares or partnership interests that are
required to be held by Persons (other than Inco or its Wholly-Owned Subsidiaries, as applicable)
under applicable law, are owned, directly or indirectly, by lnco.

“Withholding Tax Obligor” shall have the meaning attributed thereto in Section
2.120)).

Section 1.02 Determination of Ratios and Percentages
For the purpose of determining the Pro Rata Share of any Lender, as well as whether any
amendment or waiver has been approved by the Majority Lenders, the Administrative Agent
shall submit to Inco and each of the Lenders a certiﬁcate setting forth the Administrative Agent‘s
calculation thereof. The Administrative Agent’s calculation of such determination shall, abSent
manifest error, be conclusive and binding upon the Borrowers and the Lenders The Lenders and
the Borrowers agree that, in consenting to provide such calculation, the Administrative Agent is
ac‘n'ng solely as an accommodation to all the parties and shall incur no liability, obligation or
responsibility to them or to any other Person as a result of having so acted or consented to act.

Section 1.03 Payment on Day Other than Business Day
Except as otherwise provided for herein, if any payment to be made under this Agreement shall
be due and payable on a day which is not a Business Day, such instalment or payment shall be
calculated to, and such instalment or payment shall be made on, the next succeeding Business
Day.

Section 1.04 References to Time
All references to a prescribed time herein shall be construed as references to Toronto, Canada
time.

Section 1.05 Currency
Unless otherwise expressly stated, any reference in this Agreement to any sum of money shall be
construed as a reference to US. Dollars.

ARTICLE 2
AMOUNTS AND TERMS OF THE LOAN FACILITIES

Section 2.01 Establishment of Term Loan Facility
Each Term Loan Lender severally agrees, subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement,
to make Advances in respect of the Term Loan Facility to the Borrowers on any Business Day in
any amount not to exceed such Lender’s Unused Term Loan Comminnent on such day.


.18.
Section 2.02 Establishment of Bridge Loan Facility
Each Bridge Loan Lender severally agrees, subject to the terms and conditions of this
Agreement, to make Advances in respect of the Bridge Loan Facility to the Borrowers on any
Business Day in any amount not to exceed such Lender’s Unused Bridge Loan Commitment on
such day.
Section 2.03 Types, Availability, Amounts, and Purposes of Advances.

(21) Types of Advances At the option of the Borrowers, the Lenders shall make the
Loan Facilities available to the Borrowers by way of (i) Canadian Prime Rate
Advances, (ii) USBR Advances, and (iii) LEBOR Advances. At the sole request
of Inco, this Agreement shall be amendai (in a tax efﬁcient manner and upon
terms acceptable to Inco and the Majority Lenders, acting reasonably), to provide
for BA Advances for Lenders named in Schedule I to the Bank Act (Canada) and
EA Equivalent Rate Advances for other Lenders.

(b) Availability of Advances. Subject to Section 2.09, the Advances shall be made
available to the Borrowers by the Lenders from the Effective Date until 11:59
pm. on the Commitment Reduction Date; provided that the Commitments and all
of the Lenders’ obligations under the Loan Documents shall (unless speciﬁcally
provided otherwise in any Loan Document) terminate on the First Advance
Expiry Date unless the initial Advance under either of the Loan Facilities shall
have occurred before, or occurs on, the First Advance Expiry Date; provided,
however, that the obligations and liabilities of the Lenders contained in Section
2.12(e), Section 8.06, Section 8.10, and Section 905(0) shall survive the
cancellation of the Commitments in full and the termination of this Agreement.
The whole of any Unused Commitments shall be automatically terminated at
11:59 pm. on the Commitment Reduction Date, with the amount of any such
reduction being implemented based upon the Pro Rate Share of each Lender.
Borrowings under the Term Loan Facility and the Bridge Loan Facility shall be
pro-rata until the whole of the Total Bridge Loan Commitment has been advanced
or the Total Bridge Loan Commitment is reduced to zero.

(0) Amounts of Advances. Each Borrowing shall be in an aggregate amount of not
less than US$5,000,000 or CD$5,000,000 or an integral multiple of US$1,000,000
or CD$1,000,000 in excess thereof (except that a lesser amount may be drawn in
order to fully utilize the Total Term Loan Commitment or the Total Bridge Loan
Commihnent, as applicable), and shall consist of Advances of the same Type
made on the same day by the Lenders rateably according to their respective Pro
Rota Shares of the Term Loan Facility or the Bridge Loan Facility, as applicable.

(d) Pmse of Advances. Advances shall be used to ﬁnance the Transactions and
may also be used for any repayment or reﬁnancing of debt or redemption of
preferred shares in connection with the Transactions, for payment of fair value for
Falconbridge Common Shares acquired pursuant to any dissent or appraisal
rights, and to pay fees, commissions and expenses in connection therewith.


. 19 .
Section 2.04 Computations of Interest and Fees

(a) Computation of interest. All computations of interest shall be made by the
Administrative Agent taking into account the actual number of days occurring in
the period for which such interest is payable (including the ﬁrst day but excluding
the last day of such period), and (i) if based on the Canadian Prime Rate or the
USBR, on the basis of a year of 365 or 366 days, as applicable; or (ii) if based on
LIBOR, on the basis of a year of 360 days. The interest rate for USBR Advances
and Canadian Prime Rate Advances shall be adjusted automatically without notice
to the Borrowers whenever there is a change in USBR or Canadian Prime Rate, as
applicable

(h) Computation of Fees. All computations of fees shall be made by the
Administrative Agent on the basis of a year of 365 or 366 days, as the case may
be, taking into account the actual number of days occurring in the period for
which such fees are payable.

(c) Interest Act (Canadal. For purposw of the Interest Act (Canada), whenever any
interest or fee under this Agreement is calculated using a rate based on a number
of days less than a full year, such rate determined pursuant to such calculation,
when expressed as an annual rate, is equivalent to (x) the applicable rate, (y)
multiplied by the actual number of days in the calendar year in which the period
for which such interest or fee is payable (or compounded) ends, and (2) divided
by the number of days based on which such rate is calculated. The principle of
deemed reinvestment of interest does not apply to any interest calculation under
this Agreement. The rates of interest stipulated in this Agreement are intended to
be nominal rates and not effective rates or yields.

Section 2.05 Making the Advances.

(a) Each Borrowing shall be made upon notice (21 “Drawing Notice”) being received
by the Administrative Agent substantially in the form of Schedule C from a
Borrower not later than 10:00 am. (and in the case of a Subsidiary Borrower,
counter-signed by Inco) (it) three (3) Business Days prior to the date (which shall
be a Business Day) of a Borrowing comprised of a LIBOR Advance, or (y) on the
date of a Borrowing (which shall be a Business Day) comprised of a USBR
Advance or a Canadian Prime Rate Advance (or such other periods as may be
from time to time be agreed; provided, that the Drawing Notice in respect of any
Borrowing comprised of a LIBOR Advance which is to occur on the ﬁrst date
upon which any Advance is made under the Loan Facilities shall be effective if
received by the Administrative Agent two (2) Business Days prior to such date).
Each Drawing Notice shall set forth (i) the Type of Advance and amount thereof
in U.S. Dollars or Canadian Dollars, as applicable; (ii) the location and number of
the Designated Account; and (iii) in the case of a Borrowing comprised of LIBOR
Advances, the initial Interest Period therefor. The Administrative Agent shall
give each applicable Lender prompt notice of any Drawing Notice received from
a Borrower and of each Lender‘s Pro Rata Share of any resulting Advance. 0n
the date of each such Borrowing, each Lender will make available to the
Administrative Agent in the Agent’s Account, in immediately available funds in


. 20 _

U.S. Dollars in the use of Borrowings comprised of LIBOR Advances or USBR
Advances, or in Canadian Dollars in the case of Borrowings comprised of
Canadian Prime Rate Advances, such Lender’s Pro Rata Share of such
Borrowing. After the Administrative Agent’s receipt of such funds and upon
fulﬁllment of the applicable conditions set forth in ARTICLE 3, the
Administrative Agent will make such funds available in the Designated Account
or Designated Accounts of the relevant Borrower.

(b) Unless the Administrative Agent shall have received notice from a Lender prior to
the time of any Borrowing that such Lender will not make available to the
Administrative Agent such Lender’s Pro Rata Share of such Borrowing (which,
for certainty, shall not derogate from such Lender’s obligation to make Advances
as contemplated by Section 2.01 and/or Section 2.02 as applicable, the
Administrative Agent may assume that such Lender has made such portion
available to the Administrative Agent on the date of such Borrowing in
accordance with Section 2.05(a) and the Administrative Agent may, in reliance
upon such assumption, make available to the relevant Borrower on such date a
corresponding amount. If and to the extent that such Lender shall not have so
made its Pro Rata Share of such Borrowing available to the Administrative Agent,
sucb Lender and the relevant Borrower severally agree to repay to the
Administrative Agent forthwith on demand such corresponding amount together
with interest thereon, for each day from the date such amount is made available to
such Borrower until the date such amount is repaid to the Administrative Agent,
at (i) in the case of a Borrower, the higher of (A) the interest rate applicable at the
time to Advances comprising such Borrowing and (B) the cost of funds incurred
by the Administrative Agent in respect of such amount; and (ii) in the case of
Such Lender, the Federal Funds Rate in the case of Advances denominated in US.
Dollars or (B) the cost of funds incurred by the Administrative Agent in respect of
such amount in the case of Advances denominated in Canadian Dollars. If such
Lender shall repay to the Administrative Agent such corresponding amount, such
amount so repaid shall constitute such Lender’s Advance as part of such
Borrowing for purposes of this Agreement.

(0) The failure of any Lender to make the Advance to be made by it as part of any
Borrowing shall not relieve any other Lender of its obligation, if any, hereunder to
make its Advance on the date of such Borrowing, but no Lender shall be
responsible for the failure of any other Lender to make the Advance to be made
by such other Lender on the date of any Borrowing.

Section 2.06 Currency.

(3) Currency of Advances. The Loan Facilities shall, at a Borrower’s election, be
disbursed and shall be repayable in U.S. Dollars in the case of USBR Advances
and LIBOR Advances or in Canadian Dollars in the case of Canadian Prime Rate
Advances. Any Advances made in US. Dollars shall be disbursed and shall be
repayable in immediately available funds in U.S. Dollars and any Advances made
in Canadian Dollars shall be disbursed and shall be repayable in immediately
available funds in Canadian Dollars.


. 21 .

(b) Adjustments Based upon Currency Valuation. If the Administrative Agent shall
notify the Borrowers that, solely by reason of ﬂuctuations in currency valuation,
and after giving effect to the conversion of all Term Loan Advances and/or
Bridge Loan Advances, as applicable, outstanding hereunder in Canadian Dollars
into U.S. Dollars, the aggregate amount of such outstanding Term Loan Advances
and/or Bridge Loan Advances exceeds the Total Term Loan Commitment and/or
the Total Bridge Loan Conunitment, rapectively, (the amount of such excess
being hereinafter referred to as the “Excess Amount”), by more than ﬁve percent
(5%), then, subject to Section 2.09(d), the Borrowers shall immediately prepay
Advances comprising the same Borrowing by the Excess Amount, together with
any interest accrued to the date of such prepayment on the aggregate principal
amount of Advances so prepaid; provided that if the prepayment is in Canadian
Dollars, the Borrowers shall ﬁrst prepay Canadian Prime Rate Advances and if
the prepayment is in U.S. Dollars, the Borrowers shall first prepay USBR
Advances and thereafter LIBOR Advances, together with any interest accrued to
the date of such prepayment on the aggregate principal amount of Advances
prepaid. Any prepayments of LIBOR Advances shall be subject to Section
9050)).

Section 2.07 Interest RateJApplicable Margins.

(a) Rat%. Interest rates on Advances will be based on the Rating of Inco as
determined by the Rating Agencies. Outstanding Canadian Prime Rate Advances,
USBR Advances and LIBOR Advances shall bear interest at the Canadian Prime
Rate, USBR or LIBOR respectively, plus the applicable margin set forth in the
table below until such time as 21 Ratings Change shall occur whereupon such
interest rate shall be adjusted pursuant to the table below in accordance with ‘

Section 2.070)).
Rating Applicable Canadian Prime Rate Margin Applicahle LIBOR Margin (%)
(%) under:
Applicable USBR Margin (%)
under:
Bridge Loam Term Loan Bridge Loan Facility Term Loan Facility

Facility Facility
——
——
——
——
(b) Rate Adjustments and Cash Adjustments. Any change in the interest rate
applicable to an Advance brought about by a Ratings Change shall take effect on


. 22 .
the ﬁrst Business Day immediately following the date of such Ratings Change.
Inco and the Administrative Agent, acting on behalf of the Lenders, agree to settle
in cash any adjustments which may be necessary with regard to interest payments
which shall have been made prior to the receipt of notice pertaining to such
Ratings Change.

(c) Pament Dates for USBR Advances and Canadian Prime Rate Advances.
Accrued interest for each calendar month in respect of a USBR Advance or a
Canadian Prime Rate Advance shall be payable quarterly in arrears on the ﬁrst
(15') Business Day of each ﬁscal quarter in respect of the immediately preceding
ﬁscal quarter in the currency in which such Advance was denominated, provided
that the Administrative Agent shall have given the relevant Borrower one
Business Day’s prior notice of the amount due. In the event that the
Administrative Agent fails to give such notice, such payment shall be payable by
the relevant Borrower on the next Business Day following such Borrower’s
receipt of such notice.

(d) Fitment Dates for LIBOR Advances. Accrued interest in respect of each LIBOR
Advance shall be payable in arrears on the last day of each Interest Period for
each such LIBOR Advance, or in the case of LIBOR Advances having Interest
Periods in excess of three months, on each three (3) month anniversary of the ﬁrst
day of such Interest Period and on the last day of such Interest Period; provided
that the Administrative Agent shall have given the relevant Borrower one (1)
Business Day’s prior notice of the amount due. In the event that the
Administrative Agent fails to give such notice, such payment shall be payable by
the relevant Borrower on the ﬁrst (15') Business Day next following such
Borrower’s receipt of such notice.

(e) Interest Periods. At the time of each drawdown, conversion or rollover of any
Advance, each Borrower shall advise the Administrative Agent of the interest rate
basis (Canadian Prime Rate, USBR or LIBOR) which it elects and, if the LIBOR
basis is selected, the initial interest period therefor which shall be one (1), two (2),
three (3), six (6) months, some other period selected by a Borrower with the
consent of the Term Loan Lenders or the Bridge Loan Lenders, as applicable or,
with respect to Advances under the Bridge Loan Facility only, one (1) week (each
such period, an “Interest Period”) to apply therefor Interest Periods subsequent
to the initial Interest Period shall be selected for LIBOR Advances no later than
three (3) Business Days prior to the end of the then applicable Interest Period. It
is understood and agreed that a Borrower may elect a different interest basis for
any Advances outstanding at the time of such election, provided that in the case of
LIBOR Advances, such changes can only be made on the last day of an Interest
Period. If a Borrower shall fail to advise the Administrative Agent of the interest
basis or the Interest Period which it elects, the interest basis shall be deemed to be

LIBOR for LIBOR Advances and the Interest Period shall be deemed to be one
(1) month.

(i) Impossibility In the event that any future requirement imposed by any
governmental and/or banking authority in Canada or the United States maka it
effectively impossible for a Lender to continue to make Advances in U.S. Dollars


. 23 _

based on USBR, such Lender reserves the right to convert the rate on then
outstanding balance of any Advances based on USBR to a rate based on LIBOR,
all in accordance with the provisions of this Section 2.07; provided that in such
event, if a Borrower shall so request by delivery of a notice substantially in the
form of Schedule D to the Administrative Agent, such Lender will convert the
outstanding balance of such Advances to Canadian Prime Rate Advances at the
applicable Exchange Rates.

(g) Inability to Determine LIBOR. If on any date on which the interest rate on a
LIBOR Advance is to be determined the Administrative Agent determines that
deposits for the relevant amount, currency and Interest Period are not being or
will not be offered to it in the London Interbank market by leading banks or if for
any other reason the Administrative Agent is unable to determine the applicable
LIBOR, then the Lenders shall not be required to make any Advances based on
LIBOR and any then outstanding LIBOR Advance shall, at the option of Inco or a
Subsidiary Borrower, as applicable, on the last day of each Interest Period then
applicable to such LIBOR Advance, either (i) be repaid forthwith, or (ii) bear
interest based on USBR, in each case without prejudice to the right of a Borrower
subsequently to elect a LIBOR Advance.

(h) Rollover or Conversion of Advances Into Another Form of Advance. At the
option of a Borrower, any Advance may be converted or rolled over into another
Type of Advance on any Business Day, provided that: (i) such Borrower provides
the Administrative Agent with a notice substantially in the form of Schedule D or
Schedule E (a “Conversion Notice” or a “Rollover Notice“, respectively), as
applicable, not later than 10:00 am. (A) on the day of the conversion or rollover
in the case of a Borrowing to be comprised of a USBR Advance, or a Canadian
Prime Rate Advance, (B) three (3) Business Days prior to the conversion or
rollover in the case of a Borrowing to be comprised of a LIBOR Advance, and (ii)
in the case of a LIBOR Advance, no such conversion or rollover may take place
other than on the last day of an Interest Period.

The ability of a Borrower to convert a USBR Advance or a Canadian Prime Rate
Advance into a LIBOR Advance or rollover a LIBOR Advance is further subject
to the following: (i) no USBR Advance or Canadian Prime Rate Advance may be
so converted when any Event of Default has occurred and is continuing and the
Majority Lenders have determined in their sole discretion not to permit such a
conversion, and (ii) no LIBOR Advance may be rolled over into another LLBOR
Advance when any Event of Default has occurred and is continuing and the
Majority Lenders have determined in their sole discretion not to permit such a
rollover (in which case such Advance shall be converted at the option of the
relevant Borrower to a USBR Advance or a Canadian Prime Rate Advance at the
end of the Interest Period applicable to such LIBOR Advance).

Inco acknowledges that, whenever an Advance is to be converted from one
currency to another, it is its sole responsibility to (i) arrange with one Lender for
the exchange rate at which the conversion of the entire amount of such Advance is
to take place and (ii) advise the Administrative Agent of such exchange rate and
the name of a contact at the Lender with whom such arrangement was made,


_ 24 .
Such conversion of the entire amount of such Advance shall be effected by the
Administrative Agent with such Lenderr
A conversion or rollover shall not constitute a repayment or re-advance of the
Advance but shall only reﬂect a change in the rate or method of calculating
interest on such outstanding Advances as are the subject of a conversion or
rollover.

(i) Maximum Retum, Notwithstanding any provisions hereof, in no event shall the
aggregate “interest” (as deﬁned in section 347 of the Criminal Code (Canada))
payable hereunder exceed the effective annual rate of interest on the “credit
advanced” (as defined in that section) hereunder lawfully permitted by that
section and, if any payment, collection or demand pursuant to this Agreement in
respect of “interest” (as deﬁned in that section) is determined to be contrary to the
provisions of that section, such payment, collection or demand shall be deemed to
have been made by mutual mistake of the relevant Borrower and the Lenders and
the amount of such payment or collection, to the extent of such excess, shall be
refunded to such Borrower For the putposes of this Agreement, the effective
annual rate of interest shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted
actuarial practices and principles over the relevant term.

Section 2.08 Optional Reduction or Termination of the Total Commitment

(a) Wt; A Borrower may, without penalty or similar fee, payment
or assessment (except as set out in Section 9.05(b)), from time to time, prepay the
outstanding amount of Advances comprising a Borrowing in whole or in part (in a
minimum amount of US$1,000,000 or CD$1,000,000, as applicable, and
additional integral multiple; thereof, or such other amount for the purposes of
repaying the entire amount of outstanding Advances, as the case may be) with
accrued interest to, but not including, the date of such prepayment on the amount
prepaid; provided that (i) such Borrower shall be required to provide not less than
one (1) Business Day’s prior notice to the Administrative Agent with regard to
any such intended prepayments of any USBR Advances or Canadian Prime Rate
Advances, and (ii) such Borrower shall be required to provide not less than three
(3) Business Days' prior notice to the Administrative Agent with regard to any
intended prepayments of LIBOR Advances. Such prepayment shall permanently
reduce the Total Term Loan Commitment or the Total Bridge Loan Commitment,
at the option of such Borrower, and be allocated based on the Pro Rata Share of
the relevant Loan Facility of each Lender,

(b) thional Reduction of Total Commitment. Inco may, upon at least three (3)
Business Days’ prior irrevocable notice to the Administrative Agent and the
Lenders, entirely terminate or permanently reduce the then Unused Term Loan
Commitments and Unused Bridge Loan Commitments without penalty or similar
fee, payment or assessment, provided that (i) each partial reduction shall be at
least in the aggregate amount of US$5,000,000 and increments ofUS$1,000,000,
and (ii) any termination or reduction shall be implemented based upon the Pro
Rata Share of each Lender.


. 25 .
Section 2.09 Mandatory Prepayments and Reductions
(a) Bridge Loan Facility. Any outstanding Bridge Loan Advances shall be prepaid in
an amount (the “Bridge Loan Mandatory Prepayment Amount”) equal to the
sum of:
(x) 100% of the Net Proceeds received by Inco or any of its Wholly-Owned
Subsidiaries from and aﬁer October 10, 2005 Rom:
(i) the sale or other disposition outside of the ordinary course of
business of; or
(ii) loss or destruction giving rise to insurance or condemnation
proceeds with respect to;
all or any part of the assets of Inco or any of its Wholly—Owned
Subsidiaries;
excluding:
(A) insurance and condemnation proceeds to the extent such
proceeds are within 180 days of receipt thereof (1)
reinvested or (2) allocated by the recipient of such proceeds
for future reinvestment, in which case such recipient shall
deliver to the Administrative Agent before the expiry of
such 180 day period an ofﬁcer’s certiﬁcate showing, in
reasonable detail, the nature and anticipated timing of such
future reinvestment, and certifying that in the judgement of
Inco, acting reasonably, such reinvestment and the nature
and timing thereof are appropriate), in a replacement
property, (the amount of such excluded insurance and
condemnation proceeds, the “Bridge Loan Mandatory
Reinvestment Amount");

CB) any amount which is required to be repaid to any other
lender as a result of such sale or other disposition, loss, or
destruction;

(C) any amount from a * or from the sale or other disposition or
loss or destruction of (1) all of the issued and outstanding
shares of *, (2) all or any part of the assets ovmed by any of
*, Goro Nickel SAS., or PT International Nickel Indonesia
Tbk, or joint ventures, (3) marketable securities and/or
equity investments in an entity representing less than a 25%
interest in such entity (other than securities of
Falconbridge) having an aggregate market value of no more
than US$150,000,000, and (4) assets having an aggregate
market value of no more than US$150,000,000; and


. 25 _
(D) any amount from the sale or other disposition of assets by

Inco or any of its Wholly-Owued Subsidiaries (or any
Subsidiary that, as a result of the Compulsory Acquisition
(as deﬁned in the Support Agreement) or Subsequent
Acquisition Transaction (as deﬁned in the Support
Agreement) will become a Wholly-Owned Subsidiary
within 120 days next following the expiry of Inco’s offer to
acquire the Falconbridge Common Shares (as such expiry
date may be extended ﬁom time to time)) to Ineo or any of
its Wholly-Owned Subsidiaries (or any Subsidiary that, as a
result of the Compulsory Acquisition (as deﬁned in the
Support Agreement) or Subsequent Acquisition
Transaction (as deﬁned in the Support Agreement) will
become a Wholly-Owned Subsidiary within 120 days next
following the expiry of Inco‘s offer to acquire the
Falconbridge Common Shares (as such expiry deadline
may be extended from time to time»;

and

(y) 100% of the Net Proceeds received by Inco or any of its Subsidiaries from

and aﬁer October 10, 2005 from any Sweep Debt,

and any Unused Bridge Loan Commitments shall be automatically and

permanently reduced by any amount by which the Bridge Loan Mandatory

Prepayment Amount exceeds the amotmt of Bridge Loan Advances outstanding at

the time of receipt of the Bridge Loan Mandatory Prepayment Amount. Any

prepayments of outstanding Bridge Loan Advances pursuant to this Section

109(3) shall permanently reduce the Total Bridge Loan Commitment by the

amount of such prepayment,

(b) *

(0) Timing of Mandatog Pmaﬂnents. Subject to Section 2.09m), prepayments
described in Section 2.09(a) and Section 2.09(b) shall be made within ﬁve (5)
Business Days of receipt of any Bridge Loan Mandatory Prepayment Amount or
Term Loan Mandatory Prepayment Amount, as applicable, and any reduction of
Commitments described in Section 109(3) or Section 2.09(b) shall be effective on
the date of receipt of such Bridge Loan Mandatory Prepayment Amount or Term
Loan Mandatory Prepayment Amount, as applicable Subject to Section 2.09(d),
to the extent any Bridge Loan Mandatory Reinvestment Amount or Term Loan
Mandatory Reinvestment Amount, as applicable, is not reinthed in a
replacement property in accordance with Section 2.09(a) or Section 2.09(b), as
applicable, such Bridge Loan Mandatory Reinvestment Amount or Term Loan
Mandatory Reinvestment Amount shall be applied to the prepayment of Bridge
Loan Advances or the Term Loan Advances, as applicable, on the date that is the
ﬁrst Business Day following the end of the 180 period described in Section
2,09(a) or in Section 2.09(b) or the applicable *, as applicable, (or such longer


_ 27 _

period as may be provided in an ofﬁcer’s certiﬁcate dwcribed in Section
2,09(a)(x)(A) or Section 2t09(b), as applicable), and the Total Bridge Loan
Commitment or Total Term Loan Commitment, as applicable, shall be
automatically and permanently reduced on such date by any amount by which (i)
the Bridge Loan Mandatory Reinvestment Amount exceeds the amount of Bridge
Loan Advances outstanding on such date, or (ii) the Term Loan Mandatory
Reinvestment Amount exceeds the amount of Term Loan Advances outstanding
on such date, as applicable.

((1) Excess Prepamnent. Notwithstanding Section 206(b), Section 2.09(b) and
Section 2.09(c), a Borrower will not be required (and there shall be no obligation)
to prepay more than 25% of the original principal amount of any Term Loan
Advance in respect of such Borrower at any time prior to the date which is one
day aﬁer the ﬁﬁh (5m) anniversary of the date of the ﬁnal Term Loan Advance.
Subject to this Section 2.09(d), if a Borrower is required pursuant to Section
206(k)), Section 20903) or Section 2.09(c), to prepay an amount on account of the
outstanding T erm Loan Advances, such Borrower shall advise the Administrative
Agent at the time of such prepayment as to the Term Loan Advance to which such
prepayment relates,

(e) No Prgpagent Penalties. Except as set out in Section 9.05(b), there shall be no
prepayment penalties for mandatory prepayments pursuant to this Section 2.09.

Section 2.10 No Reborrowing; Repayment

Amounts prepaid under the Loan Facilities may not be reborrowedi The Borrowers shall
repay in full the unpaid principal amount of all Advances, together with all accrued but unpaid
interest and fees thereon, on the applicable Maturity Date.

Section 2.11 Increased Costs; Capital Adequacy; Illegality

(:1) Increased Costs. If the introduction of, or any change in, (i) any law or regulation

or in the interpretation of any law or regulation, (ii) any requirement for
compliance by any of the Lenders with any guideline, directive or request,
whether or not having the force of law, from any central bank or other
governmental authority, including under subparagraph (i) above, or (iii) any law,
regulation, directive, gmideline, request or interpretation regarding capital
adequacy (a “Capital Adequacy Requirement”), has the effect, directly or
indirectly, of (x) increasing the cost to a Lender of providing its Commitment,
including, but not limited to, the maintenance of reserves or special deposits in
connection with such Commitment; (y) reducing any amount received or
receivable by a Lender or reducing its effective return under this Agreement,
taking into account, in the case of a Capital Adequacy Requirement, such
Lender’s policies with regard to capital adequacy, other than Taxes or Other
Taxes covered by Section 2.12, Excluded Taxes, or an increase in cost or
reduction as a result of a Bridge Loan Lender (or if a partnership, any partner
thereof) being a nonresident of Canada for purposes of the ITA; or (z) causing a
Lender to make payment or to forego any retum on, or calculated by reference to,
any amount received or receivable by such Lender under this Agreement which (i)


. 23 .

such Lender in good faith deems to be material; (ii) is not otherwise reﬂected in
the calculation of the rate of interest or fees applicable to Advances made under
this Agreement; and (iii) is not otherwise recoverable by such Lenders pursuant to
this Agreement, then Inco shall from time to time, upon demand by a Lender
(with a copy to the Administrative Agent), pay to such Lenders additional
amounts sufﬁcient to indemnify it against such increased cost or reduced rate of
return (including, without limitation, the amount of any charge imposed on such
Lender in connection with the imposition of any reserve or similar requirement).
A certiﬁcate of a Lender claiming compensation under this Section 2.11(a) and
setting forth the additional amount or amounts proposed to be paid to it hereunder
and reasonably satisfactory in form and substance to Inco shall be submitted to
Inco. In determining such amounts, the Lender may use any reasonable averaging
and attribution methods.

(b) Illegaliﬂt If, aﬁer the date of this Ageement, the adoption of any applicable law,
rule or regulation, or any change therein, or any change in the interpretation or
administration thereof by any governmental authority, central bank or comparable
agency charged with the interpretation or administration thereof, or compliance
by a Lender with any request or directive (whether or not having the force of law)
of any such governmental authority, central bank or comparable agency shall
make it unlawful or impossible for such Lender to make, maintain or fund LIBOR
Advances, then such Lender forthwith shall so notify the Administrative Agent
and each of the Borrowers. Upon the giving of any such notice, the Borrowers
shall, at their option, either (i) prepay the aggregate amount of LIBOR Advances
then outstanding, with accrued and unpaid interest thereon to, but not including,
the date of prepayment or (ii) convert such then outstanding LIBOR Advances
(with accrued and unpaid interest thereon to be paid by the Borrowers) into a
USBR Advance equivalent to such aggregate amount. If it is illegal or impossible
for a Lender to make LIBOR Advances, then only other Types of Advances shall
be made hereunder.

(c) Notice' Different Lending Ofﬁce. Each Lender will promptly notify Inco of any
event of which it has knowledge, occurring aﬁer the date hereof, which will
entitle such Lender to compensation pursuant to this Section 2.11 or Section 2.12,
and before making any claim for payment under this Section 2.1 1 or Section 2.12,
will designate a different Lending Ofﬁce if such designation will avoid the need
for, or reduce the amount of, such compensation and will not, in the sole
judgment of such Lender, be otherwise disadvantageous to it.

(d) Termination of Commitment.

(i) In circumstances Where a Lender makes a demand pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2.] 1(3) or Section 212 or provides a notice
pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.11(b), the relevant
Borrower shall, at its option, either:

(A) continue to pay the increased costs or additional amounts
contemplated by Section 2.ll(a) or Section 2.12 or effect


_ 29 _
the prepayment or conversion contemplated by Section
2.1 l(b) without further action; or
(B) so long as no Event of Default has occurred and is
continuing, replace all or a portion of the Commitment of
such Lenders then making demands pursuant to Section
2.ll(a) or Section 2.12 or providing notices pursuant to
Section 2.ll(b) (each, an “Increased Cost Lender”) by
effecting assignments thereof to one or more Eligible
Assignees pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.11(a),
provided that if less than all of the Commitments of such
Lenders are so replaced, such replacement shall be made on
a rateable basis among the Increased Cost Lenders. If a
Borrower chooses to replace all or a portion of the
Commitments of such Lenders, then such Borrower shall
notify the Administrative Agent and the Increased Cost
Lenders of its intention to effect such replacement and shall
use commercially reasonable efforts to effect such
replacement for a period of at least ninety (90) days aﬁer
such Borrower provides such notice.
In the event that a Borrower is unable to replace all of the Commitments
of the Increased Cost Lenders, then such Borrower may, at its option1
choose to prepay all or a portion of the outstanding Advances made by the
Increased Cost Lenders and reduce the Commitment of each Increased
Cost Lender by the amount of such prepayment. In the event that less than
all of the Increased Cost Lenders are to be so prepaid, then the Advances
made by such Lenders shall be prepaid and the Commitments of such
Lenders reduced on a rateable basis among the Increased Cost Lenders.
Such prepayment shall be effected by such Borrower prepaying the
principal portion of the Advances being repaid plus all accrued and unpaid
interest thereon as at the date of payment.
Section 2.12 Payments
(3) The Borrowers shall make each payment hereunder and under any instrument
delivered hereunder, without counterclaim or set-off, not later than l2:00 noon on
the day when due, in freely transferable US Dollars or Canadian Dollars, as the
case may be, in immediately available funds or such other funds as shall be
Customary for the settlement of international banking transactions in US. Dollars,
in the case of LIBOR Advances and USBR Advances, or in Canadian Dollars in
the case of Canadian Prime Rate Advances. Upon the occurrence of an Event of
Default which is continuing and both before and alter maturity, acceleration and
judgment, interest will accrue on overdue principal, interest, fees and other
amounts payable pursuant to this Agreement, to the extent permitted by applicable
law, at a rate which is two percent (2%) per annum in excess of the rate of interest
then otherwise payable under this Agreement and shall be payable on demand.


_ 30 r

(b) Subject to Section 2‘12(d), Section 2.12(e), and Section 112(1), all payments by
the Borrowers under this Agreement or by Inco under the Inco Guarantee shall be
made at the ofﬁces of the Administrative Agent as notiﬁed to the Borrowers by
the Administrative Agent in advance Without offset or counterclaim but net of
applicable withholding Taxes (other than Excluded Taxes), if any. If a Borrower
or Inoo as guarantor under the 11100 Guarantee (each, a “Withholding Tax
Obligor") shall be so required to withhold any such Taxes from or in respect of
any amount payable in respect of the Term Loan Facility under this Agreement or
the lnco Guarantee:

(i) the amount payable shall be increased by such additional amount
as may be necessary so that after making all required deductions or
withholdings (including deductions or withholdings applicable to
additional amounts paid under this Section 2.12(b)), the Lenders or
Administrative Agent, as applicable, receive a net amount equal to
the full amount they would have received if no deduction or
withholding had been made;

(ii) such Withholding Tax Obligor shall make such required
deductions or withholdings;

(iii) such Withholding Tax Obligor shall pay the full amount deducted
or withheld to the relevant governmental authority in accordance
with and within the time required by applicable law; and

(iv) such Withholding Tax Obligor shall deliver to the Lenders or
Administrative Agent, as applicable, as soon as practicable aﬁer it
has made such payment to the applicable authority (A) a copy of
such receipt as issued by such governmental authority evidencing
the remittance of all amounts required to be deducted or withheld
from the sum payable under this Agreement, or (B) if such a
receipt is not available from such governmental authority, notice of
the payment of such amount deducted or withheld.

In addititm, the Borrowers or Inco as guarantor under the Inco Guarantee agree to
immediately pay any and all Other Taxes which arise ﬁom any payment made by such
Borrowers under this Agreement or Inco under the Inca Guarantee, or the execution,
deliver, registration of or otherwise with respect to this Agreement or the Inco Guarantee.
(c) Without prejudice to Section 2,12(b), but subject to Section 2.12(d), Section
2.l2(e), and Section 212(1), if the Administrative Agent or any Lender (in this
Section 2.12(c) an “Indemnitee”) is required at any time (whether before or alter
any Withholding Tax Obligor has discharged all of its other obligations under this
Agreement) to make any payment on account of any Taxes (other than Excluded
Taxes) or Other Taxes (including penalties and interest payable in connection
therewith) under this Agreement or the Inca Guarantee, whether or not correctly
or legally asserted, the relevant Withholding Tax Obligor shall, within thirty (30)
days of written demand of such Indernnitee, promptly indemnify such Indenmitee
against such payment or liability, together with interest and penalties in


. 31 .

connection with such payment or liability. In addition, the relevant Withholding
Tax Obligor shall indemnify the relevant Indemnitee for any Taxes based on or
measured by the overall net income of the relevant Lender or the Administrative
Agent imposed by any jurisdiction on or with respect to any increased amount
payable by such Withholding Tax Obligor under this Section 2.12. An
Indemnitee intending to make a claim pursuant to this Section 212(0) shall notify
the relevant Borrower of the event in respect of which it believes it is entitled to
make such claim and supply reasonable supporting evidence including a copy of
the relevant portion of any written assessment, provided that any such lndemnitee
shall not be required to disclose any information required to be kept conﬁdential
by regulation or contract.

((1) The obligation of a Withholding Tax Obligor to pay additional amounts pursuant

to this Section 2.12 shall not apply with respect to Taxes, interest, or penalties (i)
arising by virtue of a Lender or the Administrative Agent, as applicable, having a
connection with the jurisdiction that imposes such Taxes, interest, or penalties
other than merely by the execution of this Agreement, receipt of payments in
respect of Term Loan Advances under this Agreement, the holding and
diSposition of Term Loan Advances, the performance of its obligations or the
enforcement of its rights in respect of Term Loan Advances under this
Agreement, (ii) arising by Virtue of a Lender or Administrative Agent, as
applicable, not dealing at arm’s length with such Withholding Tax Obligor for
purposes of the ITA, (iii) arising pursuant to Regulation 105(1) of the ITA in
respect of services rendered in Canada by a person that is a non-resident of
Canada for purposes of the ITA, or (iv) arising from a failure by the
Administrative Agent or any Lender to comply with any certiﬁcation,
identiﬁcation, information, documentation or other reporting requirement if
compliance is required by law, regulation, administrative practice or any
applicable tax treaty as a precondition to exemption from or a reduction in the rate
of deduction or withholding of Taxes, but only to the extent that the
Administrative Agent or Lender, as the case may be, was legally entitled to
comply.

(e) If any Withholding Tax Obligor shall pay any additional amounts pursuant to
Section 2.12(b) or indemnity payments pursuant to Section 2.12(c) and the
Administrative Agent or any Lender at any time thereaﬂer receives a refund of the
Taxes or a direct credit which in such Lender’s sole opinion (acting in good faith)
is attributable to such amounts paid by such Withholding Tax Obligor (any of the
foregoing being referred to as a “reﬁmd”), such Lender shall, to the extent that it
can do so without prejudice to the retention of the relevant refund and subject to
such Withholding Tax Obligor’s obligation to repay promptly on demand by such
Lender the amount to such Lender if the relevant refund is subsequently
disallowed or cancelled, reimburse such Withholding Tax Obligor promptly after
receipt of such refund by such Lender with such amount as such Lender shall in
its sole opinion but in good faith have concluded to be the amount of the relevant
refund. Nothing contained in this Agreement shall interfere with the right of any
Lender or the Administrative Agent to arrange its Tax and other affairs in
whatever manner it thinks ﬁt. No Lender or the Administrative Agent shall be


.32.
required to disclose any conﬁdential information relating to the organization of its
affairs.

(f) Notwithstanding any other provision in this Agreement to the contrary, the
Borrowers shall not be required to pay any additional amounts pursuant to Section
2.12(b) in respect of any payments on or in respect of the Bridge Loan Facility
under this Agreement as a result of deductions or withholdings on account of any
applicable withholding tax on such payments, or to indemnify the Bridge Loan
Lenders pursuant to Section 2.12(c)), in respect of such withholding tax.

(g) In addition to the provisions of Section 212(1)), in respect of amounts paid or
credited by a Borrower under this Agreement or Inco under the Inca Guarantee to
or for the beneﬁt of a particular Lender that is an “authorized foreign bank" for
purposes of the ITA, the obligations under this Section 2.12 to pay an additional
amount shall apply where the particular Lender is liable for Tax under Part XIII of
the ITA in respect of such payment, even if the relevant Withholding Tax Obligor
is not required under the ITA to deduct or withhold an amount in respect of Taxes
on such payment and Section 2.12 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, as if the relevant
Withholding Tax Obligor Was required to withhold an amount in respect of such
Taxes.

Section 2.13 Evidence of Debt
The Administrative Agent shall open and maintain in accordance with its usual practice books of
account evidencing all Advances and all other amounts owing by the Borrowers to the
Administrative Agent and the Lenders hereunder. The Administrative Agent shall also enter in
the foregoing accounts details of every Drawing Notice in respect of each Advance and all
amounts from time to time owing or paid by the Borrowers to the Administrative Agent for its
own account or for the account of the Lenders hereunder, the amounts of principal, interest and
fees payable from time to time hereunder and the undrawn portion of each Lender’s
Commitment available to be drawn down by the Borrowers The information entered in the
foregoing accounts shall constitute, in the absence of manifest error, prima facie evidence of the
obligations of the Borrowers to the Administrative Agent and the Lenders hereunder, the date the
Lenders made each Advance available to the Borrowers, and the amounts the Borrowers have
paid from time to time on account of the principal of and interest on each Advance.
Secﬁon 2.14 Commitment Fee
(a) Term Loan Facilig Commitment Feel During the period from (and including) the
Effective Date to (but excluding) the earliest of (i) the Term Loan Facility
Maturity Date, (ii) the date the Total Term Loan Commitment has been wholly
advanced or has been reduced to zero, and (iii) the date that the Unused Term
Loan Commitment has been reduced to zero, Inco shall pay to the Administrative
Agent for the beneﬁt of the Term Loan Lenders an aggregate conmiitment fee in
respect of the Term Loan Facility (the “Term Loan Facility Commitment Fee").
(b) Bridge Loan Facility Commitment Fee. During the period from (and including)
the Effective Date to (but excluding) the earlier of (i) the Bridge Loan Facility
Maturity Date, (ii) the date the Total Bridge Loan Commitment has been wholly


. 33 _
advanced or has been reduced to zero, and (iii) the date that the Unused Bridge
Loan Commitment has been reduced to zero, lnco shall pay to the Administrative
Agent for the beneﬁt of the Bridge Loan Lenders an aggregate commitment fee in
respect of the Bridge Loan Facility (the “Bridge Loan Facility Commitment
Fee”).

(C) Pament of the Commitment Fees. Each Commitment Fee shall be based on the
Rating of Inco as determined by the Rating Agencies for the actual number of
days elapsed in the period referred to in Section 214(3) Section 2.l4(b), as
applicable. Each Commitment Fee shall be payable at a per annum rate equal to
(x) the applicable commitment fee rate set forth on in the table below (the
“Applicable Commitment Fee Rate“) times (y) the Unused Term Loan
Commitment or the Unused Bridge Loan Commitment, as applicable, for each
day of such period.

‘—

a
Each Commitment Fee shall be payable (i) quarterly in arrears in respect of me
immediately preceding ﬁscal quarter on the Business Day that is one (1) Business
Day next following the Business Day on which the Administrative Agent shall
have notiﬁed Inco of the amount due and (ii) upon maturity of, or, if earlier,
termination of the Term Loan Commitment or Bridge Loan Commitment, as
applicable (provided that the Administrative Agent shall give Inco one (1)
Business Day’s notice of the amount due failing which the applicable
Commitment Fee shall be payable by him on the next Business Day following
Inco’s receipt of such notice). Each Commitment Fee shall be promptly
distributed by the Administrative Agent to the Lenders based on their respective
Pro Rata Shares.

((1) Rate Adjustments and Cash Adjustments Any change in the Applicable
Commitment Fee Rate brought about by 5 Ratings Change shall take effect on the
ﬁrst Business Day immediately following the date of such Ratings Change. Inco
and the Administrative Agent, acting on behalf of the Lenders, agree to settle in
cash any adjustments which may be necessary with regard to commitment fee
payments which shall have been made prior to the receipt of notice pertaining to
such Ratings Change.


.34.

Section 2.15 Pari Passn Obligations
The obligations of the Borrowers under this Agreement and any of the other Loan Documents
(collectively, the “Borrower Obligations”) shall be unsecured and rank pari passu with any
other senior unsecured indebtedness of the Borrowers; provided that the Borrower Obligations
shall have the beneﬁt of any guarantees and/or security now or hereaﬁer provided under any of
Inco‘s other senior indebtedness.

ARTICLE 3
CONDITIONS OF LENDING/BORROWING

Section 3.01 Deliveries for Effective Date

The Effective Date shall oceur on the date that Inco has:
(a) delivered each of the following documents to the Lenders, in form and substance
satisfactory to the Administrative Agent and its counsel, acting reasonably:

(i) This Agreement and the other Loan Documents listed in Part 1 of
Schedule Q, duly executed and delivered by the parties hereto and
thereto.

(ii) Certiﬁed copies of (i) the restated articles of incorporation of lnco
under the Canada Business Corporations Act (Canada) issued by
the Director under the Canada Business Corporations Act
(Canada), (ii) Inco’s By-law No. l, and (iii) excerpts from
resolutions of the board of directors of Inca approving the
Transactions (to the extent contemplated in Part 2 of Schedule Q),
this Agreement, and each of the other Loan Documents listed in
Part 1 of Schedule Q to which Inco is a party.

(iii) A certiﬁcate of an appropriate oﬁicer of Inco certifying the names
and true signatures of the officers of Inco duly authorized to sign
this Agreement and any other Loan Documents and the other
documents to be delivered hereunder and thereunder.

(iv) A certiﬁcate of an appropriate ofﬁcer of Inco certifying that (i) the
representations and warranties contained in Section 4.01 are
correct as at such date, except to the extent that such
representations and warranties relate to an earlier or later date; and
(ii) no event has occurred and is continuing which constitutes an
Event of Default or would constitute an Event of Default, but for
the requirement that notice be given or time elapse with respect to
any applicable grace period or boﬂi.

(v) An opinion of each of Borrowers’ Counsel, lnco‘s in-liouse
counsel, and Ogilvy Renault LLP (as Canadian counsel to the

Lenders), substantially in the form of Schedules I, J, and K,
respectively.


.35.

(vi) Pro fonna ﬁnancial statements consisting of a pro forma
consolidated balance sheet of Inoo (including Falconbridge and its
Subsidiaries) as of June 30, 2005 and a pro fonna consolidated
statement of earnings for the year ended 2004 and the six month
period ended June 30, 2005 (in each case alter giving effect to the
Tender Offer and the incurrence of Advances (in an aggregate
principal amount consistent with the assumptions contained in
section 3 of the notes to the pro forma ﬁnancial statements
provided in the Circular) hereunder, including fees, commissions,
and expenses in connection therewith), as supplemented by a pro
for-ma consolidated balance sheet as at September 30, 2005 and pro
fauna consolidated statement of earnings for the nine-month
period ended September 30, 2005 and which Inco believes to be
reasonably accurate based on information available at the time of
preparation. Such pro forma financial statements will be prepared
in accordance with Rule 44—101 of the Ontario Securitim

Commission Rules and GAAP and shall be consistent with the pro
forma ﬁnancial statements provided in the Circular;

0)) delivered to the Administrative Agent such other usual and customary agreements
and documents as the Lenders may have reasonably requested relating to lnco, its
Restricted Subsidiaries and the Subsidiary Borrowers to the extent relevant to the
Transactions, together with such amendments thereto as may have been entered
into as permitted in Section 5.05 and all other available deﬁnitive documentation
related to the Transactions, all as listed in Part 2 of Schedule Q;

(c) delivered to the Administrative Agent all documentation and other information
required by bank regulatory authorities under applicable “know-your—customer”
and anti-money laundering rules and regulations, including, without limitation,
the USA Patriot Act, Title III of Pub. L. 107—56, signed into law October 26,
2001; and

(d) paid all fees, costs, and expenses when due and payable to the Administrative
Agent and the Lenders under or in connection with the Loan Documents,

Section 3.02 Conditions Precedent to the Initial Advance
The obligations of the Lenders to make the initial Advance to the Borrowers is subject to the
conditions precedent that:

(a) Inco has delivered to the Administrative Agent a certiﬁcate of an appropriate
ofﬁcer of Inco certifying that (i) the representations and warranties contained in
Section 4.01 are true and correct as at the date of such Advance, except to the
extent that such representations and warranties relate to an earlier or later date;
and (ii) no event has occurred and is continuing, or would result from such
Advance, which constitutes an Event of Default or would constitute an Event of
Default, but for the requirement that notice be given or time elapse with respect to
any applicable grace period or both;


.36.

(b) lnco has delivered to the Administrative Agent such additional usual and
customary agreements and documents as the Lenders may have reasonably
requested relating to Inoo, its Restricted Subsidiaries and the Subsidiary
Borrowers to the extent relevant to the Transactions, all as listed in Part 3 of
Schedule Q;

(c) Inoo has paid all fees then due and payable to the Administrative Agent and the
Lenders under or in connection with the Loan Documents;

((1) all conditions precedent to the Tender Offer, as set forth in Schedule F (or as
varied or waived with the approval of the Majority Lenders (where required under
this Agreement), acting reasonably and as promptly as practicable in the

circumstances), have been satisﬁed; and

(e) such Advance, or otherwise giving effect to the request for such Advance, will not
violate any applicable law, regulation, rule, policy or order then in effect.

Section 3.03 Conditions Precedent to the Subsequent Advances
The obligations of the Lenders to make any Advances to the Borrowers subsequent to the initial
Advance shall be subject to the conditions precedent that (i) the representations and warranties
contained in Section 4.01 are true and correct as at the date of the applicable Drawing Notice and
on the date of the Borrowing under such Drawing Notice, except to the extent that such
representations and warranties relate to an earlier or later date, (ii) no event has occurred and is
continuing, or would result from such Advance, which constitutes an Event of Default or would
constitute an Event of Default but for the requirement that notice be given or time elapse with
respect to any applicable grace period or both, and (iii) such Advance, or otherwise giving effect
to the request for such Advance, will not violate any applicable law, regulation, rule, policy or
order then in effect. Each request by a Borrower for an Advance subsequent to the initial
Advance made to such Borrower shall constitute a representation and warranty by such Borrower
as of the date of such request that the conditions speciﬁed in this Section 303 have been
satisﬁed.
Section 3.04 Income Tax Act (Canada) Certiﬁcate of Bridge Loan Lenders
Each initial Bridge Loan Lender (other than Natexis Banques Populaires), on or before the date
of the initial Advance, and each Bridge Loan Lender which executes an Assignment and
Acceptance after the date of the initial Advance, shall, unless an Event of Default has occurred
and is continuing, deliver to Inco a certiﬁcate of such Bridge Loan Lender in the form of
Schedule G representing and warranting either that it is not a non-resident of Canada for
purposes of the ITA, or alternatively that it is a Canadian partnership within the meaning
assigned by Section 102 of the ITA, or alternatively that it is an authorized foreign bank deemed
to be resident in Canada for purposes of the ITA in respect of all amounts paid or credited to
such Bridge Loan Lender under or in respect of this Agreement. Each Bridge Loan Lender shall
promptly notify Inco upon any change occurring in terms of their residency status (or that of any
of their respective partners) under the ITA.


_ 37 _
ARTICLE 4
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
Section 4.01 Representations and Warranties of Inca
lnco (without reference to Falconbridge or the consolidation of Falconbridge and Falconbridge’s
Subsidiaries for a period (the “Initial Period”) of 120 days next following the acquisition by
Inco or one of its Subsidiaries of 100% of the Falconbridge Common Shares, except with respect
to Section 4.0l(m)), represents and warrants as follows:

(3) Existence. It and each of the Subsidiary Borrowers is a corporation continued,
incorporated, or amalgamated, as applicable and validly existing under its
governing jurisdiction, and is qualiﬁed to do business in each jurisdiction in
which failure so to qualify would have a material adverse effect on the business
condition of Inco and its Subsidiaries, considered as a whole.

(b) Due Execution. The execution, delivery and performance by each of Inco and
each Subsidiary Borrower of each Loan Document to which it is a party are
within its powers, have been duly authorized by all necessary corporate action,
and do not contravene (i) its constating documents or by-laws or (ii) any
applicable law or any rule, regulation, writ or decree then in effect or any
contractual restriction binding on or affecting it or any of its properties.

(c) No Other Authorization. No authorization or approval (including exchange
control approval) or other action by, and no notice to or ﬁling with, any
governmental authority or regulatory body is required for the due execution,
delivery and performance by Inco or any Subsidiary Borrower of each Loan
Document to which it is a party.

((1) Legal and Binding Agreement. This Agreement constitutes the legal, valid and
binding obligation of Inco and each of the Subsidiary Borrowers enforceable
against each of them in accordance with its terms, and, if then in existence, the
Inco Guarantee constitutes the legal, valid and binding obligation of Inco,
enforceable against it in accordance with its terms, in each case except as may be
limited by (i) bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization or other laws or equitable
principles of general application to or affecting the enforcement of creditors‘
rights and (ii) the availability of remedies under general equitable principles.

(e) Financial Statements. As at the Relevant Date, the audited consolidated balance
sheet of Inco for its ﬁscal year ended December 31, 2004, and the related audited
consolidated statements of earnings and retained earnings of Inco for the ﬁscal
year then ended, and Inco’s unaudited consolidated balance sheet for the nine
months ended September 30, 2005 and the related unaudited consolidated
statements of earnings and retained earnings of Inco for the nine-month period
then ended, copies of which have been furnished to the Lenders, fairly present the
ﬁnancial condition of Inco and its consolidated Subsidiaries, considered as one
Enterprise, as at December 31, 2004 and September 30, 2005, respectively, and
the results of the operations of lnco and its consolidated Subsidiaries, considered
as one enterprise, for the year ended December 31, 2004 and for the nine-month


.33.

period then ended, respectively, all in accordance with GAAP consistently
applied. As at the Relevant Date, there has been no Material Adverse Change,
except as publicly disclosed in press releases made by Inco with a national news
wire service or in public ﬁlings made by Inco with the Ontario Securities
Commission or the Securities and Exchange Commission on or prior to October
10, 2005, in the consolidated ﬁnancial condition of lnco and its consolidated
Subsidiaries considered as one enterprise as Show in such ﬁnancial statements.

(t) No Litigation. There is no pending or, to the knowledge of Inco, threatened
action or proceeding affecting Inco, any Restricted Subsidiary or any Subsidiary
Borrower before any arbitrator or court which has or would be expected to have a
Material Adverse Effect.

(g) Compliance with Laws. To the knowledge of Inco, the operations and properties
of Inco, of any Restricted Subsidiary and of any Subsidiary Borrower are in
material compliance with all applicable laws, including all rules, regulations,
orders, and all applicable Environmental Laws, in each jurisdiction in which
failure so to comply would have a material adverse effect on the ﬁnancial
condition or operations of Inco and its consolidated Subsidiaries, considered as a
whole.

(h) No Immunig, Neither Inco, nor any Restricted Subsidiary or Subsidiary
Borrower, nor any of its or their Principal Properties, has any immunity from
jurisdiction of any court or ﬂoor any legal process (whether through service or
notice, attachment prior to judgment, attachment in aid of execution, execution or
otherwise) under the laws of the respective jurisdictions of organization of Inoo,
any such Restricted Subsidiary or any such Subsidiary Borrower, as the case may
be,

(i) No Pledges. Inco has not pledged, mortgaged or hypothecated, nor has Inco
permitted any Restricted Subsidiary or any Subsidiary Borrower to pledge,
mortgage or hypothecate, any of its assets to secure indebtedness for money
borrowed except as otherwise pemiitted by Section 5.04(a).

(j) Taxes. Each Borrower and each Restricted Subsidiary have in all material
respects paid or caused to be paid all taxes (and all interest and penalties related to
the non-payment of such taxes), if any, imposed upon any of them or their
respective Principal Properties (including all instalments with respect to the
current period), except taxes (and all interest and penalties related to the non—
payment of such taxes) that are being contested in good faith by appropriate
proceedings where adequate reserves have been established in accordance with
GAAP.

(k) Restricted Subsidiaries. As of the Relevant Date, Inco does not have any
Restricted Subsidiaries except as set out in Schedule H.

(1) No Restrictions. There are no restrictions (other than statutory restrictions
imposed by applicable law) on the ability of any of Inco’s Wholly-Owned

Subsidiaries to (i) declare, make, or pay, or agree to declare, make or pay, or


. 39 _

permit any other direct or indirect Wholly»0wned Subsidiary to declare, make or
pay, or agee to declare, make or pay, any dividends or other distributions on any
of its or their equity securities, or (ii) pay any indebtedness or other amounts
owed to Inco or any of its Wholly-Owned Subsidiaries, except in either case (1)
as may exist prior to the Effective Time (as deﬁned in the Support Agreement) in
respect of Falconbtidge and its Subsidiaries, or (2) any such restrictions consistent
with market practice which are agreed upon by such Subsidiary with arms’ length
parties in connection with ﬁnancing infrastructure and other projects or pursuant
to the terms of any joint venture, co-ownership, shareholder, or partnership
agreement governing ﬁnancing or operation of the relevant joint venture, co-
ownership, or partnership.

(m) Informhation. As at the Relevant Date, all information taken as a whole (other than
ﬁnancial projections) pertaining to Inco, its Subsidiaries, and (to the best of lnco’s
knowledge) Falconbridge and its Subsidiaries, and the Transactions that has been
or will be made available to the Lenders or the Administrative Agent by or on
behalf of Inco is or Will be when submitted (or as subsequently varied or
supplemented), accurate and complete in all material respects and not misleading
in any material respect. As at the Relevant Date, all ﬁnancial projections
(including without limitation, the pro fonna ﬁnancial statements delivered to the
Administrative Agent pursuant to Section 3.01(a)(vi) made available to the
Lenders or the Administrative Agent by or on behalf of Inco) have been prepared
in good faith and based upon assumptions believed by lnco to be reasonable.

(11) Canadian Pension Plans and Beneﬁt Plans. Except as, individually or in the
aggregate, would not reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect,
(i) all Canadian Pension Plans and Beneﬁt Plans are ﬁrnded as required by
applicable law, (ii) no failure to make contributions has occurred with respect to
any Canadian Pension Plan sufﬁcient to give rise to alien or charge affecting any
Borrower or any Restricted Subsidiary under any applicable pension beneﬁt laws,
and (iii) all contributions (including employee contributions made by authorized
payroll deductions or other Withholdings) required to be made to the appropriate
funding agency in accordance with all applicable laws and the terms of each
Canadian Pension Plan and Beneﬁt Plan have been made.

(0) US Plans. Except as, individually or in the aggregate, would not reasonably be
expected to have a Material Adverse Effect, none of Inco, its Restricted
Subsidiaries, the Subsidiary Borrowers and their respective ERISA Afﬁliates (i)
has any Accumulated Funding Deﬁciency, whether or not waived, (ii) has failed
to make any required contribution or payment to any US. Pension Plan, or made
any amendment to any US. Pension Plan, which has resulted or could reasonably
be expected to result, in the imposition of a lien or the posting of a bond or other
security under Section 302(t) of ERISA or Section 401(a)(29) of the Code, (iii)
has incurred, or is reasonably likely to incur, any liability under Title IV of
ERISA (other than a liability to the PBGC for premiums under Section 4007 of
ERISA), (iv) has failed to comply with the requirements of Section 515 of ERISA
with respect to each Multiemployer Plan or is in material “default” (as deﬁned in


_ 4o _
Section 4219(c)(5) of ERISA) with respect to payments to any Multiemployer
Plan) or (v) has violated any provision of ERISA.

(13) MW. Neither Inco, nor any Restricted Subsidiary, nor any
Subsidiary Borrower is required to be registered as an “investment company” or is
a company “controlled” by an “investment company’ or is a “principal
underwriter" or “promoter” for an “investment company” as such terms are
deﬁned in the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended.

(q) Margin Stock. Not more than 25% of the assets of Inco, any Restricted
Subsidiary or any Subsidiary Borrower consists of Margin Stock. No part of the
proceeds of the Advances made to any Borrower will be used to purchase or carry
Margin Stock or to extend credit to others for the purpose of purchasing or
carrying any such Margin Stock or for any purpose that violates, or is inconsistent
with, in any material respect, the provisions of Regulation U or other applicable
margin regulations of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

(r) Filings. All material ﬁlings have been or will when required be made in respect
of the Tender Offer, the Transactions and the incurrence of Advances hereunder.

(3) Tender Offer. As at the Relevant Date, Inco has, or will have upon mawdown of
Advances hereunder, sufﬁcient funds to complete the Transactions to the extent
contemplated in Part 2 of Schedule Q and any repayment or reﬁnancing of debt or
redemption of preferred shares in connection therewith.

ARTICLE 5
COVENANTS OF THE BORROW'ERS
Section 5.01 General
It is understood and agreed by the Lenders that:

(a) the covenants contained in Section 5.02(a), Section 5.02(b), Section 5.02(d),
Section 5.02(e), Section 5.02(t), Section 5.02(g), Section 5.02(h), Section 5026),
Section 503, Section 5,04(c), Section 5.0401), Section 5.04(e), Section 5.040),
and Section 5.04(g) are made by Inco without reference to, or consolidation of,
Falconbridge and Falconbridge’s Subsidiaries for the Initial Period; and

(b) the covenants contained in Section 5.02(c), Section 5.04(a) and Section 5.04(b)
are made by Inco without reference to, or consolidation of, Falconbridge and
F alconbridge’s Subsidiaries until the earlier of:

(i) the ﬁrst date upon which (1) Inoo has acquired beneﬁcial
ownership (within the meaning of the OSA) of, or the power to
exercise control or direction over, or securitiw convertible into,
any voting or equity shares of Falconbridge that would constitute
voting or equity shares of Falconbridge representing more than
50% of the total number of votes attached to all voting securities of
Falconbridge then outstanding, and (2) the board of directors of


_ 41 .
Falconbridge has been reconstituted as contemplated in Section 15
of the Support Agreement with the result that Inco designees
constitute a majority of such board in compliance with applicable
law; and
(ii) the day next following the Initial Period.
Section 5.02 Afﬁrmative Covenants
So long as any Advance hereunder shall remain unpaid, or the Commitments shall not have been
terminated or cancelled in full, Inco will, subject to Section 501, unless the Majority Lenders
shall otherwise consent in writing:

(3) Compliance with Laws, etc. Comply, and cause each Restricted Subsidiary and
each Subsidiary Borrower to comply, in all material respects, with all applicable
laws, rules, regulations and orders, including but not limited to all Environmental
Law, such compliance to include, without limitation, paying when due all taxes,
assessments and governmental charges imposed upon it or any such Restricted
Subsidiary, any such Subsidiary Borrower or upon any of its Principal Properties
or those of any such Restricted Subsidiary or any such Subsidiary Borrower, as
the case may be, except to the extent contested in good faith

(b) Actual Knowledge of Event of Default. If it shall have actual knowledge that an
event has occurred and is continuing which constitutes an Event of Default or
would constitute an Event of Default but for the requirement that notice be given
or time elapse with respect to any applicable grace period or both, promptly
inform the Administrative Agent in writing of such Event of Default or other
event and the action proposed in respect thereof unless such Event of Default or
other event shall be remedied or cured before Inco is reasonably able to so inform
the Administrative Agent,

(6) Environmental Indernniﬂ. In the event that the Lenders shall incur any loss, cost,
(including, without limitation, reasonable legal fees and disbursements and
consulting fees and disbursements), charge, liability or damage except for any
loss, cost, charge, liability or damage attributable to the gross negligence or wilful
misconduct of the Administrative Agent or the Lenders, resulting from the
violation by any Borrower or by any Restricted Subsidiary of any Environmental
Law, on demand by the Administrative Agent, indemnify and hold harmless the
Lenders against any such loss, cost, charge, liability or damage.

(d) Existence. Subject to Section 5.0403), do or cause to be done all things necessary
to preserve and keep in full force and effect its, each Subsidiary Borrower’s and
each Restricted Subsidiary’s, corporate or partnership existence, rights (charter
and statutory) and franchises necessary in the normal conduct of its business
except where failure to do so would not, in the aggregate, have a material adverse
effect on the business, operations, property or ﬁnancial condition of Inco and its
Subsidiaries considered as a whole; provided that Inco shall not be required to
preserve any such right or franchise if the board of directors of luco shall


_ 42 _
determine that the preservation thereof is no longer necessary or desirable in the
conduct of the business of the Borrowers

(6) Maintenance of Property. Cause (i) all properties used in the conduct of its, each
Subsidiary Borrower’s and each Restricted Subsidiary’s business to be maintained
and kept in good condition, repair and working order and supplied with all
necessary equipment; (ii) to be made all necessary repairs, renewals,
replacements, betterments and improvements thereof; and (iii) all properties used
in the conduct of its business, the business of each Subsidiary Borrower and the
business of each Restricted Subsidiary to be operated in material compliance with
all Environmental Laws and with all policies and procedures of Inco in respect
thereof, except in each case where failure to do so would not, in the aggregate,
have a material adverse effect on the business, operations, property or ﬁnancial
condition of Inco and its Subsidiaries, considered as a whole; provided that
nothing in this Section 5.02(e) shall prevent Inco from discontinuing the operation
or maintenance of any of such properties if such discontinuance is, in the good
faith judgment of Inco, necessary or desirable in the conduct of its business.

(f) Insurance. Maintain with ﬁnancially sound and reputable insurance companies
insurance on its properties, the properties of each Subsidiary Borrower and the
properties of each Restricted Subsidiary, in at least such amounts and against at
least such risks as are usually insured against in the same general area by
companies engaged in the same or similar business except where the failure to do
so would not, in the aggregate, have a material adverse effect on the business,
operations, property or ﬁnancial condition of [rice and its Subsidiaries, considered
as a whole.

(g) Inspection of Property Permit representatives of the Lenders, at their own
expense and upon reasonable notice to Inoo, to visit and inspect properties of
Inco, each Subsidiary Borrower and each Restricted Subsidiary and to discuss its
affairs with knowledgeable ofﬁcers of Inco, all subject to such conﬁdentiality
obligations as Inco may reasonably request,

(h) Use of Proceeds. Apply, and cause each Subsidiary Borrower to apply, Advances
solely to the purposes set out in Section 2.03(d).

(i) Existing Credit Agreements. In the event Inco amends, adds or modiﬁes
representations, warranties, covenants or events of default in any material respect
in the Existing Credit Agreements, Inco will, prior to the effectiveness of any
such amendment, addition or modiﬁcation, offer to make a conforming
amendment to this Agreement in form and substance satisfactory to the Lenders,
acting reasonably.

0') Additional Documentation Relating to the Tender Offer. Deliver to the
Administrative Agent following completion of any (i) Pro-Acquisition
Reorganization (as deﬁned in the Support Agreement), (ii) Subsequent
Acquisition Transaction (as deﬁned in the Support Agreement), (iii) Compulsory
Acquisition (as deﬁned in the Support Agreement), and (iv) Subsequent


_ 43 _
Amalgamation, copies of any documents relating thereto as reasonably requested
by Administrative Agent.

(k) Additional Regulatog Documentation. Deliver to the Administrative Agent, as
reasonably requested by the Administrative Agent, a copy of any approval,
authorization, or clearance contemplated in Part 3 cf SchedUle Q following receipt
thereof, or evidence of the expiration or termination of any applicable waiting
period.

Section 5.03 Financial Reporting
So long as any Advances hereunder shall remain unpaid, or the Commitments shall not have
been terminated or cancelled in full, hico will, subject to Section 501, unless the Majority
Lenders shall otherwise consent in writing:

(a) W. Furnish to the Administrative Agent: (i) as soon as
available and in any event Within 45 days aﬁer the end of each of the ﬁrst three
quarters of each ﬁscal year of Inco, an unaudited consolidated balance sheet of
lnco as of the end of such quarter and an unaudited consolidated statement of
earnings of Inco for the period commencing at the end of the previous ﬁscal year
and ending with the end of such quarter, in each case prepared in confomn'ty with
GAAP; (ii) promptly aﬁer the conclusion of each quarter of each ﬁscal year of
Inco, and in any event within 45 days alter the end of the ﬁrst three quarters of
each ﬁscal year and within 90 days aﬁer the end of the ﬁscal year in the case of
the fourth quarter, a certiﬁcate of the chairman, chief executive ofﬁcer, chief
ﬁnancial officer, comptroller, treasurer or any assistant treasurer of him, dated as
of the last day of each such quarter, (x) setting forth Inco’s calculation of the
Debt/Equity Ratio; and (y) stating that (A) to the knowledge of such officer,
during such quarter no event occurred and was continuing which constituted an
Event of Default or would have constituted an Event of Default under this
Agreement, but for the requirement that notice be given or time elapse with
respect to any applicable grace period or both; and (B) each of the representations
and warranties of Inco contained in Section 4.01(a), (b), (c), (d), (f), (g), (h), (i),
(j), (l), (n), (o), (p), and (q) was one and correct as at the last day in such ﬁscal
quarter or year, as the case may be; (iii) as soon as available and in any event
within 120 days after the end of each ﬁscal year of Inco, a copy of the annual
report for such year for Inco and its consolidated Subsidiaries, containing
consolidated ﬁnancial statements for such year in each case prepared in
conformity with GAAP and certiﬁed by Inco’s auditors, or other independent

public accountants; (iv) promptly aﬁer the sending or ﬁling thereof, email notice
of such ﬁling of all reports which Inco sends to the holders of its common shares
and all reports (excluding exhibits) on Forms 10-Q, 8-K, 10-K and all proxy
statements ﬁled pursuant to the requirements of the 1934 Act, and registration
statements (excluding registration statements on Form S-8 or comparable forms)
pursuant to the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, which Inco ﬁles with the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission and any national securities exchange in the
U.S. and any other reports ﬁled by Inco with the Ontario Securities Commission,
except to the extent that such other reports have been in substance ﬁled with the
US Securities and Exchange Commission and notice furnished to the


_ 44 _
Administrative Agent; (v) notice of any Ratings Change promptly aﬁer the
Occurrence thereof; and (vi) such other information respecting the condition or
operations, ﬁnancial or otherwise, of Inco or any of its Subsidiaries as the
Administrative Agent may from time to time reasonably request.
Section 5.04 Negative Covenants
So long as any Advance hereunder shall remain unpaid, or the Commitments shall not have been
terminated or cancelled in full, Inco shall, subject to Section 5.01, comply with the negative
covenants set forth in this Section 5.04. Subject to Section 5.01, Inco, without the written
consent of the Majority Lenders will not, and in the case of Section 5.04(a) and Section 5.04(b),
permit any Restricted Subsidiary or Subsidiary Borrower to:

(a) Negative Pledge Create or incur or assume any mortgage, hypothec, charge,
pledge, lien or other security inter-mt (hereinafter in this Section 5.04 collectively
referred to as “a mortgage” or “mortgages“), securing any indebtedness for
money borrowed (hereinaﬁer in this subsection (a) referred to as
“Indebtedness”), of or upon any Principal Property, or on shares of stock or
Indebtedness of any Subsidiary Borrower or any Restricted Subsidiary now
owned or hereaﬁer acquired by Inco, a Subsidiary Borrower or a Restricted
Subsidiary, without making effective provision, and Inco covenants that in any
such case it will make or cause to be made effective provision, whereby the
Advances hereunder then or from time to time outstanding (together with, if and
to the extent Inco shall so determine, any other Indebtedness or other obligations
then existing or thereaﬁer created) shall be secured by such mortgages equally
and rateably with (or prior to) any and all Indebtedness and obligations secured or
to be secured thereby, so long as such Indebtedness shall be so secured, provided
that the foregoing covenants shall not prevent, restrict or apply to any of the
following:

(i) Any mortgage on property, shares of stock or Indebtedness of any
corporation or partnership existing at the time such corporation or
partnership becomes a Subsidiary Borrower or a Restricted
Subsidiary,

(ii) Any mortgage on any Principal Property existing at the time of
acquisition of such property by Inco or a Restricted Subsidiary,
whether or not assumed by Inco or such Restricted Subsidiary;
provided, however, that no such mortgage shall extend to any other
Principal Property of Inco or any Restricted Subsidiary;

(iii) Any mortgage on any Principal Property (including any
improvements on an existing Principal Property) hereafter acquired
or constructed by Inco or any Restricted Subsidiary to secure the
payment of all or any part of the purchase price or cost of
construction of such Principal Property (or to secure any
Indebtedness incurred by Inco or a Restricted Subsidiary for the
purpose of ﬁnancing all or any part of the purchase price thereof or
cost of construction thereof or of improvements thereon) created


. 45 _

prior to, at the time of, or within 90 days aﬁer, the later of the
acquisition, completion of construction, or commencement of full
operation of such Principal Property; provided, however, that no
such mortgage shall extend to any other Principal Property of Inco
or a Restricted Subsidiary other than, in the case of any such
construction or improvement, any theretofore unimproved real
property on which the Principal Property so constructed, or the
improvement, is located;

(iv) Any mortgage on any Principal Property of any Restricted
Subsidiary to secure Indebtedness owing by it to Inco or to a
Restricted Subsidiary;

(v) Any mortgage on any Principal Property of Inco or any Restricted
Subsidiary in favour of (A) Canada or any Province or Territory
thereof, or any political subdivision, department, agency or
insnumentality of any of them or (B) the United States or any State
thereof, or any political subdivision, department agency or
instrumentality of any of them, to secure partial, progress, advance
or other payments to Inco or any Restricted Subsidiary pursuant to
the provisions of any contract or statute;

(vi) Any mortgage on any Principal Property of Inco or any Restricted
Subsidiary existing on the date hereof;

(vii) Any mortgage on any Principal Property of Inco or any Restricted
Subsidiary created for the sole purpose of renewing or reﬁmding
any mortgage referred to subsections (i) through (vi), inclusive, of
this Section 5.04(a); provided that the Indebtedness secured
thereby shall not exceed the principal amount of Indebtedness so
secured at the time of such renewal or refunding together with all
reasonable costs incurred in connection with such renewal or
reﬁmding, and that such renewal or refunding mortgage shall be
limited to all or any part of the same property and improvements
thereon which secured the mortgage being renewed or refunded; or

(viii) Any mortgage on any Principal Property created, incurred or
assumed to secure Indebtedness of Inco or any Restricted
Subsidiary, which would otherwise be subject to the foregoing
restrictions of this Section 5.04(a), seeming an aggregate principal
amount which, together with the aggregate principal amount of
other Indebtedness secured by mortgages on Principal Properties
then outstanding (excluding any such Indebtedness secured by
mortgages covered in clauses (i) through (vii), inclusive, of this
Section 5.04(a)) and the Attributable Debt in respect of all Sale and
Leaseback Transactions entered into after the date hereof (not
including Attributable Debt with respect to any such Sale and

Leaseback Transaction the proceeds of which have been or will be


_ 46 .
applied in accordance with Section 5.04(b)(ii)), would not at the
time exceed 5% of Consolidated Net Tangible Assets,

For purposes of this Section 5.04(a), the following shall not be deemed to be

mortgages securing Indebtedness and, accordingly, nothing contained in this

Section 504 shall prevent, restrict or apply to:

(x) any acquisition by Inco, any Subsidiary Borrower or any Restricted
Subsidiary of any property or assets subject to any reservation or
exception under the terms of which any vendor, lessor or assignor creates,
reserves or excepts or has created, reserved or excepted an interest in
nickel, copper, cobalt, precious metals, oil, gas or any other mineral or
timber in place or the proceeds thereof;

(y) any conveyance or assignment under the terms of which Inco, any
Subsidiary Borrower or any Restricted Subsidiary conveys or assigns to
any Person or Persons an interest in nickel, copper, cobalt, precious
metals, oil, gas or any other mineral or timber in place or the proceeds
thereof; or

(2) any mortgage upon any property or assets owned or leased by Inco, any
Subsidiary Borrower or any Restricted Subsidiary or in which Inco, any
Subsidiary Borrower or any Restricted Subsidiary owns an interest to
secure to the Person or Persons paying the expenses of developing or
conducting operations for the recovery, storage, transportation or sale of
the mineral resources of the said property (or property with which it is
unitized) the payment to such Person or Persons of Inco’s, such Subsidiary
Borrower’s or such Restricted Subsidiary’s proportionate part of such
development or operating expense.

(b) Sale and Leaseback Transactions. Enter into any arrangement alter the date
hereof with any bank, insurance company or other lender or investor (other than
Inco or a Restricted Subsidiary) providing for the leasing by Inco or a Restricted
Subsidiary of any Principal Property (except a lease for a temporary period not to
exceed three years by the end of which it is intended that the use of such Principal
Property by the lessee will be discontinued), which has been or is to be sold or
transferred, more than 120 days aﬁer the later of the acquisition, completion of
construction, or commencement of full operation thereof, by Inco or such
Restricted Subsidiary to such lender or investor or to any Person to whom funds
have been or are to be advanced by such lender or investor on the security of such
Principal Property (herein referred to as a “Sale and Leaseback Transaction”)
unless, either:

(i) Immediately prior to the entering into of such arrangement, Inco or
such Restricted Subsidiary could, pursuant to Section 5,04(a)(viii),
create a mortgage on a Principal Property to secure Indebtedness in
an amount equal to the Attributable Debt with respect to such Sale
and Leaseback Transaction, or


_ 47 _

(ii) Inoo applies, within 120 days aﬁer the sale or transfer, an amount
equal to the fair market value of the Principal Property so sold and
leased back at the time of entering into such Sale and Leaseback
Transaction (as determined by the Board of Directors of Inco or
any committee thereof duly authorized to act hereunder) to the
prepayment (other than mandatory prepayment) of Funded Debt of
Inoo or any Restricted Slibsidiary (other than Funded Debt owned
by Inco or any Restricted Subsidiary).

(c) Consolidation, Amalgamation, Merger or Disposition of Assets of Inco. Sell,
lease, transfer or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all its property and
assets to any other Person authorized to acquire the same or consolidate or
amalgamate with or merge into any other Person, or permit any Person other than
one of its Subsidiaries to amalgamate with or merge into Inco, in each case other
than in connection with any transaction required or contemplated to complete the
Transactions or any Subsequent Amalgamation, unless,

(i) immediately prior to and immediately following such transaction,
there shall exist no Event of Default and no event which with the
lapse of time with respect to any applicable grace period or the
giving of notice or both would become an Event of Default; and

(ii) each holder of a Participating Security of lnco shall be entitled to
receive an interest of substantially equivalent value in a
Participating Security of the surviving or emerging Person formed
by or resulting from any such consolidation, amalgamation or
merger or of the purchasing Person in the case of a sale or
disposition of all or substantially all of the property or assets of
Inco.

In the case of a transaction involving Inco or a Subsidiary Borrower (including,
without limitation, any of the Transactions or any Subsequent Amalgamation), the
surviving or emerging Person formed by or resulting from any such consolidation,
amalgamation or merger, or the purchasing Person in the case of a sale or
disposition of all or substantially all of its property and assets, shall expressly
assume and agree in writing to comply with the terms hereof and the other Loan
Documents, as applicable, and to pay all Advances then outstanding and all other
amounts hereunder when due and payable hereunder.

(d) Debt/Equity Ratio. Permit the Debt/Equity Ratio to exceed 50:50.

(e) Transactions Financing Incur any Debt or permit any Subsidiary to incur any
Debt to ﬁnance the Transactions, any repayment or reﬁnancing of debt or
redemption of preferred shares in connection therewith, payment of fair value for
Falconbridge Common Shares acquired pursuant to any dissent or appraisal
rights, and all payments of fees, commissions, and expenses in connection
therewith, in an aggregate amount in excess of US$* unless otherwise approved
by the Majority Lenders, acting reasonably.


_ 4g .

(0 mm. Except as, individually or in the aggregate, would not
reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect, Inco will not at any
time and will ensure that each of its Subsidiaries and ERISA Afﬁliates will not:
(i) terminate any U.S. Pension Plan so as to incur any liability to the PBGC, (ii)
fail to pay to any US. Pension Plan any contribution which it is obligated to pay
under the terms of such U.S. Pension Plan, if such failure would cause such US
Pension Plan to have an Accumulated Funding Deﬁciency, whether or not
waived, (iii) allow or suffer to exist any event or condition which presents a
material risk of termination by the PBGC of any US Pension Plan, to the extent
that the occurrence or nonoccurrence of such event or condition is within the
control of lnco, any Subsidiary of Inco, or any ERISA Afﬁliate; or (iv) Withdraw
from any Multiemployer Plan in a manner that would result in any withdrawal
liability under Section 4219 of ERISA.

(g) m. Use, or permit any Subsidiary to use, cash in an aggregate amount in
excess of the sum of (x) US$* of available cash and (y) the amount equal to the
Unused Bridge Loan Commitments, if any, that are terminated pursuant to
Section 209(3) as a result of Inco or any of its Subsidiaries having received Net
Proceeds in respect of Bond Debt (assuming, for the purposes of this Section
5.04(g) that amounts of Net Proceeds determined in accordance with paragraph
(x) of Section 2.09(a) are, to the extent received contemporaneously with amounts
of Net Proceeds determined in accordance with paragraph (y) of Section 2.09(a),
applied to prepay Bridge Loan Advances and, if applicable, terminate Unused
Bridge Loan Commitments, before amounts of Net Proceeds determined in
accordance with paragraph (y) of Section 2.09(a) are so applied), to complete the
Transactions, any repayment or reﬁnancing of debt or redemption of preferred
shares in connection therewith, payment of fair value for Falconbridge Common
Shares acquired pursuant to any dissent or appraisal rights, and all payments of
fees, commissions, and expenses in connection therewith

(h) WWW—sets. Prior to the earlier of (i) the Effective Time
(as deﬁned in the Support Agreement) and (ii) the termination of the Support
Agreement, Inco shall not, without the prior consent of the Majority Lenders,
acting reasonably, consent to any transaction by Falconbridge which is not
permitted by Section 4.1(g) of the Support Agreement unless an amount equal to
the proceeds of any such transaction is:

(i) attributed by Inco to reduce the dollar amount set out in Section
2.09(a)(x)(C)(3) or Section 2.09(a)(x)(C)(4); or
(ii) applied by 11100 to make prepayments of the outstanding Bridge
Loan Advances or reduce Unused Bridge Loan Commitments
Section 5.05 Transaction Covenants

(a) Subject to Section 5.05(b), Inco shall not amend, vary or waive (i) any condition
precedent in the Support Agreement to the making of the Tender Offer or (ii) any
condition precedent to the completion of the Tender Offer speciﬁed therein (in
each case, other than in connection with any extension of time required to satisfy


. 49 _
any condition precedent) without the prior written approval of the Majority
Lenders, acting reasonably and as promptly as practicable in the circumstances, as
provided below. Upon the making of any such amendment or variation to or
waiver of any condition precedent to the Tender Offer which has been so
approved, or which does not require any such approval, the equivalent condition
precedent in Schedule F shall be deemed to have been amended in the same
manner
(h) The approval of the Majority Lenders, acting reasonably, shall be required for any
amendment, or variation to any of (i) the conditions speciﬁed in paragraphs (A),
(B), (D), (F), (H), (I), (J) and (L) of Schedule F hereof and (ii) the conditions
speciﬁed in (C), (E), (G) or (K) of Schedule F hereof, only if the amendment or
variation would have a Material Adverse Effect. The approval of the Majority
Lenders, acting reasonably, shall be required for any waiver of the conditions
referred to in Section 5.05(h)(i) above (subject also as provided below in respect
of the conditions speciﬁed in paragraphs (H), (J) and (L) of Schedule F); and in
respect of the conditions referred to in Section 5.05(b)(ii) above, only if the
waiving of such condition precedent would have a Material Adverse Effect.
(0) [non shall not, without the approval of the Majority Lenders, acting reasonably
' and as soon as practicable in the circumstances, determine (i) whether the
conditions speciﬁed in paragraphs (H) or (I) of Schedule F have been satisﬁed if
the circumstances requiring such determination would have a Material Adverse
I Effect or (ii) whether the condition speciﬁed in paragraph (L) of Schedule F has
I been satisﬁed, if the circumstances requiring such determination could reasonably
_ be expected to detrimentally affect successful syndication of the Loan Facilities.
(d) Inco shall not (i) amend in any material respect any representation or warranty
made by Falconbridge in the Support Agreement; or (ii) waive any breach of a
material representation or material warranty made by Falconbridge in the Support
Agreement, in each case, without approval of the Majority Lenders, acting
reasonably and as soon as practicable in the circumstances.
ARTICLE 6
SUBSIDIARY BORROWERS
Section 6.01 Inco Guarantee
As a condition precedent of the Administrative Agent and the Lenders agreeing that Inoo may,
from time to time, designate Subsidiary Borrowers in accordance with the provisions of this
ARTICLE 6, Inco hereby agrees to give, prior to any such designation being effective, as
continuing security for the payment of all of the obligations of the Subsidiary Borrowers
hereunder, a guarantee substantially in the form of Schedule P (as amended, varied or
supplemented from time to time, the “Inca Guarantee”).
Section 6.02 Designation of Subsidiary Borrowers
[neo may, from time to time and at any time hereafter, designate, by notice in writing to the
Administrative Agent, any Wholly-Owned Subsidiary as a Subsidiary Borrower provided that:


. 50 _

(a) such Subsidiary was incorporated, continued or amalgamated in accordance with
and continues to be governed by the laws of a province of Canada or the federal
laws of Canada;

(b) such Subsidiary is not a non-resident of Canada for purposes of the ITA;

(c) such Subsidiary, prior to becoming a Subsidiary Borrower, shall have delivered to
the Administrative Agent:

(i) an executed supplement acknowledging and agreeing that it will be
bound by the terms and conditions of this Agreement (each, a
“Supplement") as if originally a party hereto substantially in the
form of Schedule R;

(ii) a certiﬁed copy of its constating documents and by-laws, as
applicable;

(iii) a certiﬁed copy of the resolutions authorizing it to enter into,
execute and deliver the Conﬁrmation, and to perform its
obligations thereimder and under this Agreement;

(iv) a certiﬁcate as to the incumbency of its ofﬁcers signing the
Continuation;

(v) a certiﬁcate of status, good standing, or like certiﬁcate with respect
to its existence issued by appropriate government ofﬁcials of the
jurisdiction of its incorporation or formation; and

(vi) an opinion of each of Borrowers’ Counsel and hico’s in-house
counsel (or such other counsel acceptable to the Administrative
Agent) substantially in the form of Schedules L and M,
respectively

((1) If not delivered to the Administrative Agent prior to the time of such designation,
Inco shall have delivered an executed Inoo Guarantee, together with opinions of
each of Borrowers” Counsel and Inco’s in—house counsel substantially in the form
of Schedules N and 0, respectively.

At any time aﬂer a Subsidiary has been designated as a Subsidiary Borrower, Inco may, by
notice in writing to the Administrative Agent, rescind such designation such that such Subsidiary
no longer constitutes a Subsidiary Borrower provided that all Advances that have been made to
such Subsidiary hereunder have been repaid in full.


_ 51 .
ARTICLE 7
EVENTS 0F DEFAULT
Section 7.01 Events of Default
If any of the following events (“Events of Default”) shall occur and be continuing but without
reference to, or consolidation of, Falconbridge and Falconbridge‘s Subsidiaries for the Initial
Period:

(a) Failure to Pay Principal. Any of the Borrowers shall fail to pay any instalment of
principal of, or interest on, any Advance or any fee or other amount owing by
such Borrower under this Agreement or any other Loan Document when due and
payable and such failure shall not have been remedied for ﬁve (5) Business Days
after the date upon which such instalment shall have been due and payable
hereunder; or

(b) lnco Guarantee. Loco shall fail to pay any amount due under the lnco Guarantee
forthwith upon demand therefor; or

(c) Rementations and Warranties False or Misleading. Any representation or
warranty made by Inco (or any of its ofﬁcers) in or in connection with this
Agreement or any other Loan Document shall prove to have been false or
misleading in any material respect when made or deemed made; provided that if

any of the foregoing shall have been occasioned by a change in GAAP made aﬁer
the date of this Agreement, then any such purported default shall be deemed not
to be an Event of Default; or
(d) Transaction Financing and ERISA. Inco shall fail to perform or observe the
covenants contained in Section 5.04(e), Section 5.04(f) and Section 5.04(g); or
(e) Failure to Perform Other Terms. Any Borrower shall fail to perform or observe
any other term, covenant or agreement which shall then be applicable contained in
this Agreement or any other Loan Document on its part to be performed or
observed (other than the covenants contained in Section 5.04(e), Section 5.046)
and Section 5.04(g)) and, if such failure is capable of cure (it being understood
that ﬁnancial covenants including, for certainty, the provisions of Section 5.04(d)
are capable of cure), any such failure shall remain unremedied for 30 calendar
days after the earlier of written notice thereof shall have been given (x) to the
Administrative Agent by Into, or (y) to lnoo by the Administrative Agent;
provided that if the failure of lnoo to perform or observe any such term, covenant
or agreement shall have been occasioned by a change in GAAP made after the
date of this Agreement, then such failure shall be deemed not to be a default or to
result in an Event of Default; or
(0 Cross Acceleration. An event of default, as defined in any indenture or
instrument under which Inco, or any Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbn'dge has at
the time of this Agreement or shall hereafter have outstanding indebtedness
thereunder for borrowed money (as a borrower) in excess of US$50 million (or
the Equivalent Amount of any other currency), shall occur and be continuing and


_ 52 _

such indebtedness shall have been accelerated by the holder(s) (or such other
party or parties vested with such rights) of such indebtedness so that the ﬁll]
amount of such indebtednws shall immediately be or become due and payable
prior to the date on which the same would otherwise have become due and
payable, and the Administrative Agent shall have given Inco notice thereof stating
that such notice is a notice of default hereunder; provided, however, that if such
event of default under such indenture or instrument shall be remedied or cured by
Inco, or any Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbridge, as applicable, or waived by the
holder(s) of such indebtedness (or such other party or parties vested vtn'th such
rights), then the Event of Default hereunder by reason thereof shall be deemed
likewise to have been thereupon remedied, cured or waived without further action
on the part of the Administrative Agent or the Lenders; and provided further that
Inco shall promptly notify the Administrative Agent of any such event of default
under such indenture or instrument as soon as Inco becomes aware of the same; or

(g) Failure to Honour Guarantee. In the case of any indebtedness of Inco, any
Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbridge in excess of US$50 million (or the
Equivalent Amount of any other currency) arising under any Guarantee of Inco,
any Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbridge, as applicable, the failure of Inco, any
Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbridge, as applicable, to make prompt payment in
Recordarree with the terms of such Guarantee, provided, however, that, so long as
Inoo, any Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbridge, as applicable, shall contest in
good faith its obligation to make such payment in accordance with the terms of
such Guarantee, then there shall be no Event of Default unless a judgment
requiring Inco, any Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbridge, as applicable, to make
such payment under such Guarantee shall have been entered against Inoo, any
Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbridge, as applicable, and such judgment shall
continue unsatisﬁed and in effect for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days from
the date of its entry and shall not have been stayed or suspended, by pendency of
an appeal or otherwise, during such period; or

(h) Voluntm Bankruptcy or Other Proceedings. The institution by Inco, any
Subsidiary Borrower or Falconhridge of proceedings to be adjudicated bankrupt
or insolvent, or the consent by it to the institution of banlo'uptcy or insolvency
proceedings against it, or the ﬁling by it of a petition or answer or consent seeking
reorganization or relief under the Companies' Creditors Arrangement Act
(Canada), the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act (Canada) or the Winding—Up and
Restructuring Act (Canada) or any other bankruptcy, insolvency or analogous
laws, or the consent by it to the ﬁling of any such petition or to the appointment of
a receiver of Inoo, any Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbridge, as applicable, of all
or substantially all of its property, or the making by it of a general assignment for
the beneﬁt of creditors, or the admitting by Inco, any Subsidiary Borrower or
Falconbridge in writing its inability, or being unable, to pay its debts generally as
they become due and its willingness to be adjudged a bankrupt or taking corporate
action in furtherance of any of the aforesaid purposes; or

(i) Involunth Bankruptcy or Other Proceeding. The entry of a decree or order by a
court having jurisdiction in the premises adjudging Inco, any Subsidiary Borrower


. 53 _
or Falconbridge a bankrupt or insolvent, or the ﬁling of a petition seeking
reorganization or winding up of lnco, any Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbridge
under the Companies' Creditors Arrangement Act (Canada), the Bankruptcy and
Insolvency Act (Canada) or the Winding-Up and Restructuring Act (Canada) or
any other bankruptcy, insolvency or analogous laws, or issuing sequestration or
process of execution against Inco, any Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbrldgc or all
or substantially all of its property, or appointing a receiver of Inco, any Subsidiary
Borrower or Falconbridge of all or substantially all of its property, or ordering the
winding up or liquidation of its affairs, and the continuance of any such decree or
order or appointment unstayed and in effect for a period of 60 consecutive
calendar days, or the pendency of such petition for a period of 60 consecutive
calendar days; or
(j) Adverse Judgments. A ﬁnal judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction in the
United States or Canada for the payment of money in excess of US$50 million (or
the Equivalent Amount of any other currency) shall be rendered against Iuco or
Falconbridge and such judgment shall continue unsatisﬁed and in effect for a
period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days from the date of its entry and
shall not have been stayed or suspended, by pendency of an appeal or otherwise,
during such period; or
(k) Government Seizure of Property. Any governmental authority or any person or
entity acting under governmental authority shall have taken any action to
condemn, seize or appropriate, or to assume custody or control of, all or any
substantial part of the property and assets of Inco, any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries, any Subsidiary Borrower or Falconbridge, located in the United
States or Canada; or
(1) Invalidity. It becomes unlawful for any of the Borrowers to comply with their
obligations under the Loan Documents to which each is a party or any of those
obligations are not or cease to be legal, valid and binding, in each case, other than
as a result of any action or step taken or not taken by the Administrative Agent or
the Lenders; or
(in) Change of Control. The Borrowers shall not, (i) within ten (10) Business Days
next following the date any Change of Control occurs, have obtained a waiver
Earn the Majority Lenders pursuant to Section 901 with respect to such Change
of Control, or (ii) within seven (7) Business Days next following the date any
Change of Control occurs, made an irrevocable offer to the Administrative Agent
to prepay all outstanding Advances no later than the tenth (10“) Business Day
next following the date any Change of Control occurs and terminate the Total
Commitments pursuant to Section 2.0&
then, and in any such event, the Adminis‘n'ative Agent shall at the request, or with the consent of
the Majority Lenders, by notice to the Borrowers, declare the Lenders’ obligations to make
Advances to be terminated and declare the Advances, all interest thereon and all other amounts
payable under this Agreement to be forthwith due and payable, whereupon the Advances, all
such interest and all such amounts shall become and be immediately on the same day due and
payable, without presentment, demand, protest or further notice of any kind, all of which are


_ 54 .
hereby expressly waived by the Borrowers; except that, in the case of an Event of Default
speciﬁed in Section 7 0101) or Section 7.0l(i), the foregoing remedies shall be available to the
Administrative Agent and Lenders automatically upon the occurrence of any such Event of
Default without the requirement that such notice be furnished to the Borrowers by the
Administrative Agent or the Lenders. In addition to the foregoing remedies, if there shall occur
an Event of Default by virtue of Section 7.01(h) or Section 7.0l(i) at the time of such Event of
Default, each LIBOR Advance shall be converted into a USBR Advance or a Canadian Prime
Rate Advance, at the option of the relevant Borrower.
Upon the occurrence of any Event of Default, and in addition to any other rights or remedies of
any Lender and the Administrative Agent hereunder, any Lender or the Administrative Agent as
and by way of collateral security (or such alternate arrangement as may be agreed upon by the
relevant Borrower and such Lender or the Administrative Agent, as applicable) shall be entitled
to deposit and retain in an account to be maintained by the Administrative Agent (bearing
interest at the Administrative Agent’s rates as may be applicable in respect of other deposits of
similar amounts for similar terms) amounts which are received by such Lender or the
Administrative Agent from such Borrower hereunder or as proceeds of the exercise of any rights
or remedies of any Lender or the Administrative Agent hereunder against such Borrower, to the
extent such amounts may be required to satisfy any contingent or unmanned obligations or
liabilities of such Borrower to the Lenders or the Administrative Agent, or any of them
hereunder.
ARTICLE 8
THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT AND THE LENDERS
Section 8.01 Authorization and Action
(a) Each Lender irrevocably appoints and authorizes the Administrative Agent to take
such action as the Administrative Agent on its behalf and to exercise such powers
and such discretion under this Agreement and any of the other Loan Documents
as are delegated to it by the terms of this Agreement, together with the powers and
discretion reasonably incidental thereto. As to any matters not expressly provided
for by this Agreement, the Administrative Agent shall not be required to exercise
any discretion or take any action, but shall be required to act or refrain from
acting (and shall be fully protected in so doing) upon the instructions of the
Majority Lenders (which instructions shall be binding upon all Lenders) or all of
the Lenders, as may be required by Section 9.01. The Administrative Agent shall
not be required to take any action which (i) exposes it to personal liability; (ii) is
contrary to this Agreement or any applicable law; (iii) would require it to become
registered to do business in any jurisdiction; or (iv) would subject it to taxation.
(b) The Administrative Agent has no duties or obligations other than as set out in this
Agreement and there shall not be construed against the Administrative Agent any
implied duties (including ﬁduciary duties), obligations or covenants. The
Administrative Agent may execute or perform, and may delegate the execution
and performance of, any of its powers, rights, discretions and duties under this
Agreement and any of the other Loan Documents through or to any Persons
designated by it provided that any such delegation dom not affect the rights or


_ 55 _
obligations of the Borrowers hereunder and the Borrowers may continue to deal
exclusively with the Administrative Agent.
(0) The Administrative Agent is not obliged to (i) take or refrain from taking any
aetion or exercise or refrain from exercising any right or discretion under this
Agreement and any of the other Loan Documents on behalf of the Lenders; or (ii)
incur or subject itself to any cost in connection herewith, unless it is ﬁrst
Specifically indemniﬁed or furnished with security by the Lenders, in form and
Substance satisfactory to it (which may include further agreements of indemnity
or the deposit of funds).
Section 8.02 No Liability
Neither the Administrative Agent nor its directors, ofﬁcers, agents or employees shall be liable to
any Lender for any action taken or omitted to be taken by it or them in connection with this
Agreement or any of the other Loan Documents except for its or their own gross negligence or
wilful misconduct. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Administrative Agent:
(1) may treat the Lender that made any Advance as the holder of the indebtedness resulting
therefrom until the Administrative Agent receives and accepts an Assignment and Acceptance
entered into by such Lender, as assignor, and an Eligible Assignee, as assignee, as provided in
Section 9.11; (ii) may consult with legal counsel (including Bomwer’s Counsel), independent
P1113113 accountants and other experts selected by it and shall not be liable for any action taken or
omitted to be taken in good faith by it in accordance with the advice of such counsel, accountants
or experts; (iii) makes no warranty or representation to any Lender and shall not be responsible
to any Lender for any statements, warranties or representations (whether written or oral) made in
or in connection with this Agreement; (iv) shall not have any duty to ascertain or to inquire as to
the performance, observance or satisfaction of any of the terms, covenants or conditions of this
Agreement or any other Loan Document on the part of the Borrowers or their existence at any
time of any Event of Default or to inspect the property (including the books and records) of the
Borrowers; (V) shall not be responsible to any Lender for the due execution, legality, validity,
enforceability, genuineness, sufﬁciency or value of, or the perfection or priority of any lien or
security interest created or purported to be created under or in connection with, this Agreement
or any of the other Loan Documents or any other instrument or document furnished pursuant
hereto or thereto; and (vi) shall incur no liability under or in respect of this Agreement or any of
the other Loan Documents by acting upon any notice, consent, certiﬁcate or other instrument or
writing (which may be by facsimile) believed by it to be genuine and signed or sent by the proper
party or parties.
Section 8.03 Accommodations by Administrative Agent
The Administrative Agent has the same rights and powers under this Agreement with respect to
its Commitment as any other Lender and may exercise such rights and powers as though it were
not the Administrative Agent. The Administrative Agent and its aﬂiliates may accept deposits
from, lend money to, to the extent permitted by law, act as trustee under indentures of, and
generally engage in any kind of business with Inco, any of its Subsidiaries, or any Person who
may do business with or own securities of such Persons, all as if it were not the Administrative
Agent and without any duty to account to the Lenders. The Administrative Agent shall have no
duty to disclose any information obtained or received by it or any of its Afﬁliates relating to Inco


_ 56 _
or any of its Subsidiaries to the extent such information was obtained or received in any capacity
other than as Administrative Agent,
Secﬁon 8.04 Holding of Security; Sharing of Payments, etc.
(a) Each Lender agrees with the other Lenders that it will not, without the prior
consent of the other Lenders, take or obtain any lien on any assets of the
Borrowers to secure the obligations of the Borrowers under this Agreement,
except for the beneﬁt of all Lenders or as may otherwise be required by law.
(b) If any Lender obtains any payment (Whether voluntary, involuntary or through the
exercise of any right of set-oft) on account of Advances made by it in excess of its
Pro Rata Share of payments obtained by all the Lenders, such Lender shall
account to and pay over to the other Lenders their Pro Rata Share and shall, upon
request, immediately purchase from the other Lenders such participations in the
Advances made by the other Lenders as shall be necessary to cause the
purchasing Lender to share the excess payment with the other Lenders, each
according to its Pro Rata Share. If all or any portion of the excess payment is
recovered from the purchasing Lender, the purchase price shall be rescinded and
each Lender shall repay to the purchasing Lender the purchase price to the extent
of the recovery together with an amount equal to the Lender’s Pro Rata Share
(according to the proportion that the amount the Lender’s required repayment
bears to the total amount recovered from the purchasing Lender) of any interest or
other amount paid by the purchasing Lender in respect of the total amount
recovered. The Lender purchasing a participation from another Lender pursuant
to this Section 8.04 may, to the fullest extent permitted by law, exercise all its
rights of payment (including any right of set-off) with respect to such
participation as fully as if the Lender were a direct creditor of the Borrowers in the
amount of the participation and each of the Borrowers expressly acknowledges the
creation of such right.
(c) Nothing in this Credit Agreement shall be construed or deemed to permit any
Lender to enforce its rights and remedies hereunder against the Borrowers alone,
Section 8.05 Lender Credit Decisions
Each Lender acknowledges that it has independently and without reliance upon the
Administrative Agent or any other Lender and based on the ﬁnancial statements referred to in
Section 4.01(e) and such other documents and information as it has deemed appropriate, made its
own credit analysis and decision to enter into this Agreement. Each Lender also aclmowledges
that it will, independently without reliance upon the Administrative Agent or any other Lender
and based on such documents and information as it shall deem appropriate at the time, continue
to make its own credit decisions in taking or not taking action under this Agreement or any of the
other Loan Documents.
Section 8.06 Indemniﬁcation
Each Lender shall indemnify and save the Administrative Agent harmless (to the extent not
reimbursed by any of the Borrowers) in proportion to its Pro Rata Share from any liabilities,


_ 57 _

obligations, losses, damages, penalties, taxes, actions, judgements, suits, costs, expenses,
disbursements or claims suffered by, imposed upon or asserted against the Administrative Agent
as a result of, or arising out of, this Agreement or any action taken or omitted by the
Administrative Agent under this Agreement or any of the other Loan Documents provided that
no Lender shall be liable for any part of such liabilities, obligations, losses, damages, penalties,
taxes, actions, judgments, suits, costs, expenses, disbursements or claims resulting from the gross
negligence or wilful misconduct of the Administrative Agent in its capacity as Administrative
Agent. Without limiting the foregoing, each Lender shall reimburse the Administrative Agent
promptly upon demand for its rateable share (in proportion to its Pro Rata Share) of any
out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Administrative Agent in connection with the preparation,
execution, administration or enforcement of, or legal advice in respect of rights or
responsibilities under, this Agreement or any of the other Loan Documents (to the extent not
reimbursed by any of the Borrowers). The provisions of this Section 8.06 shall survive the
termination of this Agreement and the repayment of the Advances.

Section 8.07 Liability of the Lenders
Each of the Lenders agrees with each of the other Lenders that, except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Agreement, none of the Lenders has or shall have any duty or obligation, or shall
in any way be liable to any of the other Lenders in respect of this Agreement or any of the other
Loan Documents or any action taken or omitted to be taken in connection with it.

Section 8.08 Successor Administrative Agent
The Administrative Agent may (i) resign at any time by giving written notice to the Lenders and
the Borrowers; (ii) be removed at any time for cause by the Majority Lenders; or (iii) be removed
at the request of Inco at any time if its Commitment falls below that of any other Lender, such
resignation or removal to be effective upon the appointment of a successor Administrative
Agent. Upon notice of any resignation or removal, the Majority Lenders have the right to
appoint a successor Administrative Agent who (at any time that no Event of Default has occurred
and is continuing) shall be acceptable to Inco, acting reasonably. If no successor Administrative
Agent is appointed or has accepted the appointment within thirty (30) days aﬁer the retiring
Administrative Agent’s notice of resignation or removal, as the case may be, then the retiring
Administrative Agent may, on behalf of the Lenders and acting reasonably, appoint a successor
Administrative Agent, which is a Lender and which (at any time that no Event of Default has
occurred and is continuing) shall be acceptable to lrioo, acting reasonably, Upon the acceptance
of any such appointment by a successor Administrative Agent, the successor shall succeed to and
become vested with all the rights, powers, privileges and duties of the retiring Administrative
Agent and the retiring Administrative Agent shall be discharged from its duties and obligations
under this Agreement. After any retiring Administrative Agent resignation or removal, as the
case may be, the provisions of this Article 7 shall inure to its beneﬁt as to any actions taken or
omitted to be taken by it while it was Administrative Agent.

Section 8.09 Reliance Upon Administrative Agent
The Borrowers shall be entitled to rely upon any certiﬁcate, notice or other document or other
advice, statement or instruction provided to it by the Administrative Agent pursuant to this
Agreement or any of the other Loan Documents, and the Borrowers shall generally be entitled to
deal with the Administrative Agent with respect to matters under this Agreement or any of the


.58.
other Loan Documents which the Administrative Agent is authorized to deal with without any
obligation whatsoever to satisfy itself as to the authority of the Administrative Agent to act on
behalf of the Lenders and without any liability whatsoever to the Lenders for relying upon any
certiﬁcate, notice or other document or other advice, statement or instruction provided to it by
the Administrative Agent, notwithstanding any lack of authority of the Administrative Agent to
provide the same.
Section 8.10 Conﬁdentiality
(a) Conﬁdentialit Undertakin . The Administrative Agent and each of the Lenders
agrees that it shall:

(i) keep the Conﬁdential Information strictly conﬁdential and not
disclose it to anyone except as permitted by this Section 810 and
ensure that Conﬁdential Information is protected with security
measures and a degree of care that such Person would use with its
own conﬁdential information;

(ii) use the Conﬁdential Information solely in connection with its
participation in the Loan Facilities;

(iii) ensure that any person to whom it passes any Conﬁdential
Information (unless disclosed under Sections 8.10(b)(ii) or (iii)
acknowledges and complies with the provisions of this Section
8.10 as if that person were also party to it,

(17) Permitted Disclosure. The parties acknowledge that Conﬁdential Information
may be disclosed under the following conditions:

(i) to any of the parties hereto and their Afﬁliates, ofﬁcers, directors,
employees and professional advisers to the extent necessary in
connection with the Loan Facilities (and to other persons
authorized by a Lender or the Administrative Agent to organize,
present or disseminate such information in connection with
disclosures otherwise made in accordance with this Section);

(ii) when requested or required by any court of competent jurisdiction
or any competent judicial, governmental, supervisory or regulatory
body;

(iii) when required by the laws or regulations of any country with
jurisdiction over the affairs of the recipient;

(iv) in accordance with Section 91 1(1); or

(v) with the prior written consent of Inco.

provided, however, that such person notiﬁes Inco prior to any disclosure under
Section 8.10(b)(ii) (but no such notice shall be required to disclose Conﬁdential
Information pursuant to the request of any regulatory authority described in clause


_ 59 .
(ii) above made during the course of a supervisory examination) and usm best
efforts at Inco’s request to limit the scope of any disclosure and informs Inco
forthwith upon becoming aware that Conﬁdential Information has been disclosed
in breach of this Section 8.10.

(c) Consequences of Breach. It is understood and agreed that Inco or its Subsidiaries
may be irreparably harmed by the breach of the terms of this Section 8.10, that
damages may not be an adequate remedy, and that Inco or any of its Subsidiaries
or any of their ofﬁcers, employees or professional advisers may be granted an
injunction or speciﬁc performance for any threatened or actual breach of the
provisions of this Section 8.10, without proof of actual damages, in addition to
any other remedy to which any of them would be entitled.

(d) Inside Information. It is acknowledged that some or all of Conﬁdential
Information is or may be price-sensitive information and that the use of such
information may be regulated or prohibited by applicable legislation relating to
insider dealing and that the Conﬁdential Information will not be used for any
unlawful purpose.

ARTICLE 9
MISCELLANEOUS
Secﬁon 9.01 Amendments, etc.
No amendment or waiver of any provision of this Agreement or any instrument delivered
hereunder, nor consent to any departure by the Borrowers therefrom, shall in any event be
effective unless the same shall be in writing and signed by the Majority Lenders, and then such
waiver or consent shall be effective only in the speciﬁc instance and for the speciﬁc purpose for
which given provided, however, that no amendment, waiver or consent shall, unless in writing
and signed by all the Lenders, do any of the following: (i) waive any of the conditions speciﬁed
in Section 301, Section 3.02 and Section 3.03, (ii) increase the Commitments of the Lenders,
(iii) reduce the principal of, or interest on, the Advances or any fees or other amounts payable
hereunder due to such Lenders, (iv) postpone any date ﬁxed for any payment of principal of, or
interest on, the Advances or any fees payable hereunder due to such Lenders, (v) change the
percentage of the Commitments or of the aggregate unpaid principal amount of the Advances, or
change the deﬁnition of “Majority Lenders”, (vi) amend the deﬁnition of First Advance Expiry
Date or Commitment Reduction Date; (vii) amend or release the Inco Guarantee; or (viii) amend
this Section 9.01; and provided further that no amendment, waiver or consent shall, unless in
Writing and signed by the Administrative Agent in addition to the Lenders required above to take
such action, affect the rights or duties of the Administrative Agent under this Agreement.
Section 9.02 Notices, etc.

All notices and other communications provided for hereunder shall be in writing (including
facsimile communication) and sent by registered or certiﬁed mail or transmitted by facsimile or
delivered to a Borrower, a Lender or the Administrative Agent, at the address shown opposite its
name on the signature pages of this Agreement; and as to each other party, at such other address
as shall be designated by such party in a written notice to the other parties. All such notices and
communications shall, when mailed or transmitted or delivered, be effective when deposited in


.60.
the mails or delivered, or, when transmitted by facsimile, when receipt thereof is conﬁrmed, as
the case may be, except (i) as otherwise provided for herein and (ii) that all notices and
communications to the Administrative Agent pursuant to this Agreement shall not be effective
until received by the Administrative Agent All notices, communications and other documents
delivered hereunder, unless in the English language, shall be accompanied by a certiﬁed English
translation thereof
Section 9.03 No Waiver; Remedies
No failure on the part of the Lenders, the Administrative Agent or the Borrowers to exercise, and
no delay in exercising, any right hereunder or under any of the other Loan Documents shall
operate as a waiver thereof; nor shall any single or partial exercise of any right hereunder
preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right. The remedies
herein provided are cumulative and not exclusive of any remedies provided by law.
Section 9.04 Accounting Terms
All accounting terms not speciﬁcally deﬁned herein shall be construed in accordance with
GAAP except as otherwise stated herein
Section 9.05 Costs and Expenses
(a) Out-of-Pocket Costs of the Administrative Agent and Lenders, In consideration
for the agreement of the Administrative Agent and the Lenders to enter into this
Agreement, Inco agrees to pay on demand all reasonable out-of-pocket costs and
expenses (including, without limitation, all reasonable out-of-pocket costs and
expenses incurred with respect to the use of Intmlinks or in connection with due
diligence and navel, and reasonable courier, reproduction, printing, and delivery
costs) of the Administrative Agent, the initial Lenders (including in their capacity
as Lead Anangers) associated with the syndication of the Loan Facilities and with
the preparation, execution and delivery, administration, amendment, waiver or
modiﬁcation (including proposed amendments, waivers or modiﬁcations) of the
Loan Documents; provided that the fees and out-of-pocket costs and expenses of
counsel to be paid by Inco in connection therewith shall be limited to the
reasonable fees and out-of-pocket expenses of one set of Canadian and one set of
US. counsel as the Lenders may deem reasonably appropriate with respect
thereto and with respect to advising the Administrative Agent and the Lenders as
to their rights and responsibilities under this Agreement. Inco further agrees to
pay on demand all reasonable out~of-pocket expenses (including but not limited to
reasonable legal fees and expenses) of the Lenders and the Administrative Agent
for workout proceedings, enforcement costs, and documentary taxes associated
with the Loan Facilities. The obligations of Inco under this Section 9.05(a) shall
survive the payment in full of the Advances hereunder and the cancellation or
termination of the Commitments in full.
(13) Broken Interest Periods - LIBOR. If, due to prepayments or repayments made by
any Borrower of LIBOR Advances or due to acceleration of the maturity of
LIBOR Advances or due to any other reason, the Lenders receive payments of
principal of any LIBOR Advance other than on the last day of an Interest Period


_ 61 _
relating to such LIBOR Advance, such Borrower shall pay to the Lenders on
demand (i) an amount equal to the net yield which the Lenders would have earned
for the balance of such Interest Period in respect of the LIBOR Advance so repaid
or prepaid if such LIBOR Advance had not been repaid or prepaid prior to the end
of Such Interest Period, reduced, if the Lenders are able to re-lend or reinvest the
principal amount of the LIBOR Advance so repaid or prepaid for the balance of
such Interest Period, by the net yield to the Lenders on so re-lending or
reinvesting the LIBOR Advance, plus (ii) any expense or penalty incurred by the
Lenders on so re-lending or reinvesting such LIBOR Advance. A certiﬁcate of
the Administrative Agent setting forth the basis for the determination by each
affected Lender of the amount necessary to compensate it as aforesaid shall be
promptly submitted by the Administrative Agent to such Borrower and, absent
manifest error, shall be conclusive and binding.
(c) Indemnity. Inco hereby indemniﬁes and agrees to hold harmless all Indemniﬁed
Parties (as deﬁned below) horn and against all Liabilities (as deﬁned below).
“Indemniﬁed Party” shall mean the Administrative Agent, the Lead Arrangers,
each Lender, and each Afﬁliate of each of the foregoing and the respective
directors, ofﬁcers, agents, employees, advisers and representatives of each of the
foregoing. “Liabilities” shall mean any and all losses, claims, damages,
reasonable out—of—pocket costs, expenses (including, but not limited to, reasonable
fees and expenses of no more than one set of Canadian counsel and one set of
U.S. counsel) and liabilities which may be incurred by or asserted or awarded
against any Indemniﬁed Party (including, without limitation, in connection with
any investigation, litigation or proceeding or the preparation of a defence in
Connection therewith), in each case arising out of, or in connection with or
relating to, this Agreement or any of the other Loan Documents or the
transactions contemplated hereby and any actual or proposed use of the Advances,
except to the extent that such Liabilities are (i) determined by a ﬁnal, non-
appealable judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction to have resulted from
such Indemniﬁed Party’s gross negligence or wilﬁil misconduct or the failure of
such Indemniﬁed Party to perform its obligations in respect of the Loan Facilities,
or (ii) for any loss of proﬁt, income, revenue or loss of business opportunity. No
Indemniﬁed Party shall have any liability (whether in contract, tort or otherwise)
to the Borrowers or any of their respective security holders or creditors for or in
connection with the transactions contemplated hereby, except to the extent such
liability is determined in a ﬁnal non-appealable judgment by a court of competent
jurisdiction to have resulted primarily from such Indemniﬁed Party’s gross
negligence or wilful misconduct. In no event, however, shall any Indemniﬁed
Party be liable on any theory of liability for special, indirect, consequential or
punitive damages (including, Without limitation, any loss of proﬁts, business or
anticipated savings).
Section 9.06 Judgment Currency
(a) If, for the purposes of obtaining judgment in any court, it is necessary to convert a
sum due hereunder or under any instrument delivered hereunder in any currency
(for the purposes of this Section, the “Original Currency") into another currency


_ 52 _
(for the purposes of this Section, the “Other Currency”), the parties hereto agree,
to the fullest extent that they may effectively do so, that the rate of exchange used
shall be that at which in accordance with its normal banking procedures the
Lenders could purchase the Original Currency with the Other Currency on the
Business Day preceding that on which ﬁnal judgment is given or, if permitted by
applicable law, on the day on which such judgment is paid or satisﬁed.
(b) The obligation of a Borrower in respect of any sum due in the Original Currency
to the Lenders under such instrument shall, notwithstanding any judgment in any
Other Currency, be discharged only to the extent that on the Business Day
following receipt by the Lenders thereof, the Lenders may in accordance with
their normal banking procedures purchase the Original Currency with such Other
Currency. If the amount of the Original Currency so purchased is less than the
sum originally due to the Lenders in the Original Currency, such Borrower agrees,
as a separate obligation and notwithstanding any such judgment, to indemnify the
Lenders against such loss, and if the amount of the Original Currency so
purchased exceeds the sum originally due to the Lenders in the Original Currency,
the Lenders agree to remit such excess to such Borrower.
Section 9.07 Descriptive Headings
The descriptive headings of the sections of this Agreement are inserted for convenience of
reference only and do not constitute part of this Agreement.
Section 9.08 Severahility
The provisions of this Agreement are severable, and if any clause or provision of this Agreement
shall be held invalid or unenforceable in Whole or in part in any jurisdiction, then such clause or
provision shall, as to such jurisdiction, be ineffective to the extent of such invalidity or
unenforceability without in any manner affecting the validity or enforceability of such clause or
provision in any other jurisdiction or the remaining provisions hereof in any jurisdiction.
Section 9.09 Survival
Except as otherwise provided for herein, no representation, warranty, covenant or agreement not
providing for indemnity by Inco hereunder shall survive beyond the payment in full of Advances
and of interest, fees, indcrnnities and other expenses due or to become due hereunder or, if
earlier, the termination or cancellation in full of the Total Commitment, All indemnity
obligations of any party to this Agreement shall survive the termination of the Commitments, the
repayment of Advances hereunder and the termination of this Agreement.
Section 9.10 Binding Effect; Governing Law
This Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the beneﬁt of the Borrowers, the
Administrative Agent and the Lenders and their respective successors and assigns, except that
neither Inco nor any other Borrower shall have the right to assign its respective rights hereunder
or under any of the other Loan Document or any interest herein or therein This Agreement and
the Inco Guarantee shall be governed by, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the
Province of Ontario and the laws of Canada applicable therein. Each of the Borrowers hereby


. 63 .
submits to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the Province of Ontario for the purposes
of any legal or equitable suit, action or proceeding in connection with the Credit Agreement and
any other Loan Document and waives any right to a trial by jury in any action or proceeding to
enforce or defend any rights under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents.
Section 9.11 Assignments and Participaﬁnns
(a) Each Lender may and, in the case of an Increased Cost Lender shall (upon
demand by Inco pursuant to Section 2.1 l(d) with at least ﬁve (5) Business Days’
notice to such Increased Cost Lender and the Administrative Agent), assign to one
or more Persons all or a portion of its rights and obligations under this Agreement
(including, without limitation, all or a portion of its Commitment and the
Advances owing to it); provided, however, that:
(i) each such assignment shall be a constant, and not a varying,
percentage of all rights and obligations under this Agreement;
(ii) except in the case of an assignment of the Term Loan Facility
when an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, the
Borrowers shall be under no increased obligations under this
Agreement (including, without limitation, their obligations under
Section 2.11 or Section 2.12) than had no such assignment been
made;
(iii) except in the case of an assignment to a Person that immediately
prior to such assignment was a Lender, or an assignment of all of a
Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement, the amount
of the Commitment that is the subject of each such assignment
(determined as of the date of the Assignment and Acceptance with
respect to such assignment) shall in no event be less than
US$l0,000,000 the “Minimum Assignment Amount”) unless the
Administrative Agent and, provided that no Event of Default has
occurred and is continuing, Inco otherwise agree; and provided
further that there shall be no Minimum Assignment Amount upon
the occurrence of an Event of Default that is continuing;
(iv) subject to Section 9,1](a)(viii), each such assignment shall be to a
Person approved in writing by the Administrative Agent and,
provided that no Event of Default has occurred and is continuing,
lnco (each such approval not to be unreasonably Withheld or
delayed) and the Administrative Agent and Inco shall be provided
with prior notice of the identity of the proposed assignor Lender,
the proposed amount of such assignment and the identity of the
proposed assignee; provided further that the approval of the
Administrative Agent and Inco shall not be required for
assignments to another Lender or to any Afﬁliate of a Lender and
each such assigning Lender shall only be required to provide notice
of such assignment to the Administrative Agent and Inco;


_ 64 .

(v) each such assignment made as a result of a demand by a Borrower
pursuant to Section 2.ll(d) shall be arranged by such Borrower
after consultation with the Administrative Agent and shall be
either: (x) an assignment of all of the rights and obligations of the
assigning Lender under this Agreement, or (y) an assignment of a
portion of such rights and obligations made concurrently with
another such assignment or other such assignments that together
cover all of the rights and obligations of the assigning Lender
under this Agreement;

(vi) no Lender shall be obliged to make any such assignment as a result
of a demand by a Borrower pursuant to Section 2.ll(d) unless and
until such Lender shall have received one or more payments from
either such Borrower or one or more assignees in an aggregate
amount at least equal to the aggregate outstanding principal
amount of the Advances owing to such Lender, together with
accrued interest thereon to the date of payment of such principal
amount and all other amounts payable to such Lender hereunder
including, without limitation, increased costs or additional
amounts;

(vii) the parties to each such assignment shall execute and deliver to the
Administrative Agent for acceptance and recording in the Register
(as deﬁned below) an Assignment and Acceptance; and

(viii) except when an Event of Default has occurred and is continuing,
each such assignment in respect of the Bridge Loan Facility shall
be to an Eligible Assign-lee.

Upon such execution, delivery and recording, from and aﬁer the effective date
speciﬁed in each Assignment and Acceptance, (x) the assignee thereunder shall be
a party hereto and, to the extent that rights and obligations hereunder have been
assigned to it pursuant to such Assignment and Acceptance, shall have the rights
and obligations of a Lender hereunder, and (y) the assigning Lender thereunder
shall, to the extent that rights and obligations hereunder have been assigned by it
pursuant to such Assignment and Acceptance, relinquish its rights (other than its
rights under Section 2.11 and Section 905 to the extent any claim thereunder
relates to an event arising prior to such assignment) and be released from its
obligations (other than its obligations under Section 8.06 to the extent its
obligations thereunder relate to an event arising prior to such assignment) under
this Agreement and the other Loan Documents and, in the case of an Assignment
and Acceptance covering all or the remaining portion of an assigning Lender’s
rights and obligations under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents, such
Lender shall cease to be a party hereto.

Each Eligible Assignee of all or part of the Bridge Loan Facility shall
acknowledge to each Borrower in writing that notwithstanding payments made to
it pursuant to this Agreement may be subject to withholding tax under the ITA
and that it‘ any Borrower is required by law (or the interpretation or administration


_ 65 .
thereof by the relevant governmental authority) to withhold tax then such
Borrower will withhold such tax; and that no Borrower is under any obligation to
indemnify or hold harmless such Eligible Assignee in respect of such withholding
tax,

03) By executing and delivering an Assignment and Acceptance, the assigning Lender
and the assignee thereunder conﬁrm to and agree with each other and the other
parties hereto as follows:

(i) other than as provided in such Assignment and Acceptance, the
assigning Lender makes no representation or warranty and assumes
no responsibility with respect to any statements, warranties or
representations made in or in connection with this Agreement or
any of the other Loan Documents or the execution, legality,
validity, enforceability, genuinenms, sufﬁciency or value of this
Agreement or any of the other Loan Documents or any other
instrument or document furnished pursuant hereto;

(ii) the assigning Lender makes no representation or warranty and
assumes no responsibility with respect to the ﬁnancial condition of
the Borrowers or the performance or observation by the Borrowers
of any of their obligations under this Agreement or any of the other
Loan Documents or any other instrument or document furnished
pursuant hereto;

(iii) with respect to assignments of the Bridge Loan Facility, the
Borrowers shall be under no increased obligations under this
Agreement (including, without limitation, their obligations under
Section 2.11 or Section 2.12 than had no such assignment been
made);

(iv) with respect to assignments of the Term Loan Facility, provided
that no Event of Default has occurred and is continuing, the
Borrowers shall be under no increased obligations under this
Agreement (including, without limitation, their obligations under
Section 2.11 or Section 212) than had no such assignment been
made;

(v) the assignee confirms that it has received a copy of this
Agreement, together with copies of the ﬁnancial statements
referred to in Section 4‘01(e) and such other documents and
information as it has deemed appropriate to make its own credit
analysis and decision to enter into such Assignment and
Acceptance;

(vi) the assignee will, independently and Without reliance upon the
Administrative Agent, the assigning Lender or any other Lender
and based on such documents and information as it shall deem
appropriate at the time, continue to make its own credit decisions


. 66 _
in taking or not taking action under this Agreement or any of the
other Loan Documents;

(vii) the assignee, in the case of an assigmnent in respect of the Bridge
Loan Facility, conﬁrms that it is an Eligible Assignee;

(viii) such assignee appoints and authorizes the Administrative Agent to
take such action as Administrative Agent on its behalf and to
exercise such powers and discretion under this Agreement and
other Loan Documents as are delegated to the Administrative
Agent by the terms hereof, together with such powers and
discretion as are reasonably incidental thereto;

(ix) the assignee agrees that it will perform in accordance with their
terms all of the obligations that, by the terms of this Agreement,
are required to be performed by it as a Lender; and

(x) such assigning Lender shall pay to the Administrative Agent an
assignment fee of US$3,500 for each assignee, such fee to be due
and payable upon the execution and delivery of the relevant
Assignment and Acceptance; provided that such fee shall not be
required for assignment among Lenders or to an Afﬁliate of a
Lender,

(6) Upon its receipt of an Assignment and Acceptance executed by an assigning
Lender, an assignee (representing, in the case of an assigmnent in respect of the
Bridge Loan Facility, that it is an Eligible Assignee), the Administrative Agent
and, if applicable, Inco, shall:

(i) accept such Assignment and Acceptance,

(ii) record the information contained therein in the Register, and

(iii) give prompt notice thereof to the Borrower.

(d) The Administrative Agent shall maintain a copy of each Assignment and
Acceptance delivered to and accepted by it in a register for the recordation of the
names and addresses of the Lenders, and the Commitment of and principal
amount of the Advances owing to, each Lender from time to time (the
“Register”), The entries in the Register shall be conclusive and binding for all
purposes, absent manifest error, and him, the Administrative Agent and the
Lenders may treat each Person whose name is recorded in the Register as a
Lender hereunder for all purposes of this Agreement. The Register shall be
available for inspection by Inoo or any Lender at any time and from time to time
upon reasonable prior notice.

(6) Each Lender may sell participations to one or more banks or other entities (other
than Inco or any of its Afﬁliates) in or to all or a portion of its rights and


. 67 .
obligations under this Agreement (including, without limitation, all or a portion of
its Commitment and the Advances owing to it); provided, however, that:

(i) such Lender’s obligations under this Agreement (including,
without limitation, its Commitment) shall remain unchanged;

(ii) such Lender shall remain solely responsible to the parties hereto
for the performance of such obligations;

(iii) the Administrative Agent and the other Lenders shall continue to
deal solely and directly with such Lender in connection with such
Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement;

(iv) no participant under any such participation shall have any right to
approve any amendment or waiver of any provision of this
Agreement or any consent to any departure by the Borrowers
therefrom except to the extent that such amendment, waiver or
consent would reduce the principal of, or interest on, Advances
made hereunder or any fees or other amounts payable hereunder, in
each case to the extent subject to such participation, or postpone
any date ﬁxed for any payment of principal of, or interest on, the
Advances made hereunder or any fees payable hereunder, in each
case, to the extent of such participation; and

(v) the Borrowers shall be under no increased obligations under this
Agreement (including, without limitation, their obligations under
Section 2.11 or Section 2.12 than had no such participation been
made.

(i) Any Lender may, in connection with any assignment or participation or proposed
assignment or participation pursuant to this Section 911 disclose to the assignee
or participant or proposed assignee or participant, any information relating to the
Borrowers furnished to such Lender by or on behalf of the Borrowers; provided
that, prior to any such disclosure, the assignee or participant or proposed assignee
or participant shall agree to preserve the conﬁdentiality of any Conﬁdential
Information relating to the Borrowers received by it from such Lender in the same
manner and to the extent set out in Section 8,10 hereof.

Section 9.12 Counterparts
This Agreement may be executed and delivered by facsimile and in any number of counterparts
and by each party to this Agreement on separate counterparts, each of which counterparts, when
so executed and delivered, shall be deemed to be an original and all of which counterparts, taken
together, shall constitute one and the same agreement.

Section 9.13 Enﬁre Agreement
This Agreement, the other Loan Documents and any other agreement speciﬁed in writing
between the Administrative Agent Inco or any of the Lenders constitute the whole and entire


_ 63 _
agreement between the parties hereto concerning the matters addressed in this Agreement and
supercede any prior agreements undertakings, declarations, commitments or representations,
written or verbal, in respect thereof.
- remainder of page intentionally Ieﬁ blank —


_ 69 .
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be executed by their
respective officers thereunto duly authorized, as of the date ﬁrst above written
145 King Street West INCO LIMITED, as a Borrower
Suite 1500
To t , 0N M5 _
m“ 0 H 437 By: /s/ Robert D. J. Dawes

Attention: Vice~President & Treasurer Name: Reb‘m D‘ 1‘ Dawes

Title: Executive Vice President and Chief
Telephone No; 416.361.7650 Fmaneial Ofﬁcer
Facsimile Nor: 416.351.7538 By:

Name:

Title:

- remainder of page intentionally left blank -


_ 7o _
12th Floor, South Tower ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, as
Royal Bank Plaza Administrative Agent
200 Bay Street
Toronto, ON M5] 2W7 By: /s/ David Wheatley
a

V ‘ Name: David Wheatley
Attentmn. Agency Servmes Group Title: Manager, Agency
TelephoneNo‘: 416-842-3901
Facsimile No.2 416-842-4023

- remainder of page intentionally left blank -


_ 71 _
4'" Floor, PO. Box 50 ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, as Lender
Royal Bank Plaza
South Tower
200 Bay Street By: /s/ Stam Fountoulakis
R
Toronto, ON M5] 2W7 Name: Stem Fountoulakis
Title: Authorized Signatory

Attention: Stam Fountoulakis By;

Vice President 

Corporate Banking — fime'

Global Mining & Metals Tltle:
Telephone No.: 416-842-3791
FacsimileNo.: 416-842-5320

- remainder of page intentionally left blank -


.72 _
40 King Street West THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA, as Lender
62’“1 Floor
Scotia Plaza
Toronto, ON MSW 2X6 By: 15/ David Konarek
Name: David Konarek
ﬁnenﬁon: 500“ Stewart Title: Managing Director
61%?“ N0" 416’933'2959 By: /s/ Alexander M, Mihailovich
Fac51m1le No.1 416-866-2009 
Name: Alexander M1ha110v1€h
Title: Associate
- remainder of page intentionally left blank -


_ 73 _

One Pierrepont Plaza MORGAN STANLEY SENIOR FUNDING
7‘h Floor (NOVA SCOTIA) co., as Lender
300 Cadman Plaza West
Broomyn’ NY 11201 By: /s/ Jaap L. Tonckens
Attention: Erma Dell’Aquila Nfime: {ﬂap L' Tonekens
Telephone No.: 718-754-7286 Title: Vice “651de
Facsimile No.2 718-754-7249 By:

Name:

Title:

- remainder ofpage intentionally left blank -


_ 74 .
c/o Goldman, Sachs & Co. GOLDMAN SACHS CANADA CREDIT
30 Hudson Skeet, 17‘h Floor PARTNERS C0" as Lender
Jersey City, NJ 07302
By: /s/ Steve Hickey
Attention: Pedro Ramirez Name: Steve Hickey
TelePh?ne No‘: 917-343-8319 Title: President-Goldman Sachs Canada
Facsmlle No.2 212-428-1243 Credit Partners CO.
By:
Name:
Title:
- remainder of page intentionally leﬂ‘ blank -


_ 75 _

77 King Street West BNP PARIBAS (CANADA), as Lender
Suite 41 00
PO. Box 31
Toronto, ON MSK 1N8 By: /s/ Krista McLeod

Name: Krista McLeod
Attention: Allan Fordyce Title: Assistant Vice President

Director . . .

Telephone No.: 416-365-6743 B3" %
Facsimile Noiz 416-947-3538 Name: Jean-Philippe Cadet

Title: Director

— remainder of page intentionally left blank —


. 75 .
1200 Smith Street, Suite 1300 BNP PARIBAS, as Lender
Houston, Texas, 77002
Attention: Donna Verwold By: (3/ Brian Malone
Telephone N0.: 713-982-11000 W
Facsimile N0; 713‘659-6915 .
Title:
By: /s/ David Dodd
Name: David Dodd
Title: Director
— remainder of page intentionally leﬂ‘ blank —


.77 _
Suite 1400, Ems! & Young Tower SUMITOMO MITSUI BANKING
Toronto»Dominion Centre CORPORATION OF CANADA, as Lender
PO, Box 172
222 Bay Street .
Toronto, ON MSK 1H6 By' 1%
Name: Alfred Lee
Attention: Alfred Lee Title: Vice President
Vice President By:
Telephone No.: 416-368-4934 Name:
Facsimile No.: 416-367-3565 i
Title:
— remainder of page intentionally leﬂ blank —


.73 .

277 Park Avenue SUMITOMO MITSUI BANKING
New York, NY 10172 CORPORATION, as Lender
Attention: Robert Dupree _
Telephone No.: 212.224.4159 BY- W
Facsimile No.: 212424-522 Name: Masakazu Hasegawa

Title: Joint General Manager

By:
Name:
Title:
— remainder of page intentionally left blank —


.79 .
301 South College St NC 5562 WACHOVIA BANK, NA, as Lender
Charlotte, NC 28288
Attention: J. Andrew Phelps By: %
VP Name: Doug Davis
Telephone No.: 704-383-7239 Tide; Director
Facsimile No.: 704-383-1625 By:
Name:
Title:
— remainder of page intentionally left blank —


.30 .
141 Adelaide Street West CONGRESS FINANCIAL CORPORATION
Suite 1500 (CANADA), as Lender
Toronto, ON MSH 3L5
' By: /s/ Enza Agosta
Attention: 15/313221 Agosta —Name: Ema Ag‘osta
Telephone No; 415.354_6401 Title: Vice President-Congress Financial
Facsimile N0.: 4&6-364-8165 “mm” (Canada)
By:
Name:
Title:
— remainder of page intentionqu left blank —


.81 .
1177 Avenue of the Americas AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
6“ Floor BANKING GROUP LIMITED, as Lender
New York, NY 10036
' . By‘. /s/ Martin Cleaver

Attention: 3;]me Dial Name: Martin Cleaver
Telephone No.: 212-801-9740 Title: Chief Operating Ofﬁcer
Facsimile Nu: 212-536-9247 By:

Name:

Title:

— remainder of page intentionally leﬁ‘ blank —


.82 _
70 York Street HSBC BANK USA, TORONTO BRANCH,
4‘“ Floor as Lender
Toronto, ON M5] 139
By: /s/ Jody Sanderson
Attention: Jeffrey Roth ‘.——_———
Relationship Manager N'ame' Judy sandmon

Telephone No.: 416-525-5504 Tale:
Facsimile Noe: 416-525-6581 By: /s/ Margaret Lane

Name: Margaret Lane

Title:

— remainder of page intentionally left blank —


.33 _
100 Yonge Street MIZUHO CORPORATE BANK
Suite 1102, Box 29 (CANADA), as Lender
Toronto, ON MSC 2W1
_ By: /s/ W. M1 McFarland
Attmtlon: 13/1111 McFarland Name: W‘ M. M cle an d
Telephone N0.: 416-874-1145 Title: Vice President
Facsimile No.2 416-367-3452 By:
Name:
Title:
— remainder of page intentionally left blank —


.34 _
1251 Avenue of the Americas MIZUHO CORPORATE BANK LTD., as
New York, NY 10020 Lender
Attention: Yoshimi Tsushima By; /s/ Bertram H, Tang
VP .
Telephone No.: 212-282-4947 Nf‘me‘ Balm“? H‘ Ta“?
Facsimile N0; 212_282_4488 Tltle: Semor Vlce Pres1dent
By:
Name:
Title:
—- remainder of page intentionally left blank -


.85 _

1251 Avenue of the Americas NATEXIS BAN QUES POPULAIRES, as

34'11 Floor Lender

New York, NY 10020

' By: /s/ Robin Liu

Attention. Salish Sweet Name: Robin Li“

Telephone No.: 212-872-5052 WEI

Facsimile No.2 212-872-5162 By: /s/ Stephen A. lendras
Name: Stephen A. Jendras
Title: Vice President

— remainder of page intentionally left blank 7


.86 .
55 East 52nd Street UFJ BANK LIMITED, as Lender
New York1 NY 10055
Attention: Stephen C. Small By: /5/ Stephen C Small
Senior Vice President Name: Stephen 0 Small
Telephone No.: 212_339_6201 Title: Senior Vice President and Area
Facsimile No.: 212-754-1304 Manager
By:
Name:
Title:
— remainder of page intentionally left blank —


.37 .
#1630 # 650 West Georgia Street UNITED OVERSEAS BANK LIMITED, as
Vancouver, BC V6B 4N9 Lender
Attention: Winnie Chew .
Senior Manager By. /s/ K. Jm Koh
Telephone No.: 604-662-7055 Name: K. Jin Koh
Facsimile No.2 604-662—3356 Tine; General Manager
By:
Name:
Title:
— remainder 0fpuge intentionally left blank -


FIRST AMENDMENT AGREEMENT
Dated as ofJanuary 31, 2006
First Amendment Agreement between INCO LIMITED, a corporation organized and
existing under the laws of Canada, as borrower, ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, as
Administrative Agent, and MORGAN STANLEY SENIOR FUNDING (NOVA SCOTIA) CO.,
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, GOLDMAN SACHS CANADA CREDIT PARTNERS C0,,
THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA and the other banks and other ﬁnancial institutions which are
party hereto as Lenders.
WHEREAS Inco, Royal Bank of Canada, as Administrative Agent, and Morgan Stanley
Senior Funding (Nova Scotia) Col, Royal Bank of Canada, Goldman Sachs Canada Credit
Partners Co., and The Bank of Nova Scotia and the other banks and other ﬁnancial institutions
party thereto as lenders entered into a loan agreement dated as of December 22, 2005 (the “Loan
Agreement”);
AND WHEREAS Inco has requested that the deﬁnition of First Advance Expiry Date in
the Loan Agreement be amended by replacing the date of May 8, 2006 with the date June 8,
2006;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to Section 9.01 of the Loan Agreement such amendment must
be signed by all the Lenders;
NOW THEREFORE for good and valuable consideration (the receipt and sufﬁciency of
which is hereby acknowledged) the parties hereto agree as follows:
1.1 Defined Terms
Capitalized terms not otherwise deﬁned herein shall have the respective meanings given
to them in the Loan Agreement
1.2 Amendment
The deﬁnition of “First Advance Expiry Date” as contained in Section 1.01 of the Loan
Agreement is hereby amended by deleting the reference to “May 8, 2006” contained therein and
replacing it with “June 8, 2006”.
1.3 Representations and Warranties
Inco represents and warrants to the Administrative Agent and Lenders as speciﬁed below:
(a) Due Execution. 'lhe execution, delivery and performance by Inco of this First
Amendment Agreement are within its powers, have been duly authorized by all
necessary corporate action, and do not contravene (i) its constating documents or
by-laws or (ii) any applicable law or any rule, regulation, writ or decree then in


_ 2 _
effect or any contractual restriction binding on or affecting it or any of its
properties.

(b) No Other Authorization No authorization or approval (including exchange
control approval) or other action by, and no notice to or ﬁling with, any
governmental authority or regulatory body is required for the due execution,
delivery and performance by Inco of this First Amendment Ageement.

(C) Legal and Binding Agreement This First Amendment Agreement constitutes the
legal, valid and binding obligation of 11100 enforceable against it in accordance
with its terms except as may be limited by (i) bankruptcy, insolvency,
reorganization or other laws or equitable principles of general application to or
affecting the enforcement of creditors’ rights and (ii) the availability of remedies
under general equitable principles.

(d) Representations Accurate and No Default. The representations and warranties
contained in Section 4.01 of the [can Agreement are true and correct as of the
date hereof, except to the extent that such representations and warranties relate to
an earlier or later date; and (ii) no event has occurred and is continuing, or would
result from the amendment to the Loan Agreement contemplated hereby, which
constitutes an Event of Default, but for the requirement that notice be given or
time elapse with respect to any applicable grace period or both.

1.4 Conﬁrmation of Loan Documents

The Loan Agreement, as amended herein, and the other Loan Documents shall continue
in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and are hereby ratiﬁed and
conﬁrmed in all respects. This First Amendment Agreement constitutes a Loan Document for
the purposes of the Loan Agreement.
1.5 Counterparts

This First Amendment Agreement may be executed and delivered by facsimile and in any
number of counterparts and by each party to this First Amendment Agreement on separate
counterparts, each of which counterparts, when so executed and delivered, shall be deemed to be
an original and all of which counterparts, taken together, shall constitute one and the same
agreement.
1.6 Binding Effect; Governing Law

This First Amendment Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the beneﬁt of the
Borrowers, the Administrative Agent and the Lenders and their respective successors and
assigns, except that neither Inco nor any other Borrower shall have the right to assign its
respective rights hereunder or any interest herein or therein. This First Amendment Agreement
shall be governed by, and consh'ued in accordance with, the laws of the Province of Ontario and
the laws of Canada applicable therein.


_ 3 _

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this First Amendment
Agreement to be executed by their respective officers thereunto duly authorized, as of the date
ﬁrst written above.

INCO LIMITED, as a Borrower
Per: /s/ S, Anderson
Name: S. Anderson
Title: Vice President and Treasurer
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


_ 4 -
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, as
Administrative Agent
Per: /s/ David Wheatley
Name: David Wheatley
Title: Manager, Agency
- remainder af page Ieﬁ intentionally blank -


. 5 .
MORGAN STANLEY SENIOR FUNDING
(NOVA SCOTIA) CO., as Lender
Per: /s/ Jaap L. Tonckens
Name: Jaap Li Tonckens
Title: Vice President
Per:
Name:
Title:
- remainder 0f page leﬁ intentionally blank -


. 6 _
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, as Lender
Per: ls/ Siam Fountoulakis
Name: Stam Fountoulakis
Title: Authorized Signatory
- remainder 0fpage left intentianally blank -


_ 7 _

GOLDMAN SACHS CANADA CREDIT

PARTNERS C0., as Lender

Per: /s/ Steve Hickey
Name: Steve Hickey
Title: President-Goldman Sachs Canada
Credit Partners Co.

Per:
Name:
Title:

- remainder of page Ieﬁ intentionally blank —


_ g l

THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA, as Lender

Per: /s/ Michael K Eddy
Name: Michael K. Eddy
Title: Director-Mining

Per: /s/ Alexander Mihailovich
Name: Alexander Mihailovich
Title: Associate

- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


_ 9 _

BNP PARIBAS (CANADA), as Lender

By: /s/ Allan Fordyce
Name: Allan Fordyce
Title: Director

By: /s/ Krista McLeod
Name: Krista McLeod
Title: Assistant Vice President

- remainder of page Ieﬂ intentionally blank -


. 10 .
BNP PARIBAS, as Lender
By: /s/ Polly Schott
Name: Polly Schott
Title: Vice President
By: /s/ Betsy Jocher
Name: Betsy Jocher
Title: Vice President
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


. 11 .
SUMITOMO MITSUI BANKING
CORPORATION OF CANADA, as Lender
By: /s/ Alﬁed Lee
Name: Alfred Lee
Title: Vice President
By:
Name:
Title:
- remainder 0]" page left intentionally blank —


_ 12 _

SUMITOMO MITSUI BANKING

CORPORATION, as Lender

By: /s/ William M, Ginn
Name: William M. Ginn
Title: General Manager

By:
Name:
Title:
- remainder afpage leﬂ intentionally blank -


l 13 .

WACHOVIA BANK, NA, as Lender

By: /s/ 1. Andrew Phelps
Name: I Andrew Phelps
Title: Vice President

By:
Name:
Title:

- remainder of page left intentianally blank -


. 14 .
WACHOVIA CAPITAL FINANCE
CORPORATION (CANADA), as Lender
By: /s/ Enza Agosta
Name: Enza Agosta
Title: Vice President-Wachovia Capital
Finance Corporation (Canada)
By:
Name:
Title:
- remainder of page left intentionally blank —


_ 15 _
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
BANIGNG GROUP LIMITED, as Lender
By: /s/ John W. Wade
Name: John W‘ Wade
Title: Director
By:
Name:
Title:
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


_ 15 .
HSBC BANK USA, TORONTO BRANCH,
as Lender
By: /s/ Jody Sanderson
Name: Jody Sanderson
Title:
By: /s/ Margaret Lane
Name: Margaret Lane
Title:
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


_ 17 _

MIZUHO CORPORATE BANK

(CANADA), as Lender

By: /s/ W.M. McFarland
Name: W.M. McFarland
Title: Vice President

By:
Name:
Title:

- remainder 0f page Ieﬁ intentionally blank -


.18.
MIZUHO CORPORATE BANK LTD., as
Lender
By: /s/ Bertram H. Tang
Name: Bertram H. Tang
Title: Senior Vice President
- remainder of page leﬂ intentionally blank -


.19.
NATEXIS BANQUES POPULAIRES, as
Lender
By: /s/ Stephen A. Jendras

Name: Stephen A. Jendras
Title: Vice President

By: /s/ Carla Sweet
Name: Carla Sweet
Title: Vice President

- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


.20.
THE BANK OF TOKYO-MITSUBISHI,
UFJ LTD., as Lender
By: /5/ Spencer Hughes
Name: Spencer Hughes
Title: Authorized Signatory
- remainder of page left intentionqu blank -


_ 21 .

UNITED OVERSEAS BANK LIMITED, as

Lender

By: /s/ K, Jin Koh
Name: K. Jin Koh
Title: General Manager

By:
Name:
Title:
- remainder af page left intentionally blank -


.22.
BANK OF TOKYO — MITSUBISHI UFJ
(CANADA), as Lender
By: /s/ Angelo Bisutti
Name: Angelo Bisutti
Title: Senior Vice President
By:
Name:
Title:
- remainder 0f page left intentionally blank -


W
Dated as of February 20, 2006

Second Amendment Agreement between [NCO LIMITED, a corporation organized and
existing under the laws of Canada, as borrower, ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, as
Administrative Agent, and MORGAN STANLEY SENIOR FUNDING (NOVA SCOTIA) COl,
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, GOLDMAN SACHS CANADA CREDIT PARTNERS C0.,
THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA and the other banks and other ﬁnancial institutions which are
party hereto as Lenders,

WHEREAS Inco, Royal Bank of Canada, as Administrative Agent, and Morgan Stanley
Senior Funding (Nova Scotia) Co, Royal Bank of Canada, Goldman Sachs Canada Credit
Partners Co., and The Bank of Nova Scotia and the other banks and other ﬁnancial institutions
patty thereto as lenders entered into a loan agreement dated as of December 22, 2005 as
amended by the document entitled Fiist Amendment Agreement between such parties made as of
January 31, 2006 (collectively, the “Loan Agreement”);

AND WHEREAS Inco has requested that the deﬁnition of First Advance Expiry Date in
the Loan Agreement be amended by replacing the date of June 8, 2006 with the date August 10,
2006;

AND WHEREAS pursuant to Section 901 of the Loan Agreement such amendment must
be signed by all the Lenders;

AND WHEREAS Section 4.1(g) of the Support Agreement is being amended by an
amending agreement made as of February 20, 2006 to read as set out in Schedule “A” hereto (the
text in Schedule “A” is hereinaﬁer referred to as the “Amended Section 4.1(g)”)

NOW THEREFORE for good and valuable consideration (the receipt and Sufﬁciency of
which is hereby acknowledged) the parties hereto agree as follows:

1.1 Deﬁned Terms

Capitalized terms not otherwise deﬁned herein shall have the respective meanings given to them
in the Loan Agreement.

1.2 Amendment

The deﬁnition of “First Advance Expiry Date” as contained in Section 101 of the Loan
Agreement is hereby amended by deleting the reference to “June 8, 2006“ contained therein and
replacing it with “August 10, 2006’!


. 2 _
1.3 Section 5.0401) of the Credit Agreement
The Administrative Agent and the Lenders acknowledge and agree that the reference to Section
4.1(g) of the Support Agreement contained in Section 5.0401) of the Credit Agreement shall
hereinafter be read as a reference to the Amended Section 4‘] (g),
1.4 Representations and Warranties
Inco represents and warrants to the Administrative Agent and Lenders as speciﬁed below:

(e) Due Execution. The execution, delivery and performance by lnco of this Second
Amendment Agreement are within its powers, have been duly authorized by all
necessary corporate action, and do not contravene (i) its constating documents or
by-laws or (ii) any applicable law or any rule, regulation, writ or decree then in
effect or any contractual restriction binding on or affecting it or any of its
properties.

(f) No Other Authorization. No authorization or approval (including exchange
control approval) or other action by, and no notice to or ﬁling with, any
governmental authority or regulatory body is required for the due execution,
delivery and performance by lnco of this Second Amendment Agreement,

(g) Legal and Binding Agreement. This Second Amendment Agreement constitutes
the legal, valid and binding obligation of 11100 enforceable against it in accordance
with its terms except as may be limited by (i) bankruptcy, insolvency,
reorganization or other laws or equitable principles of general application to or
affecting the enforcement of creditors’ rights and (ii) the availability of remedies
under general equitable principles.

(h) Representations Accurate and No Default. The reprmentations and warranties
contained in Section 4.01 of the Loan Agreement are true and correct as of the
date hereof, except to the extent that such representations and warranties relate to
an earlier or later date; and (ii) no event has occurred and is continuing, or would
result from the amendment to the Loan Agreement contemplated hereby, which
constitutes an Event of Default, but for the requirement that notice be given or
time elapse with respect to any applicable grace period or both,

1.5 Conﬁrmation of Loan Documents

The Loan Agreement, as amended herein, and the other Loan Documents shall continue in full
force and effect in accordance with their respective terms and are hereby ratiﬁed and conﬁrmed
in all respects. This Second Amendment Agreement constitutes a Loan Document for the
purposes of the Loan Agreement.

1.6 Counterparts

This Second Amendment Agreement may be executed and delivered by facsimile and in any
number of counterparts and by each party to this Second Amendment Agreement on separate
counterparts, each of which counterparts, when so executed and delivered, shall be deemed to be


_ 3 .
an original and all of which counterparts, taken together, shall constitute one and the same
agreement.
1.7 Binding Effect; Governing Law
This Second Amendment Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the beneﬁt of the
Borrowers, the Administrative Agent and the Lenders and their respective successors and
assigns, except that neither lnco nor any other Borrower shall have the right to assign its
respective rights hereunder or any interest herein or therein. This Second Amendment
Agreement shall be governed by, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the Province of
Ontario and the laws of Canada applicable therein.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Second Amendment
Agreement to be executed by their respective ofﬁcers thereunto duly authorized, as of the date
ﬁrst written above.

INCO LIMITED, as a Borrower
Per: /s/ Robert D. J. Davies
Name: Robert Di 1‘ Davies
Title: Executive Vice President and Chief
Financial Ofﬁcer
— remainder of page left intentinnallv blank -


. 4 .
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, as
Administrative Agent
Per: /5/ David Wheatley
Name: David Wheatley
Title: Manager, Agency
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


_ 5 .

MORGAN STANLEY SENIOR FUNDING

(NOVA SCOTIA) C0., as Lender

Per: /s/ Jaap L. Tonckens
Name: Jaap LA Tonckens
Tiﬂe: Vice President

Per:
Name:
Title:

- remainder of page leﬂ intentionally blank -


_ 5 .
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, as Lender
Per: /s/ Slam Fountoulakis
Name: Stam Fountoulakis
Title: Authorized Signatory
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


_ 7 _
GOLDMAN SACHS CANADA CREDIT
PARTNERS C0,, as Lender
Per: /s/ Ed Forst
Name: Ed Forst
Title: Authorized Signatory
Per:
Name:
Title:
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


_ 8 _

THE BANK OF NOVA SCOTIA, as Lender

Per: /s/ Michael K, Eddy
Name: Michael K. Eddy
Title: Director-Mining

Per: /s/ Alexander Mihailovich
Name: Alexander Mihailovich
Title: Associate

- remainder of page left intentitmally blank -


_ 9 .

BNP PARIBAS (CANADA), as Lender

Per: /s/ Michael Gosselin
Name: Michael Gosseliu
Title: Managing Director

Per: /s/ Krista McLeod
Name: Krista McLeod
Title: Assistant Vice President

- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


_ 10 .

BNP PARIBAS, as Lender

Per: /s/ Laury Robinson
Name: Larry Robinson
Title: Director

Per: /s/ Mark A. Cox
Name: Mark A. Cox
Title: Director

- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


. 11 .
SUMITOMO MITSUI BANKING
CORPORATION OF CANADA, as Lender
Per: /5/ Alfred Lee
Name: Alfred Lee
Title: Vice President
Per:
Name:
Title:
- remainder of page Ieﬂ intentionally blank -


. 12 .

SUMITOMO MITSUI BANKING

CORPORATION, as Lender

Per: ls/ William M. Ginn
Name: William M. Ginn
Title: General Manager

Per:
Name:
Title:

- remainder of page Ieﬂ’ intentionally blank -


. 13 .

WACHOVIA BANK, NA, as Lender

Per: /s/ I. Andrew Phelps
Name: J. Andrew Phelps
Title: Vice President

Per:
Name:
Title:

- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


_ 14 .

WACHOVIA CAPITAL FINANCE

CORPORATION (CANADA), as Lender

Per: ls/ Enza Agosta
Name: Enza Agosta
Title: Vice President-Wachovia Capital
Finance Corporation (Canada)

Per:
Name:
Title:
- remainder of page left intentianally blank -


_ 15 _
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
BANKING GROUP LIMITED, as Lender
Per: /s/ R. Scott McInan
Name: R. Scott McInnis
Title: General Manager
Per:
Name:
Title:
- remainder of page left intentinnally blank -


_ 16 .
HSBC BANK USA, TORONTO BRANCH,
as Lender
Per: /s/ Jody Sanderson
Name: J oday Sanderson
Title:
Per: /s/ Margaret Lane
Name: Margaret Lane
Title:
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


. 17 _

MIZUHO CORPORATE BANK

(CANADA), as Lender

Per: /s/ W. M‘ McFarland
Name: W. M. McFarland
Title: Vice President

Per:
Name:
Title:

— remainder of page left intentionally blank —


.18.
MIZUHO CORPORATE BANK LTD., as
Lender
Per: /5/ Makoto Murata
Name: Makoto Murata
Title: Deputy General Manager
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


_ 19 _
NATEXIS BANQUES POPULAIRES, as
Lender
Per: /5/ Vincent Lauras
Name: Vincent Lamas
Title: Managing Director
Per: /s/ Carla Sweet
Name: Carla Sweet
Title: Vice President
- remainder ofpage left intentianally blank -


.20.
THE BANK OF TOKYO-MITSUBISHI,
UFJ LTD., as Lender
Per: ls/ Spencer Hughes
Name: Spencer Hughes
Title: Authorized Signatory
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


. 21 .
UNITED OVERSEAS BANK LIMITED, as
Lender
Per: /5/ K. Jin Koh
Name: K4 Jin Koh
Title: General Manager
Per:
Name:
Title:
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -


. 22 _
BANK OF TOKYO — MITSUBISHI UFJ
(CANADA), as Lender
Per: /s/ Angelo Bisutti
Name: Angelo Bisutti
Title: Senior Vice Presidem
Per:
Name:
Title:
- remainder of page left intentionally blank -

