
ASX RELEASE: 5 SEPTEMBER 2016
GOLD EXPLORATION AND STRATEGY UPDATE
Exploration underway at Rocky Gully Project to advance gold targets towards drilling in December quarter
Exploration commences to define and prioritise gold targets at Lake Cowan project
Acquisition of Philips River gold project in the highly prospective Albany-Fraser belt
Corporate advisors engaged to assist with the evaluation of further gold project acquis ition opportunities
Consideration being given for potential corporate restructuring of gold projects in new listed vehicle
Metalicity Limited (ASX:MCT)  (“Metalicity”  or “Company”) provides  the following  update  on its gold  exploration 
projects and strategy as the Company commences  an exploration program to advance gold targets towards drilling.   
 
Rocky Gully Project  
 
The Rocky  Gully  Project  is  a 1,200km2 tenement  package located at the southern  end  of  the Albany-Fraser  Belt. 
Ongoing  gold  exploration  work  at  Rocky  Gully  has  identified  priority  targets  from  the  significant  volume  of 
geological and  geophysical  data compiled  by  Metalicity and previous  owners.  The priority  gold targets identified 
(see  Figures 2, 3, 4, 5) are based  on  coincident  anomalism  in  geochemical and  geophysical  datasets. Metalicity is 
currently  planning  further  geochemical  sampling  to  better  define  these  anomalies  prior  to  drilling.  Drilling  is 
planned to coincide with the cessation of cropping and  related activities toward the end of the December quarter. 
 
Phillips River Project 
  
Metalicity’s Phillips  River Project consists  of two granted tenements and one tenement application covering a total 
of 754km2 (see Figures 1, 6). The recent opportunistic  acquisition  of this package underpins  Metalicity’s confidence 
in the potential of the Albany-Fraser Belt to host mineral deposits  in addition to the world class Tropicana and Nova 
discoveries.  The ground was previously  held by Silver Lake Resources Limited which undertook  considerable  target 
generation  work  however  only  limited  air  core  drilling  has  been  conducted.  Metalicity  is  currently  compiling  a 
database of historical  exploration results  and will progress  systematic analysis and target generation once  this  has 
been  completed. Within  the tenement package gold is  being targeted in remnants  of  reworked Archaean Yilgarn 
Craton material and where it has been remobilised  out of older material into shear zones during one or more of the 
several deformation events that have affected the area.  
 
Lake Cowan Project  
 
Metalicity’s primary focus  at Lake Cowan  (Figures  1, 7) is  the lithium  potential of  the pegmatites adjacent to the 
Bald Hill  tantalum operation. However, gold  is  also  being targeted both  in  bedrock  and  where it may  have been 
weathered out of bedrock and deposited within younger palaeo-channels. Support for this latter model comes from 
drill intercepts up to 1m @ 3.0g/t Au in 11BDAC015 within grit in an inferred palaeo-channel  within the tenement 
area (Figure 7, Burgess and Wilson,  2012). Follow  up work planned  by Metalicity will include  air core drilling  along 
the palaeo-channel, and soil sampling in the eastern portion of the tenement area to vector toward concealed gold 
mineralisation that may be the primary source for the gold now found in the palaeo-channel. S2 Resources Limited’s 
Nanook  Project  is  an  example  of  a recent palaeo-channel  hosted  discovery  to  the western  end  of  Lake  Cowan, 
approximately 30km to the southwest (See S2 Resources ASX release 3/5/2016).
Metalicity Limited 
ASX Code: MCT 
ABN: 92 086 839 992
www.metalicity.com.au 
6 Outram Street 
West Perth WA 6005
Gold Project Strategy Update 
 
The Company  is currently evaluating several gold acquisition  opportunities  consistent  with its strategy of adding 
projects to its portfolio  which it believes  will be value accretive for shareholders.  Corporate advisors  have been 
engaged to assist with this process.
In conjunction,  Metalicity continues  to evaluate the optimal corporate structure to both progress  its gold portfolio 
and realise the significant  shareholder value that exists within these projects. This includes  the potential to 
restructure the assets into a new listed vehicle. Any potential divestment  will require normal shareholder  and 
regulatory approval.
Metalicity Managing Director, Matt Gauci, commented:  
 
“Exploration is  underway across our portfolio of  highly prospective gold projects at  the  same time  as  we 
progress the development of our Admiral Bay zinc project. We have engaged corporate advisors to support our 
ongoing strategy to  add projects to  our  portfolio which  we  believe  have the  potential  to  add  significant 
shareholder value. We will continue to consider other alternatives to realise shareholder value from our gold 
assets.”
2
Figure 1:  Metalicity Western Australian Gold and Silver projects
Source:  Metalicity
3
Figure 2: Metalicity projects in the Albany Fraser Belt over regional geology.
Figure 3: Rocky Gully Project showing priority gold targets over total magnetic intensity image.
4
Figure 4: G4 gold target showing historic surface sampling results over total magnetic intensity image.
Figure 5: G2 and MB1 gold targets showing historic surface sampling results over total magnetic intensity.
5
Figure 6: Phillips River Project tenure over regional geology.
Figure 7: Lake Cowan project over regional geology with historic drilling and 1m @ 3g/t intercept in 
11BDAC015.
6
ENQUIRIES
Investors
Matt Gauci 
Managing Director 
+61 8 9324 1053  
mgauci@metalicity.com.au 
 
About Metalicity Limited
Media
Michael Vaughan 
Fivemark Partners 
+61 422 602 720 
michael.vaughan@fivemark.com.au
Metalicity  Limited  is  an Australian  mining  exploration  company  with  a  primary  focus  on  base  metals  sector  and the 
development  of the world class Admiral Bay Zinc Project,  located in the north west of Australia. The company is currently 
undertaking a Pre-Feasibility  study on Admiral Bay. The Company’s secondary focus is the rare  and precious metals secto r 
where  early  stage  exploration  has  commenced.  The  Company is  supported  by  a management  team  with  300+  years 
collective  experience  in the resources  sector.
Competent Person Statement
The  Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves (the  ‘JORC Code’)  sets 
out  minimum  standards, recommendations and guidelines for  Public Reporting in Australasia of Exploration Results, 
Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves. The Information contained in this announcement has been presented in accordance 
with the JORC Code. Information in this report relating to Exploration results at the Rocky Gully and Lake Cowan Projects  
has been  compiled from  historic data  by  Pip Darvall who has sufficient experience  which is relevant  to  the  style of 
mineralisation and type  of  deposit  under  consideration and to  the  activity which  he  is undertaking  to  qualify as a 
Competent  Person as defined by the 2012 Edition of the Australasian Code for reporting of Exploration Results, Mineral 
Resources and Ore Reserves.  Mr Darvall consents to the inclusion of the data in the form and context in which it appears.
See ASX Announcement  on 4/7/16 regarding the  Mineral Resource Estimate at the Admiral Bay Project.
References:  
 
Askins,  P., and Stewart, J. I., 2008. LAKE KATHERINE PROJECT Annual Report for E70/2841  for the Period 23 
January 2007 to 22 January 2008. (Askins  sampling data).
Burgess, A. I., and Wilson,  S. W., 2012. Blue Dam (Yardina) Project Annual Mineral Exploration Report Tenement 
E15/1128 For the period 16/4/2011  to 15/4/2012.
Grunsky, E.C., 1988. Laterite Geochemistry in the CSIRO-AGE Database for the Albany-Fraser  Region (Vol.1 
CSIRO/AMIRA Laterite Geochemistry  ProjectP240, Exploration  Geoscience Restricted Report 161R. (AGE sampling 
data).
Kennedy, G., 2001. Supersorb  Joint Venture E70/1953  Annual  Report for the Year Ending 2/6/2001. (Anglo - 
Minorco sampling  data).
7