
EXECUTION COPY
W
SPONSOR GUARANTEE
damd as of
December 15, 2005
 among
 Inmet Mining Corporation
as Guarantor
and
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce
as Administrative Agent and Collateral Agem
on behalf ofthe
La: Cruccs Lenders
(as such term is deﬁned herein)
W
mmk. [0234“)! _


TABLE OF CONTENTS ‘
Ll 
13 Interpretation 
1.4 Headings and Table ofComcnts 
1.7 General Provisions as to Certiﬁcates and Opinions, etc. 
 3.1 
 3.2 lmpaixmem 
3 33 Amount oquaranwed Obligations 
3,4 Paymmt on Demand
3.5 Assignment and Postponement 
3.6 Suspension of Guarantor 
3.7 No Prejudice to Las Cruccs Lenders or Adminisuative Agent....,...........................21
3.8 Subrogation 
3.9 No Set Oﬁ'by Gum-amm- 
3.10 Successors ofthe 
3.11 Cominuing Guarantee
3.13 Security for Guarantee 
3.14 Limited
3.15 Taxes and Other 
ARTICLE 4 REPRESENTATIONS AND 
4.1 Organimtion; Pawns
4.2 Authoﬁzalion; 
4.3 Governmental Approvals; No 
4.4 Financial Condition; No Material Adverse Change
4.5 Litigation 
4.6 Compliance with Applicable Laws and Agreements
4.8 mership ofPropeny 
4.12 Subsidiaries
4.14  .
4.15 Environmental  
DOCSTOR: imam: 


_ z .
4.16 
ARTICLE 5 POSITIVE COVENANTS OF THE 
5.1 Financial Smamms and Other 
5.2 Existencc; Conduct ufBusincss 
5.3 Paymem ofObﬁgations
5.4 Maintenance 
55 Books and Rccords; Inspection 
56 Compliance wimEnvitonmmml Laws; Envmmmemal Liability 
5.8 Insurance 
5.9 Opemion and Mainmnence ofProperty 
I, 5.10 Financial Covenants
 5.11 
*’ 5.12 Project 
ARTICLE 6 NEGATIVE COVENANTS OF THE GUARANTOR 
6.1 
6.4 
6.5 Loans or Advances 
6.6 
6.7 Hedging 
6.8 Dividends 
6.9 Transactions with Afﬁliates 
6.10 chaymcut 
5.12 Pension Plan 
6.13 Sale at Discount of
6.14 
6.15 Non-Connolled 
6.16 Non-Camoﬂed [meant-ms
ARTICLE? EVENTS OF 
7.] Events 
7.3 Other 
7.4 Ranedics Not Exclusive 
8.2 Acknowledgcmm! oquaramor 
8.3 Expenses;  :
8.4  
8.5  "


. 3 .
8,7 Successurs and 
8.9 Governing Law, Jurisdiction; Consent to Service of
8.10 Authority of Adminisn'stivc Agent 
8‘11 Counterparts; ‘
W — List of Guam»: Security Documents
3mm: “B” —- Disclosed Matters
ﬁhedule “C” — Inn-Act Permitted Hedging Prognm
 gcheduxe “a” — Permitted Indebtedness
‘  - Subm'diaﬁes
Bxh’bit I — Form of Compliance Certiﬁcate


SPONSOR GUARANTEE -

SPONSOR GUARANTEE (the "Gunrnntee") dated as of December 15, 2005 made by
Inmer Mining Outpomion (the "Gust-enter") to and in favour of the Canadian Imperiel Bank of
Commerce, acting as agent for (i) the Agents and Lenders under the herein deﬁned Credit
Agreement and (ii) the Permitted Hedging Lenders, in such capacity together with any successor
agent which may be appointed from time to time and its assigns (the “Adminiatraﬁve Agent'ﬁ.

WHEREAS pursuant to a Credit Agreement dated as ofthe date hereof (as the same may
be amended, supplemented, revised, restated or rele from time to time, the “Credit
Agreement”) hemeen Cobre Las Cruces, SA. (the “Company"), as borrower, Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce, as sole lead arranger, Technical Agent. NA Collamal Agent and
Administrative Agent, the Bank of Nova Scotia, Societé Ghérale and Baum Bilbao Vizcaya
Argentnria. as Co-Arrangers and Eta-Syndication Agents, Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentnrin, as
European Collateral Agent, and the banks and the ﬁnancial institutions named an the execution
page: thereof together with such other banks and ﬁnancial  who may become party
thereto from time to time, as lenders (the “Lenders"), the Lenders have agreed to make certain
senior secured project ﬁnance credit facilities available to Company consisting of: (i) a senior
secured term credit facility for the Company in an aggregate amount not exceeding
US$240,000,000 std designated as Tranche A (the "Tnnehe A Facility“) for the purposes of
assisting the Company in the ﬁnancing ofa portion ofthe direct and indirect costs in respect of
the development, cause-mien, procurement and start up of the Les Cmoes copper mine
development project in Southern Spain (collectively, the "Project"); and (ii) a senior secured
bridge credit facility for the Company in an aggregate mount of up to 6,159,000,000 and
designated as Tranche B (the “Tranche B Fncility") for the purposes of bridge ﬁnancing to the
reimbursement of VAT and the payment of certain government grants and subsidies in respect of
the Project and for other moses contained in the Credit Agreement;

AND WHEREAS ﬁtcun time to time (i) certain of the Lenders and other Permitted
Hedging lenders (as deﬁned in the Credit Agreement) may enter into Permitted Hedging '
Agreements (as defined in the Credit Agreement) with the Company; and (ii) lnmet Permitted
Hedging Lenders may W into Inmet Permitted Hedging Agreements with the Guarantor;

AND WHEREAS the Gimantcr holds, directly or indirectly, 70% of the Equity
Securities of the Company;

AND WHEREAS the Guarantor has agreed to execute and deliver this Guarantee to end
in favour of the Lenders and the Permitted Hedging Lenders (the Lenders and the Permitted
Hedging Lenders are collectively referred to herein as the "Las Cruces Lenders“) and the
Administrative Agent to guarantee, subjem to the terms and conditions of this Gimme, on a
several and not join: basis its pru ram share (consisting of 70%) of the payment of all present
and future debts, liabilities and obligations, direct or indirect, absolute or contingent of the
Company to the La: Cranes Lenders and the Administrative Agent arising pursuant to or in
respect of the Credit Agreement, the other Loan Documents and the Permitted Hedging
Agreements to which the Company is a party as set out herein;

AND WHEREAS as of the date hereof the Guaranttor has executed and delivered to the
NA Collateral Agent, the Guarantor Security Documents (are hereinaﬁer deﬁned) as continuing

, cocsmm 3022mm


r 2 .
collateral security for the obligations of the Guarantor, (i) under this Guarantee prior to the
Guarantee Termination Event; and (ii) under any Inmet Permitted Hedging Agreements;
AND WHEREAS the Guarantor Security Documents are held by the Collateral Agent
for the beneﬁt of the Secured Party Beneﬁciaries in accordance with the terms of the honor
Security Agency Agreement;
AND WHEREAS it is also a condition to the execution of the Credit Agreement by the
Lenders that the Guarantor agrees for the beneﬁt of the lenders to fund its Pmporﬁonate Share
of Project Costs (including, for greater certainty. Cost Ovemms) related to the Project;
ANDWHEREASdiepartiesheretohnveagreedmattheobligations oftheGoar-amor
hereunder in respect of the Guaranteed Obligations as set forth in Article 2 shall be terminated
upon the later of Completion and the payment in full of the Guaranteed Obligations in respect of
 the Tranche 8 Facility; V
' NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises, the sum of $10.00 in

lawful money of Canada now paid by the Administrative Agent for itself and as agent for the

other Agents, the Lenders and the Permitted Hedging Lenders to the Guarantor and other good

and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufﬁciency of which are hereby eelnwwledged, tin

Guarzumr hereby agrees as follows:

ARTICLE 1
DEFINITIONS

1.! Definitions

In this Guarantee (including the recitals) and the Schedules hereto, unless the contact
otherwise requires: (a) the terms deﬁned in the introduction of the parties, the recitals and other
provisions hereof shall have, as herein used. the same meanings, (b) capitalized terms used
herein and not otherwise deﬁned shall have the respective meanings attributed to them in the
Credit Agreement, and (c) the following capitalized terms shall have the following meanings:

“Afﬁliate” means with respect to any Person, another Person that directly, or indirectly
through one or more intermediaries, Controls or is Controlled by or is under common Control
with, such Person.

“Applicable Law" mans all applicable Canadian, European Union, Spanish, federal,
provincial, municipal, foreign and international stamtes, acts, codes, ordinances, decrees, treaties,
rules, regulations, municipal by-laws, judicial or arbitral or administrative or  or
departmental or regulatory judgments, orders, decisions, rulings or awards or any provisions of
the ﬁrregoing, and all policies, practices and guidelines of any Governmental Agency binding on

i the Person referred to in the context in which such word is used (including, in the case of Tax
matters, any accepted practice or application or ofﬁcial interpretation of any relevant taxation
authority).

"Asset Disposition“ means, with respect to any Person, any direct or indirect sale,
exchange, assignment, lease. license, transfer, or other disposition of any of its business, assets. :
shares, rights, revenues or other property (whether now owned or hereinaﬁer acquired, tangible 


. 3 .
or intangible), by such Petson or any Subsidiary thueof, whetha in one uansaction or a series of
transactim

"Authorization" means, with Inspect to any Person, any suihoﬁation, order, permit,
approval, grant, licence, consent, right, franchise, pn‘vilege, certiﬁcate, judgment, writ
injxmetion. award, deteminaticn, ditection, decree, Ivy-law, rule or regulation nf any
Governmental Authority having jurisdiction over such Poison.

“Capital Lease Obligations" of any Person means the obligations of such Person to pay
rent or other amounts under any lease of (or other arrangement conveying the right to use) real or
personal property, or a combination themaf, which obligations are required to be classiﬁed and
accounted for as capital leases on a balance sheet of such Person under GAAP and the amount of
such obligations shall be the capitalized amount titexeof determined in accordance with GAAP.

 "Cuh Equivalent" means,

 (a) in the case of the Guarantor:

'y (3) investments in ditect obligations of Canada or the United States of
America, including Canadian or United States of America federal,
provincial or state obligations, with maturities of one year or less
fmm the date of acquisition of the investment and having short-
term credit ratings afar least Al by 8&1’. P] by Moody’s will by
Dominion Bond Rating Service Ltd;

(ii) investments in certiﬁcates of deposit or acceptances of maturities
less than one year, issued by commercial banks or ﬁnancial
institutions in Canada or the United States of America having
combined capital and surplus in excess of $500,000,000 and
having shortcterm credit ratings of at least A1 by 8&1’. P1 by
Moody’s or R] by Dominion Bond Rating Service Ltd;

(iii) investments in commercial paper issued by issuers resident in
Canada or the United States of America of mmn'tist of not more
than 270 days rated at least A1 by SM, Pl by Moody‘s or R] by
Domitian Bond Rating Service L11;

(iv) investments in securities that are obligations of Canada or the
United States of America purchased by the Guarantor under
mpumhsse agreements pursuant to which arrangements are made
with selling ﬁnancial instimtimts (being a ﬁnancial insn't-ntion
having unimpaired capital and surplus of not less than
$500,000,000 and with shun-tam credit ratings of at least A] by
S&P, P1 by Moody’s or R1 by Dominion Bond Rating Service

Ltd.) for such ﬁnancial imtitutions to repurchase such aecurin‘es ;
within 30 days from the date of pomltase by the Guarantor, and a
other similar short-term investments made in connection with the g
Guarantor’s cash management muses; provided that the

Guarantor shun take possession of all secun'ties purchased by the ;


_ . 4 .

Guarantor under reme agreemmts and shall adhere to
customary margin and mark-to—market procedures with respect to
ﬂuctuations in value; and

(v) investments in any  issued by an investment company
registered under Section 8 of the Invesmem Company Act of D40
(15 C. 8014-8) that is a money market ﬁmd in compliance with all
applicable requirements of Securities and Exchange Commission
Rule 23-7 (1 7 CFR 27023-7);

(b) in the case ofCayeli:

(i) investments in US Dollar term deposits with mamrities of one year
, or less US Dollar denominated direct obligations of the United
 States of America including federal obligations with maturities of
 one year or less, US Dollar term deposits with 'l‘urkish ﬁnancial
‘ institutions that are restricted to the top leading and reputable
banks in Turkey as deﬁned by capital and or alternatively to
foreign branches of major international ﬁnancial institutions

located in Turkey; and

(c) in the case ofany other Subsidiary that is a Credit Party:

' (i) investments in euro and US Dollar denominated term deposits with
» European ﬁnancial institutions with short term credit ratings of at
least “A” as deﬁned by SkP’s, and with maturities of no longer
than one year and US Dollar and euro denominated commercial
paper with credit ratings ofal least “A” as deﬁned by 8&1’.

“Cayeli” means Cayeli Bald: lsletrnelcri A.S., a corporation incorporated under the laws
of Turkey.

“Change in Control" man: the acquisition of ownership, directly or indirectly,
beneﬁcially or of record, by any Power: or group of Persons, acting jointly or outerwise in
concert, of (3) Equity Securities representing more than 50% of the aggregate ordinary voting
power represented by the ismed and ammding Equity Securities of the Guarantor or (1)) Equity
Securities of the Guarantor representing a lesser percentage of thc aggregate ordinary voting
power which is, in and of itself, ruﬁicient, if exercised, to elect a majority of the board of
directors of the Guarantor.

"Collateral" means the property described in and subject to the Liens. privileges,
priorities, hypothecs and security interests purported to be created by any Guarantor Security
Documents.

“Collateral Agent" means the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce in its capacity as
Collateral Agent on behalfofand for the beneﬁt of the Les Cmccs Lenders and the lame!
Permitted Hedy‘ng Lenders in accordance with the lnmet Security Agency Agreement, and shall
include its W and assigns in such capacity 


. 5 .

"Commitment" in relation to a Lender means, except as may be adjusted pursuant In the
terms of the Credit Agreement, the amount set out opposite its name on W of the
Credit Agreement as its oorrunitmem in respect cfthe Tranche A Facility and the Tranche B
Facility.

"Commodity Swap Agreement" means any contract for the purchase or sale for future
delivery of commodities (whether or not the subject oorrunodities are to be delivered, and
whether a "pm" or a "call"), hedging contract, forward contract, swap ageunent. futures
contract. option contract, cap or collar agreement or other commodity pricing protection
agreement or option with respect to any such transaction (or any combination of the foregoing, or
any derivative thereof), designed to hedge against ﬂuctuations in prim of the subject
commodities.

“Compliance Certiﬁcate" means a certiﬁcate of a Responsible Oﬂicer substantially in
the form of Exhibit It

"Constaﬁng Documentr" means, with respect to any Person. its articles or certiﬁcate of
incorporation, amendment, mnalgamxtiun or continuance, lay—laws, partnership agreement,
limited pamership agreement, declaration of trust trust indcnume or other similar document as
may be applicable together with any shmholders’ agreements, unanimous slureholder
declarations, voting trust agreements or similar agreements or arrangements applicable to such
Person's shares, units, patmcrship interests or other similar rights in such Person's equity or
capital ﬁrm: time to time. »

"Constitution" means the constitution of OK Tedi in eﬂ'cct as of the date hereoﬁ

"Consumables Hedging Agreement" means any contract for the purchase or sale for
future delivery of consumables (whether or not the subject consumables are to be delivered, and
whether a “put” or a "cail"), hedging contract, forward contract, swap agreement, futures
contract, option contract, cap or collar agreement or other consumable pricing protection
agreement or option with respect to any such tramacn'on (or any combination of the foregoing, or
any derivative thereoﬁ, designed to hedge against ﬂuctuations in prices of the subject
consumbles.

"Con Business" has the meaning set forth in Section 63(1)).

"Care Business Asset" means any asset used in the Core Business by the Guarantor, or
by any Subsidiary of the Guarantor or any other Person in which the Guarantor has a direct or
indirect interest.

“Credit Agreement" has the meaning set forth in the recitals hereto.

"CreditvParty" means the Guarantor, each of its Subsidiaries and any other Person which
is a party to a Financing Document (other than Lcucadia, the Administrative Agent, the
Collateral Agents, the [met Permitted Hedging Lenders, the Las Cmces Lenders and their
respective successors and assigns).

"Current Assets" means all assets of the Guarantor on a consolidated basis which under
GAAP would be classiﬁed as current assets.


_ 5 .

"Current Liabilities" means all liabilities of the Guarantor on a consolidated basis
which under GAAP would be classiﬁed as current liabilities.

"Current Ratio" means, on any day, the ratio of Comm Assets to Current Liabilities.

"Default" means any event or condition which oonstimtes an Event of Default or which,
upon notice, lapse of time or both, would, unless cured or waived, become an Event ofDefaulL

"Delay Event“ means any event, whether similar to the following or not, which is not
within the reasonable control of OR Tedi and could not, by the exercise of reasonable efforts.
have been avoided by 0k Tedi and shall include, subject to the foregoing and without limitation:

(a) a weather event or pattern that impairs the ability of 01: Tedi to transport

concentrates from the project (as deﬁned in the FSRA) indie normal course;

0:.) ﬁre, explosion, lightning, stun-n, tempest, hmricane, tornado, ﬂood, bursting or

overﬂowing of water tanks, apparatus or pipes, ionizing radiation, earthquake, riot or

civil commotion;

(c) failure by any utility, local, governmental or regulatory authority or other like

body to carry out works or provide services;

(:1) without prejudice to any obligation of 0): Tedi to provide stand-by power

facilities, failure or shortage of power fuel or transport;

(e) blockade or embargo;

(i) the discovery of fossils,  or human remains requiring action in

accordance with Applicable Laws; or

(g) ofﬁcial or unofﬁcial strike, lockout, work to rule or other industrial action in each

case generally aﬁecting the mining industry (or a signiﬁcant sector ofthat industry),

“Disclored Matters" means the actions, suits and proceedings and the environmental
matters disclosed in sshidglg "B".

'Euvimnmental Law" means all applicable federal, provincial, local or foreign laws,
rules, regulations, codes, ordinances, orders, decrees, judgments. injunctions, notices or binding
agreements issued, promulgated or entered into by any Governmental Authority, having the force
of law and relating to the environment, including the preservation or reclamation of amoral
resources and the generation, use, handling, collection, treatment, storage, transportation,
recovery, recycling, release, threatened release or disposal of any Hazardous Material.

“Equity Securities" mans with respect to any Person, any and all shares, interests,
partieipaiiom. rights in, or other equivalent (however designated and whether voting and non-
voting) of, such Person‘s capital, Whether outstanding on the date hereof or issued after the date
hereof, including any interest in a partnership, limited parmership or other similar Person and
any beneﬁcial interest in a trust, and any and all rights, warrants, options or other rights
exchangeable {or or convertible into any oftl‘le foregoing,


. 7 .

"Equivalent Amount“ means on any date, the ammtnt of U.Sl dollars into which an
amount of Canadian dollars can be convened or the amount of Canadian dollars into which an
mourn of U.S. dollars may be convened by applying the Bank of Canada noon rate on such

. date. '

"Event of Default” means has the meaning set forth in Section 7,].

"Exchange Rate Swap Agreement" means any contract for sale, purchase, or exchange
or for future delivery of foreign cmrency (whether or not the subject currency is to be delivered
or exchanged), hedging contract, forward contract, swap agreement, futures contract, or other
foreign exchange proremion agreement or option with respect to any such transaction (or any
onmbinau'on of the foregoing or any derivative thereof), designed In hedge against ﬂuctuations in
foreigi exchange rates.

"Excluded Taxes” means, with respeetto my Lus Cruoes Lender, any Agent or my other
recipient of any payment to be made by or an account of the Guaranteed Obligations, (5) taxes
imposed on or measured by its net income or capital. and ﬁnnehise taxes imposed on it (in lieu of
net income taxes), by the jurisdiction (or any political subdivision thereof) under the laws of
which such recipient is organized or in which its principal oﬁio: is located or, in the case of any
Lender, in which its Applicable Lending Ofﬁce is located, and (b) any branch proﬁts taxes or
any. similar tax imposed by anyjurisdietion in which the lender is located.

"Existing Hedger" means Macquarie Bank Limited and/or Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce.

"Existing Hedging Agreements“ means the Hedging Agreements entered into between
the Guarantor and the Existing Badgers in connection with the 2002 Credit Agreemmt that
main misreading.

"Financing Documents" means this Guarantee, the Guarantor Security Documents, any
Inmet Pens-lined Hedging Agreements together with any other document, instrument at
agreement (other than participation, agency or similar agreements among the Lenders or between
any Lender and any other bank or creditor with respect to any indebtedness or obligations of the
Guarantor or any Subsidiary thereof (as applicable) hereunder or dietemder) now or hereaﬁer
entered into in connection with this Guarantee (including the lnmet Security Agency
Agreement), as such documents, instruments or agreements may be amended, modiﬁed or
supplemented from time to time.

"Fiscal Quarter" means any ﬁscal quarter of the Guarantor.

"Fiscal Year" means any ﬁscal year of the Guarantor

"FRSA" means the Fourth Restated Shareholders Agreement dated December 11, 2001,
entered into by and among The Independent State of Papua New Guinea. lnmet Mining
Corporation, Mineral Resources 01: Tedi No. 2 Limited, PNG Sustainable Development Program
Limited and 0k Tedi Mining Limited.

“Future Assets" means all Operating Assets acquired aﬁcr the Closing Date by the
Guarantor, any Subsidiary of the Guarantor or any other Person in which the Guarantor has a.


. g _
direct or indirect urterest , respectively, partially or wholly. Future Assets shall also include the
shares of the Person owning such Operating Assets, and "Future Asset" means any one of the
Future Assets.

“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles in Canada in effect from time
to time.

“Governmental Authority" means the Govenmtent of Councils, any other nation or any
political subdivision thereof, whether provincial. state, territorial or local, and any agency,
authority, insmmentality, regulatory body, court, cenu'al bank, ﬁscal or monetary authority or
other ombority regulating ﬁnancial instimlions, and my other entity exercising executive,
legislative, judicial, taxing, regulatory or administrative powers or ﬁrnctions of or pertaining to
government.

"Guaranteed Obligations" has the meaning attributed thereto in Section 21(5). -

“Guarantee Termination Event“ shall occur at any time Inmet’s liability in respect of
the Guaranteed Obligations under Article 2 hereof has been terminated by the terms hereof
(whether by operation of Section 2.1(c) or satisfaction ofthe Guaranteed Obligations).

"Guarantor Security Documents" means the agreements or instruments described in
M "A" and any and all other agreements or instruments now or hereafter executed and
delivered by the Guarantor, any Subsidiary of the Guarantor or my other Ferson as security for
the payment or performance of (i) the obiigetions of the Guarantor hereunder, and (ii) the
obligatiom of the Guarantor or any of its Subsidiaries under any Inmet Permitted Hedging
Agramwm, as any of the foregoing may have been, or may hereafter be. amended, modiﬁed or
supplemented.

"Hazardous Mitotic!“ means any substance, product, liquid, waste, pollutant, chemical,
contaminant, insecticide, pesticide, gaseous or solid matter, organic or inorganic matter, fuel,
micro organism, my, odour, radiation, energy, vector, plasma, constituent, material or any
combination thereof which (a) is listed, regulated or addressed under any Environmental Law, or
(b) is hazardous, ham-dons waste, toxic, a pollutant, a deleterious substance, a contaminant or a
source of pollution or contamination under any Environmental Law, including, petrolemn and
polychlorinsted biplienyls, including petroleum distillates, asbestos or asbestos containing
materials, radon gas, infectious or medical wastes and all other substances or wastes of any
nature regulated pursuantto my Environmental Law.

"Hedging Agreements" means (ﬂatly Commodity Swap Agreement, (ii) any Interest
Rate Protection Agreement, (iii) any Exchange Rate Swap Agreement, or (iv) Commables
Hedging Agreement made available to the Guarantor and its Subsidiaries.

"Hodglng Transaction" means any transaction represmted by an agreement or '
conﬁmtation implementing or chemise relating to a rate swap transaction, basis swap, forward
rate Emotion. commodity swap, commodity option, equity or equity index swap, equity or

equity index option, bond option, interest me option, foreign exchange transaction, cap
transaction, ﬂoor transaction, collar connection, currency swap mamion. currency option,
commodity transaction or credit derivative transaction.


- 9 .

"Indebtedness" of any Person includes, Without duplication, (a) all obligations of such
Person for borrowed money or with respect to deposits or advances of any kind, (b) all
obligatiom of such Person evidenced by hands, debentures, notes or similar instnnnents, (c) all
obligations of such Person under conditioml sale or other title retention agreements relating to
property acquired by such Person, (:1) all obligations of such Person in respect of the deferred
purchase price of property or services (excluding current accounts payable incurred in the
ordinary course of business), (e) all Indebtednas of others seemed by (or for which the holder of
such Indebtedness has an existing rigid, contingent or otherwise, to be secured by) any Lien on
property owned or acquired by such Person, whether or not die Indebtedness secured thereby has
been assumed, (i) all guarantees by such Person of Indebtedness of others, (3) all Capital Lease
Obligations of such Person, (h) ail obligations, contingent or otherwise, of such Person as an
account party in respect of letters of credit and letters of guarantee, (i) all obligrnious, contingent
or otherwise, of such Person in respect of bankers‘ acceptances, (j) the net mount of obligations
of such Person (determined on a marked-tomatket basis) under any Hedging Agreements. The
Indebtedness of any Person shall include the Indebtedness of any other Person (including any
parmership in which such other Person is a general or limited partner) to the extent the ﬁrst such
Person is liable therefor as a result of such Person’s ownership interest in or other relationship
with the other Person, except to the merit the terms of such Indebtedness provide that the ﬁrst
Pemn is not liable thmfor.

'Tndemnitee" shall have the meaning set ford: in Section 8.30:).

"Information" has the meaning attributed thereto in Section 4.4(c).

“Initial Dnde Date" means the date of the ﬁrst Borrowing made under the Credit
Agreement

"Inmet Group" means the Guarantor and all of its Subsidiaries. I

“Inmet Hedging Obligntiom“ means all liabilities, if any, of the Guarantor under any
Inmet Permitted Hedging Agreement

"Inmet Permitted Hedging Agreement" means a Hedging Agreement:

(it) entered into among (i) the Guarantor, and (ii) an Inmet Permitted Hedging
Lender;

(b) entered into in the ordinary course of business (but not for speculative purposes)
to hedge or mitigate risks to which the Guarantor is exposed in the conduit of its
business or the management of its liabilities; and

(c) containing terms and provisions consistent with the knot Permitted Hedging
Program as approved by the Lenders,

provided that the Boosting Hedging Agreements shall constitute inane: Permitted Hedging
Agreements hereunder pending nmoff of the existing Hedging Transactions thereunder.
"Inrnet Permitted Hedging Lenders" means:


. lo _

(a) a Las Cruces Lender,

(b) an Existing Hedger; and

(c) any other Person xhat

(i) is a ﬁnancial institution and has a long term credit rating of A or
better with 8&1’ and A2 or better with Moody‘s; and

(ii) has been approved as an lnmet Permitted Hedging Lender by the
Majority Lenders;

and "Inmet Permitted Hedging Lender" means any one of them.

. "Inmet Permitted Hedging Program" means the scope and general policy of the
Grammars commodity, consumables, foreign exchange and interest rate hedging program,
including, without limitation, hedging limits, team, forms of agreements (including satisfactonr
form of intercreditor agreements, as required), permitted commparﬁes and restrictions all as
more pmtieularly described in M “C” hereto.

"Interest Rate Protection Agreement" means any rate swap, rate cap, rate ﬂoor, rate
collar, forward rate agreement, ﬁxtures or other rate protection agreement or option with respect
to any such transaction (or any combination of the foregoing, or any derivative thereof), designed
to hedge against ﬂuctuations in interest rates

"inner Security Agency Agreement" means the security sharing and agency agreement
dated as of the date hereof among the Guarantor, the Collateral Agent, the European Collateral
Agar: and the other Secured Putty Beneﬁciaries.

'Interearporate Indebtedness" has the meaning set forth in Section 3.5(a)

"Joint Control" means, in respect of any Person, the wommally agreed sharing by the
Guarantor with other Persons of the continuing power to determine such Person‘s strategic,
operating, investing and ﬁnancing policies where the sharing of such power results in the
Guarantor proportionately consolidating the income, assets and liabilities of such Person with the
consolidated accounts ofthe Guarantor.

"Lax Croce: Lenders" has the meaning set forth in the recitals hereto and "Las Croce:
Lender" means any one of them.

"Mucadin" means Leucadia National Corporation.

"Leucadia Sponsor Guarantee" means the Sponsor Guarantee of even date herewith
executed by Leucadia in favour of the Administrative Agent for itself and as agent for the m
Cmces Lenders.


_ 11 .

"Lien" means, with respect to the property of any Person any of a mortgage, plaige,
; hypothecatiou, encumbrance, lien (statutory or other), privilege. charge or other security interest
of any kind in or with respazt to such property or any part thereof (including. without limitation,
any conditional sale or other title retention agreement, and any ﬁnancing lme under which such
Person is lessee having substantially the some economic effect as any of the foregoing) or my
other arrangement that, directly or indirectly, has substantially the same effect as any of the
foregoing or any right conferred to a creditor of such Person or which places a creditor of such
Person in a position. which enables such creditor effectively, with or without legal process, to
realize upon, retain or otherwise enforce rights against1 any of such Person‘s property, assets or

undertaking (including, without limitation, proceeds thereof)

"Liquidity" means cash and Cash Equivalents.

"Material Adverse Change“ means with respect to the Guarantor on a consolidated
basis any eVent, development or circumstance that has or oould reasonably be expected to have a
material adverse eﬂ‘cct on the business, asses. liabilities (including environmental liabilities).
operations, results of operations or conditions (ﬁnancial or otherwise) ofthe Guarantor or on the
prospects thereof, or on the ability to carry on the business of the Guarantor or a signiﬁcant part
thereof, which, either alone or in combination. impairs or is reasonably likely to impair the
ability of the Guarantor to perform any of its material obligations under any Financing
Dominant; provided that a negative change in metal prices or currency exchange rates shall not
constitute a Material Adverse Change.

“Material Subsidiary" means, at any time (a) a Subsidiary of the Guarantor which has
gross assets representing 10 percent (10%) or more of the consolidated gross assem of the Imnet
Group (and for this purpose “gross assets" shall mean the sun of ﬁxed assets, current assets
(including, for greater certainty, intangible assets) and investments as disclosed in the most
recent fuiancial statements of that Subsidiary or the Inmet Group. is the case may be), and (b) a
Subsidiary of the Guarantorthat owns, directly or indirectly, an interest in a Strategic Asset.

“Moody’s” means Moody's Investors Services, Inc.

“Non-Controlled Investment" means, at any time, any Future ASSet that is not
Controlled by the Guarantor at such time.

"Non-Recourse Indebtedness“ means Indebtedness of the Guarantor or a Subsidiary of
the Guarantor under which the holder of the Indebtedness may not look to the covenant of the
Guarantor or such Subsidiary but only to speciﬁed designated assus (the "Recourse Assets") for
payment including the cash ﬂow gmemted from such Recourse Asses; provided that, as of the
date of this Guarantee, such Recourse Assets shall not be owned directly or indirectly by the
Guarantor or any Subsidiary of the Guarantor and shall not be Operating Assets or part of the
Strategic Assets.

"Operating Assets" means the assets used in commercial production inciuding mining,
milling or processing. and the sale of metals and/or minerals and, for skater certainty, (i)
includes the Persons that use or own such assets, and (ii) excludes Care Business Assets that are
resource or development properties not in commercial production


.12-

"0k Tedi" means 0k Tent Mining Limited, a corporation incorporated under the laws of
Papua New Guinea.

“Ownership Agreement" means, in respect of a Non-Controlled Investment, any
shareholder agreement, joint venture agreement, partnership agreement, co-tenancy agreement.
declmtion oftnut or deed of trust, management agreement or other agreement applicable to the
rights of the Guarantor with respect to the ownership of such Non-Controlled investment
"Permitted Liens" means (3) Lin: for the obligations of the Guarantor or any Subsidiary of the
Guarth in favour of (i) the Las Cruces Lenders under or pursuant to any of the Financing
Documents, or (ii) the lnmet Permitted Hedging Lenders under or pursuant to any of the
Guarantor Security Documents, ['93) Liens granted by a Subsidiary of the Guarantor in favour of
the Guarantor in order to seem any of such Subsidiary‘s indebtedness to the Guarantor, (c)
Liens imposed by any Governmental Authority for Taxes not yet due arid delinquent or Much
are being contested in good faith in accordance with Section 5.3. and, during such period during
which such Liens are being so contested. such Liens shall not be executed on any of the assets of
the Guarantor or any of its Subsidiaries, (d) carrier’s, wmhonsemen's, meehanios',
materielmen’s, repmrmen's and other like Liens arising by operation of Applicable Law, such as
prior claims, legal hypotheos securing the claims ofPersons having taken part in the construction
or renovation ofen immovable, arising in the ordinary course of business, which are not overdue
or which are being contested in good faith and by appropriate proceedings, and, during such
period during which such Liens are being so contested, such Liens shall not he executed on any
of the assets of the Guarantor or of any such Subsidiary, provided that the Guarantor or any such
Subﬁdiary shall have set aside on its books reserves deemed adequme therefor and not resulting
in qualiﬁcation by auditors, (e) statutory Liens incurred or pledges or deposits made under
worker’s compensation, unemploymt insurance and other social security legislation, (0 Liens
or deposits to Seems the performance of bids, tenders, trade contracts, leases, statutory
obligntions, surety and appeal bonds, performance bonds and other obligations of a like nature
(other than for borrowed money) incurred in the ordinary course of business, (3) serviuides,
easements, rights-of-way, resu'ictions and other similar encumbrmees on real property imposed
by Applimble Law or incurred in the ordinary course of business and encumbrances consisting
of zoning or building restrictions, easements, licenses, restrictions on the use of property or
minor imperfections in title thereto which, in the awegme, are not mania! in amount, and
which do not in any case materially detract from the value of the property subject thereto or
More with the ordinary conduct ofthe business of the Guarantor or my of its Subsidiaries, (h)
Liens of or resulting ﬁom any judgment or award, the time for the appeal or petition for
rehearing of which shall not have expired, or in respect of which the Guarantor or its
Subsidiaries shall at any time in good faith he prosecuting an appeal or proceeding for review
and in respect of which a stuy of execution pending such appeal or proceeding for review shall
have been secured, (1) Liens to secure Indebtedness, including Capital Lease Obligations,
permitted by Section 6.l(d), (i) Liens in respect of Tmilus concentrates sold in connection with a
holding certiﬁcate held by international Metals 8*. Materist Company Ltd. pursuant to a copper
concerto-ate sale agreement dated October 8, 2003 between the Guarmtor and International
Metals & Materials Company Ltd; (in) Purchase Money Liens permitted by Section 6.1(e) and
Section 6.10) and Liens seeming Indebtedness permitted under Sections 6.1(c)(iii), 6.101), 6.16),
6.10), and 6,!(k), (m) undetermined or inchoste Liens and charges arising or potentially arising
under statutory provisions which have not at the time been filed or registered in accordance with
Applicable Law or of which written notice has not been duly given in accordance with


. 13 .
Applicable Law or which although ﬁled or registered, relate to obligations not due or delinquent,
(n) the rights reserved to or vested in Governmental Amharities by statuary provisions or by the
terms of leases, licenses, ﬁnnehises, grants or permits, which affect any land, to terminate the
leases, licenses, franchises, yams or permits or to require armual or other periodic payments as a
condition of the continuance thereof, (0) security to public utilities or to any municipalities or
Governmental Authorities or other public wthority when required by the utility. municipality or
Governmntal Authorities or other public authority in connection with the supply of services or
utilities to the Guarantor or its Subsidiaries, (p) Liens or covenants restricting or prohibiting
access to or from lands abutting on controlled access highways or covenants meeting the use to
which lands may be put; proﬁded, however, that, in the case of a Subsidiary of the Guarantor
such Liens or covenants do not materially and adversely aﬁ'ect the use of the lands by the
Guarantor or its Subsidiaries, (q) Liens consisting of a royalty paid by Cayeli Bakir Islctmeleri
AS. ("CHI") to Ed Holdings A3, a public corporation that is wholly-owned by the Government
5 of the Republic of Turkey and is the lessor under a Lease dated March 8, 1985 that granted the
 Cayeli mining concession and mining rights to C31, which royalty is paid annually by March 31
‘ and is equal to 7% of "net-aﬁer-tax proﬁts" (as deﬁned in the aforementioned Lease) of CE] for
the most recently completed ﬁscal year (subject to a minimtun annual royalty payable equivalent
to US$667,000 plus value added tax (in 2004, the amount of the royalty paid to Eti Holdings was
US$1,225,207), (r) Stamtory or other Liens incurred or pledges or deposits made in favour of a
Governmental Authority to secure the performance of obligations of the Guarantor or my of its
Subsidiaries under Environmental Laws including reclamation requirements to which any assets
of the Guarantor or such Subsidiary is subject, (5) a pledge by Cayeli of the shares of Artvin
Bakir Modem lsletmeleri A.S., (“ABMI”) the owner of the Cerateppe Property to secure Cayeli’s
deferred payment obligations to Cominco Mining Partnership in acquiring ABMI, (t) the
reservations, limitations, provisos and conditions, if any, messed in any original grant of any
real property or any interest therein, provided they do not materially reduce the value of the
assets of the Person or materially interfere with the use of such assets in the operation of its
business; and (u) any extension, renewal or replacement of any of the foregoing; provided.
however, that the Liens permitted hereunder shall not be extended to cover any additional
Indebtainess of the Guarantor and its Subsidiaries or their property (other than a substitution of
like property}

"Penon" includes any natural person, corporation, company, limited liability company,
trust, joint venture, association, incorporated organizatim, partnership, Gavan-mental Authority
or other entity

"Purchase Money Lien" means a Lien taken or reserved iii-personal property to seeure
payment of all or part of its purchase price, provided that such Lien (i) secures an amount not
exceeding the lesser of the purchase price of such personal property and the fair market value of
such personal property, (ii) extends only to such personal property and its proceeds, and (iii) is
granted within the time period permitted by Applicable Law.

“Pyhbaimi” means Pyhasalmi Mine OY, a corporation incorporamd and registered in
Finland

"Quarterly Date“ means each of the last day of each of March, June, September and l
December in each calendar year. -


- 14 -

“Recourse Azure" has the meaning set for the in the deﬁnition of ‘Non—Rccourse
Indebtednex.

"Related Parties“ means, with respect to any Person, such Person's Afﬁliate: and the
move directors, oﬁicers, employees, agents and advisers of such Person and of such
Pason’s Aﬁliaies.

"Responsible Oﬁicer" means. with respect to any corporation, the chairman, the
president, any vice president. the chief executive oﬁicer or the chief operating ofﬁcer, and, in
respect of ﬁnancial or accounting matters, the chief ﬁnancial oiﬁcer of such corporation; unless
otherwise speciﬁed, all references herein to a Responsﬂale Ofﬁcer mean a Responsible Ofﬁcer of
the Guarantor.

r "5&1" means Standard & Poor’s Rating Services, a division ochGraw-Hill, 1m.
 "Secured Party Beneficiariel" means, collectively, the Administrative Agent, the
5 Collateral Agent, the Las Cruces Lenders and the brute! Permitted Hedging Lenders

"Sponsor Contribution Amount" means, at any time, the mount of Sponsor
Contribution muimd at such time to be contributed by the Sponsors to fund their respective
Proportionate Shares 0f Project Costs, such Sponsor Contributions to be made as provided in the
Credit Agreemem

"Strategic Assets” means businesses carried on (and the asses used in the operation of
such businesses) by each of Pyhasalmi, Cayeli, 0k Tech and the Troilus Division of the
Guarantor, respectively, and “Strategic Asset“ means may one of the Strategic Assets.

"Subordinaled Debt“ means indebtedness for horrowm‘l money which is fully

subordinated as to principal, inmost, fees and other mounts and as to any security interest such
that no payments to the subordinate wedilor on acommt of principal may be made or accepted
other than payments of shares of the Guarantor issued from its treasury, and no actions may be
tak by the subordinate creditor no enforce its security until after the Guaranteed Obligations
and Inmet Permitted Hedging Obligations and all other amotmts due by the Guarantor to the
Secured Party Beneﬁciaries under the Financing Documents have been repaid and the
Borrowings have been cancelled or otherwise terminated; provided that payment of interest and
fees may he made in accordance with the provisions thereof so long as no Default or Event of
Delimlt is then outstanding,

“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person (the “parent? at any date, any Person
Controlled by (i) the parent, (it) the parent and one or more Persons each of which is Controlled
by the parent, (iii) two or more Persons, each of which is Controlled by the parent, or (iv) a
Person that is Controlled by the parent For geatcr certainty, "Subsidiary" of the Guarantor
includes, without limitation, lame: Finland OY, Pyhlisalmi, Cayeli and any Future Asset that is
not a Non-Controlled Investmer but excludes (x) 0!: Tedl (so long as it does not constitute a
Subsidiary of the Guarantor (y) the Company and (2) any Future Asset so long as it constitutes a t
Non—Controlled Investment. ‘

"Synthetic Purchase Agreement" means any mp, derivative or other agreement or 
combination of agreements pursuant to which the Guarantor Or any other Credit Party is or may


. 15 .

become obligated to make (i) any payment in connection with a purchase by any third party from
a Person other than the Guarantor or any other Credit Party of any Equity Securities, or (ii) any
payment (other than on account of a permitted purchase by it of any Equity Securities) the
amotmtofwhicbiedeierminedbyrefermoetotheprioeorvalueatanytimeornnyeqnty
Securities; provided that no phantom stock or similar plan providing for payments only to current
or former directors, officers or employees of the Guarantor or the other Credit Parties (or to their
heirs or estates) shall be deemed to be a Synthetic Purchase Ayeement.

'Tnngihle Net Worth" means, for the Guarantor on a consolidated basis (including, for
greater certainty, the Company), the excess of total consolidated assets over tom! consolidated
liabilities, as determined in accordance with GAAP on a consistent basis, provided, however,
that the determination of total consolidated assets shall exclude (i) all goodwill, Organimticmnl
expenses, research and development expenses, trade marks, trade mark applications, trade

; names, copyrights, patents, patent applications, licenses and rights in any thereof, and other ,
: similar hmgibles. (1i) all prepaid expenses, deferred charges or unamon‘ized debt discount and
expense, (iii) Equity Securities of, obligations or other securities of, or capital contributions to. or
investments in, any Subsidiary and the Company, (iv) seem-ides which, are not readily
marketable, (v) cash held in a sinking fund or other analogous fund established for the purpose of
redemption, retirement or prepayment of Equity Securities or Indebtedness, (vi) any write-up in
the book value of any asset resulting from s revaluation thereof; and (vii) any items not included
in clauses (i) through (vi) above which are treated as intangibles under GAAP.

"Tax" or “Taxes” means all taxes, charges, fees, levies, imposts and other assessments,
including all income sales, use, goods and services. value added, capital, capital gains,
alternative, net worth, transfer, proﬁts, withholding, payroll, employer health, excise, real
property and personal property taxes, and any other taxes, moms duties, fees, assessments, or
similar charges in the nature of 5 mx, including Canada Pension l‘lan and provincial pension phm
contributions, unemployment insurance payments and workers’ compensation premiums,
together with any install-news with respect thereto, and any interest, ﬁnes and penalties with
respect thereto, imposed by any Governmental Authority (including federal, state, provincial,
municipal and foreign Govenunentnl Authorities), and whether disputed or not;

"Trmmtions" means the execution, delivery and performance by the Guarantor and the
other Credit Parties or any Subsidiary or Alﬁliate of the Guarantor, of any of the Financing
Documents;

“2002 Credit Agreement" means the Credit Agreement dated as of February 28, 2002
among the Guarantor, as borrower. Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Macqum'ie Bank
Limited, Standard Bank London Limited, Wendeutsche Landesbank Gromuude and the other
lenders from time to time party thereto, as lenders and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce as
Administrative Agent and Technical Agent.

"(1.5. GAAP" means generally accepted acootntting principles in the United States of
America in effect ﬁ’om time to time.

1.2 References
Any reference made in this Guarantee to: j


- 15 .

(a) Any reference to Sections, Articles or Schedules is, unless otherwise indicated, to
Sections and Articles of this Guarantee and to Schedules to this Guarantee, as the
case may be The provisions of each Schedule shall constitute provisions of this
Guarantee as though repeated at length herein

(b) A "month" is a reference to a period starting on one day in a calendar month to
but excluding the numerically corresponding day in the next calendar month
except that, where any such period would otherwise end on a day other than a
Business Day, it shall end on the next Business Day, unless that day falls in the
calendar month succeeding that in which it would otherwise hBVe ended. in which
case it shall end on the next preceding Business Day in a calendar month or if
there is no numerically corresponding day in the month in which than period ends,
that period shall end on the last Business Day in that later month»(and references

 to "month!" shall be construed accordingly).
 (c) "USS" or "Dollar-5" means the lawful currency of the United States unless
F otherwise indicated. "Cdrt $" or "Canadian dollars" means the lawful currency of
Canada.
13 Interpretation
Ln this Guarantee:
_ (a) the singular includes the plural and vice-versa;

(b) r‘ilr wrlrlng" or "written" means priming, typewriu'ng and teleeopy;

(c) a document, notice or other instrument shall be considered to have been validly
signed or executed, if it has ban signed by either an original signature or a

. facsimile signame or stamp afﬁxed by an Authorized Signatory;

(d) all calculations of interest, commissions and/or fees under this Guarantee are to be
madeonthebasisofthesratedratessetomhereinmdnoton anybasiswhlch
gives effect to the principle of deemed reinvestment;

(e) unless otherwise defined or the context otherwise requires. terms for which
meanings are provided in this Guarantee which are not deﬁned in the Credit
Agreement shall how such meanings when used in each other Financing
Document and each notice and other communication delivered from time to time
in connection with this Guarantee or-any other Financing Document;

(2) reference to either gender includes the other gender;

(g) reference to any agreement (including this Guarantee and the Schedules hereto
and any other Financing Document), document or Instrument means such
agreement, document or lnsmrrnenr a amended. supplemented, unrated,

reﬁnanced, replaced, waived, restated or modiﬁed, and in effect from time to time
in accordance with the terms thereof and, if applicable, the terms hereof; ‘


-17.
(h) reference to any law means such low as amended, modiﬁed, codiﬁed or resumed,
. inwholcorinpartnndineffeotﬁomﬁmemﬁmeineludingrulesand
regulations promulgated thereunder:
(i) "hereunder", "hereof", "hereto", "herein" and words of similar import shall be
deemed references to this Guarantee as a whole and not to any particular Article,
Section, clause or other provision hereof;
(3) any reference no any particular Article, Secﬁon or clause shall be to such Article,
Section or Gimme of this Guarantee;
0:) "including" (and with correlative meaning "inulnde") means including without
limiting the generality of any description preceding such term;
i (1) reference to “company” or “corporation” shall be construed as a reference to the
 analogous form of business entity used in any relevant jurisdiction;
 (:11) when an expression is deﬁned, another part ofspeech or grammatical form of that
expression has a corresponding meaning;
(n) whenever any provision of this Guarantee requires or provides for orpermits an
approval, consent or notice to be given, this Guarantee shall be deemed to provide
that such approval, consent or notice shall be in writing; and
(0) whenever any provision of this Guarantee includes reference to "to the beat of a
Person‘s knowledge“ or words of similar import such reference shall be
construed as knowledge arrived at after reasonable enquiry.
1.4 Headings end Table of Contents
The headings, the table of contents, the Articles and the Sections are inserted for
convenience only and are to be ignored in construing this Guarantee.
1.5 Accounting Terms
(5) All accounting terms not deﬁned in this Guarantee shall be inmrpreted in
accordance with GAAP. Further, in cases where accounting terms, which are
historical in nature, are used on a projected or forecasted basis, such terms shall
be interpreted accordingly (adjusted as appropriate).
(b) If, aﬁer the Initial Drawdown Date, there shall be any change to the Fiscal Year of
the Guarantor, or in the application of the accounting principles used in the
preparation of the ﬁnancial stamens referred to herein a a result of the
promulgation of rules, regulations, pronouncements, or opinions by the Ontario
Securities Commission or the Canadian Imtitute of Chartered Accountants, as the
case may be, or agencies in Canada or any other applicable jurisdiction with 
similar Functions, which changes result in a change in the method of calculation 5
of, or have an adverse impact on, ﬁnancial covenants. standards, or terms ?
applicable to the Guarantor, found in this Guarantee or my other Financing 3


.13.

Document, the parties hereto agree promptly to enter into negotiations in nrder to
amend such ﬁnancial covenants, standards or terms so as to reﬂect equitably such
changes with the desired result that the evaluations of the Guarantor's ﬁnancial
condition shall be the same aﬂer such changes as if such changes had not been
made; provided, however, that until all the Lenders shall have given their consent
to such amendments. the Guarantor‘s ﬁnmial condition shall continue to be
eveluatedonthesarnepﬁnciplesasthoseuscdintheprepamtion ofﬂieﬁnancial
statements of the Guarantor referred to herein.

1.6 Recitals

The recitals to this Guarantee form part: hereof.

1.7 General Provisions as m Certiﬁcates and Opinions, etc.

When the delivery of a certiﬁcate is a. condition provident to the taking of any action by
any Administrative Agent or any Lender hereunder, the truth and accuracy of the facts and the
diligent and good faith determination of the opinions stated in such certiﬁcate shall "m each case
be conditions precedent to the right of the Gwautor I!) have such action taken, and any
certiﬁcate executed by the Guarantor shall be deemed to represent and warrant that the facts
statedursuchoertiﬁcare mtrueand accurate.

1.8 Permitted Lien-

Any reference in any of the Financing Doctments to a Pennitled Lien is not intended to
subordinate or postpone, and shall not be interpreted as subordinating or postponing, or as any
agreement to subordinate or postpone, any Lien created by any of the Financing Documents to
any Fern-timed Lien. However, the Administrative Agent or applicable Collateral Agent, on
behelfofthe Las Cruccs Lenders, will, at the expense of the Guarantor, execute such documents
as may be necessary to subordinate any Lien created under any of the Financing Documents in
favour of any Permitted Lien against Recourse Awets in respect of Indebde permitted under
Sections 6.101) and 6.1(i) of this Guarantee.

ARTICLE 2
GUARANTEE
2.1 Guarantee

(a) Subject to Sections 2.16:) and (c), the Gurme hereby irrevocany and
unconditionally guarantees and is jointly and severally liable and obligated with
the Company and seva liable with Leucadia to the Agents and to the Las
Cruces Lenders for the due and punctual payment of all principal, interest, fees,
, expenses, costs, indemniﬂes and all other Obligations which may become due by
the Company to the Agents and the La: Cruces Lenders under or in connection
with tile Credit Agreement or any Permitted Hedging Agreernems, whether at
stated maturity, by acceleration or otherwise, present or ﬁmne, direct or indirect,

absolute or contingent (collectively. the "Guaranteed Obligations“).


.19.

(b) The obligations of the Guarantor for the Guaranteed Obligations pursuant to
Section 2.10:) are made on a several and not joint basis with the obligations of
Leueadia under the Leucadia Sponsor Guarantee, it being acknowledged and
agreed that the liabilities of the Guarantor under this Guarantee in respect of the
Guaranteed Obligations shall be expressly limited at all times to 70% of the
aggregate amount of such Guaranteed Obligations.

(e) The obligations of the Guarantor for the Guaranteed Obligations shall terminate
upon the later of (i) the Completion Date and (ii) the date when all Obligations of
the Compmy in respect of Tranche B have been fully and indefensiny paid in
full.

2.2 Absolute Liability ,

* The Guarantor guarantees that the amomts in respect of the Guru-smart Obligations will
be paid to the Administrative Agent and Les Cranes Lenders strictly in accordance with their
terms and conditions. that this Guarantee is a primary obligation of the Bummer and the
Guarantor shall be liable as principal debtor and not solely as surety with respect to the payment
of the Guaranteed Obligations and that the liability of the Guarantor under this Guarantee shall
be absolute and lmconditionnl irrespective of:

(a) the lack of validity or enforceability ofany terms of any of the Loan Documents;

(11) any contest by the Company or any other Person as to the mount of the
Guaranteed Obligations or the validity or enforceability of any terms of the Loan
Documents or the priority of any security granted to the Administrative Agent or
the Las Cmces Lenders by the Company or any other Person;

(0) any loss of, or loss of value of, any security gamed to the Administrative Agent
or any of the Las Cruces Leaders;

((1) any defence, counter claim or right of set off available to the Company;

(c) any extension of the time or times for payment of the Guaranteed Obligations or
any other indulgeuces which the Les Cmces Lenders or the Adminish'ative Agent
may grant to the Company or any other Person or any amendment to, or alteration

or renewal of, any ofthe Loan Documents or the Guaranteed Obligations;

(t) any dwiings with the security which the LE Cruces Lenders or the
Administrative Agent hold or may hold pm-suant to the terms and conditions of
the Loan Documents, including the taking, giving up or exchange of securities,
the variation or realization thereof, the accepting of compositions and the granting
of releases and discharges;

(g) the assignment ofall erany part of the beneﬁts of this Guarantee;

(it) any invalidity, non perfection or unenforceability of any Security held by the 1.55 E
Cruces Lenders or any of the Agents, or any irregularity or defect in the manner 


. 20 .
‘ or procedure by which the Administrative Agent and the Las Cruces Lenders
realize on such security; and
(i) any other circumstances which might otherwise constitute a defence uvaiiabie to,
or a disaharge of, the Guarantor, the Company or any other Pemn in respect of
. the Guaranteed Obligations ortitis Guarantee.
ARTICLE 3
ENFORCEMENT
3.1 Remedies
The Guarantor agrees that the Las Cruces Lenders and the Administrative Agent need not
seek or exhaust their recourse against the Company or any other Person or realm on any security
 they may hold in respect of the Guaranteed Obligations before being uniﬁed to paymem or -
" performance under thi Guarantee. Should the Las Ctuecs Lenders or the Administrative Agent
elect to realize on any security they may hold, either before, oonmmenﬁy with or after demand
for payment under this Guarantee. the Guarantor shall have no right of discussion or division
3.2 Impairment of Security
Any loss of or in respect of, any security received by the Las Cruces Lenders or the
Administrative Agent ﬁ’mn the Company or any other Person shall not discharge pro route or
limit or lessen the liability oftbe Cnrarantor under this Guarantee.
33 Amount of Guaranteed Obligation:
Any account settled or stated by or among the Las Cruces Lenders, the Administrative
Agent and the Company, or if any mach Account has not been settled or stated immediately before
demarrd for payment under this Guarantee. any account stated by the Administrative Agent shall,
in the absence of manifest mathematical error, be accepted by the Gwalior as conclusive
evidence of the amount of the Guaranteed Obligations which is due by the Company to the Las
Cnrces Lenders and the Administrative Agent or remains unpaid by the Company to the Las
' Cruees Lenders and/or the Administrative Agent
3.4 Payment on Demand
The obligation of the Guarantor to pay any amount in respect of the Guaranteed
Obligations and all other amount: payable by it to the Las Ctuoes Lenders or the Administrative
Agent under this Guarantee shall arise, and the Guarantor shall make such payments,
immedime after demand for some is made in writing to the Guarantor. The liability of the
Guarantor shnl] bent interest from the date of such demand at the rate or m ofimerest then
applicable to the Guaranmeed Obligations under and calculated in the manner provided in the
Loan Documents. :;
3.5 Assignment and Poltponement 
(a) All obligations, liabilities and indebtedness of the Company to the Guarantor of ;
any nature whamoever and all security therefor (the “Intercorporste 


-21.

Indebtedness") are assigned to the Administrative Agent as continuing and
collateral security for the Guarantor—’5 obligations under this Gmruntee. Until
nnﬁoebytheAdminimﬁveAgentorththmnmorthatammmtsinrespectof
the Guaranteed Obligntions have become due and payable, the Guarantor may
receive payments in respect of the Intercorpomte Indebtedneg in accordance with
theirtennsaudsubjeettot‘he tennsofthisGuamnteenndthe Credit Agreement
The Guarantor shall not assign all or any pan of the Interwrporate Indebtedness
to any Person other than the Administrative Agent or the Les Cruoes Lenders.

(b) Upon the commute and during the continuance of an Event of Default, all
lntercorporate Indebtedness outstanding and all security therefor shall he held in
mfortheLasCrucesIendersandtbeAdrninistrativeAgemandshallbe
collected, enforced or proved subject to, and for the purpose of. this Guarantee

E and any payments received by the Guarantor in respect of the Intercorporate

‘ Indebtedness shall be segregated from other fluids and property held by the
Guarantor and immediately paid to the Administrative Agent on account of the
Guaranteed Obligations.

(c) Upon'the occtu'rencc and during die continuance of an Event of Default, the Las
Cruces Lenders and the Administrative Agent shall be entitled to receive payment
of amounts in respect of the Guaranteed Obligations in full before the Guarantor
is entitled to receive any payment on account of the interact—potato Indebtedness.
in such case. the hrteroorporate Indebtedness shall not be released or withdrawn
by the Guarantor unless the Administrative Agent's written consent to such
release or withdrawal is ﬁrst obtained. The Guarantor shall not permit the
prescription of the Intercorpome indebtedness by any statute of limitations or ask
for or obtain any security or negotiable paper for, or other evidence of; the
Intercorpornte Indebtedness except for the purpose of delivering the some to the
Administrative Agent,

3.6 Suspension of Guarantor Rights
The Guarantor agrees that pribr to a Guarantee Termination Event, the Guarantor shall
not exercise any rights which the Guanntor they at any time have by reason of the performance
of my of its obligations rmder this Guamtee (i) to he indemniﬁed by the Company, or (ii) to
take the beneﬁt (in whole or in mrt and whether by way of subrogation or otherwise) of any .
rights of the Les Cmccs Lenders or the Administrative Agent under any of the Loan Documents;
previded that, for greater certainty. clause (ii) above shall not apply to prohibit the Guarantor
from receiving payment from the Company of reasonable fees in respect of the provision of this
Guarantee, fees payable by the Company to the Guarantor under the Construction Services
Agreement and Management Savices Agreement or any reimbursement of Owner‘s Costs by
the Company to the Guarantor all to the extent permitted under the Credit Agreement.
3.7 No Prejudice to LII Croce: Lenders or Administrative Agent
The Les Cruces Lenders and the Administrative Agent shall not be prejudiced in any way :
in the right to enforce any provision of this Guarantee by any out or failure to act on the part of r
the Company, the Las Cruces Lenders or the Administrative Agent. The Administrative Agent :
and the Las Cruces Lenders may. at any time and ﬂour time to time, in such manner as they msy


. 22 .
determine is expedient, without any consent of, or notice to, the Guarantor, and without
impairing or releasing the obligations of the Guarantor, (i) change the manner, place or terms of
payment or change or extend the time of payment of, or renew or alter, the Guaranteed
Obligations, (ii) renew, detcnnine, vary or, subject to Section 8.2, increase any credit or credit
facilities to, or the terms or conditions in respect of any transaction with, the Company or any
other Perm (iii) release, compound or vary the liability of the Company or any other Person
liable in any manner under or in rennet of the Guaranteed Obligations, (iv) exercise or enforce
or refrain from exercising or enforcing any right or semzity against the Company, the Guarantor
or any other Person, and (v) apply any stuns from time to time received to the Guaranteed
Obligations. In their dealings with the Company, the Administrative Agent and the Las Cruces
Lenders need not enquire into the authority or power of any Person purporting to act for or on
behalf of the Company.
3.8 Subrogat‘ion
The Guarantor agrees that it will not enforce any claim, remedy or other right which it
may now have or hereaﬁer acquire agaimt the Company that arises fromthe existence, payment,
performance or enforcement of the Guarumor’s obligations under this Guarantee, including any
right of subrogation, reimbmement, exoneration, indemniﬁcation or any right to participate in
any claim or remedy of the Las Cruoes Lenders or the Administrative Agent against the
Company or any collateral which the La: Cruces Lenders or the Administrative Agent now have
or hereatter acquire, whether or not such claim, remedy or other right is reduced to judgment or
is liquidatai, unliquidatod. ﬁxed, contingent, matured, unmanned, disputed, undisputed. secured
or unsecured, and “rather or not such claim, remedy or other right arises in equity or under
contract, statute or conunon law until the Guaranteed Obligations have been paid in full. The
Guarantor further agrees that the Company shall be an intended third party beneﬁciary ofthe
Guarantor’s waiver contained in this Section 3.8 (but not of any other provision of this
Guaramee). If any amount is paid to the Guarantor in violation of the preceding sentence and, at
such time, the Las Crocea Laﬁers' and the Administrative Agent’s claims against the Company
in respect of the Guaranteed Obligations shall not have been indefensiny paid in full, any
amount paid to the Guarantor shall be deemed to have been paid to the Guarantor for the beneﬁt
of, and held in trust for, the La Crocus Lenders and the Administrative Agent. and shall
immediately be paid to the Admhiisn'aﬁve Agent to be credited and applied upon such
Guaranteed Obligations. The Guarantor acknowledges that it will receive direct and indirect
beneﬁts from the transactions contemplated by this Guarantee and that the waiver set forth in this
Section 3.8 is knowingly made in cornemplation of such beneﬁts.
3.9 No Set Oil by Guarantor
To the hillest extent permitted by Applicable Law, the Guarantor shall make all payments
under this Guarantee without regard to any defence, counter claim or right of set off available to
it.
3.10 Successors of the Company
Any change or changes in the name of or reorganization (whether by way of
reconstruction, consolidation, amalgamation, merger, transfer, sale, lease or otherwise) of the
Company or its business or in the Project shall not affect or in any way limit or lessen the ‘
liability of the Guarantor under this Guarantee or under the Guarantor Security Documents. ‘


- 23 -
3.11 Continuing Guamtec
The gimme provided in Article 2 is a continuing Wee. It extends to all pmsem
and future Guaranteed Obligations, applies to and guarantees the ultimate balance of any
amounts in respect of the Guaranteed Obligations due or remaining due to the Administrative
Agent and the Las Cmces Lenders and shall be binding as a continuing obligation of the
Guarantor until (i)the Administrative Agent and the Las Cmces Lenders release the Guarantor. or
(ii) the common: of s Guarantee Tennination Event. This Guarantee slmll continue to be
effecdworbeninstaledastheoasemsybe, ifatsnytimeanypaymem inmpectofanyofdie
_ Guaranteed Obligations is rescinded or must otimwise be returned by the Lenders or the
Adminisu'ative Agent upon the insolvency, bankruptey or reorganiution of the Company or
otherwise. all as though such payment had not been made,
3.12 Supplemental Security
This Guarantee is in addition and without prejudice to and supplements! to all other
guarantees and semu'iﬁes held or which may hereafter be held by the Las Cruoes Lenders or the
Administrative Agent.
3.13 Security for Guarantee
The Guarantor acknowledges that this Guarantee is intended to secure payment and
performance of the Guaranteed Obligations. The Guarantor further acknowledges that the
payment and performance of (i) the Guarantwd Obligatiom, (ii) the miller obligations of die
Gtmmntor under this Guarantee and (iii) the lnmet Hedging Obligations are secured pursuant to
the terms and provisions of those agreements and insmunents described in Schedule "A"
(collectively, the "Guarantor Security Documents").
3.14 Limited Recourse
The liability of the Guarantor under this Guarantee shall be limited as set forth in
Section 2.10:2) with respect to the Guaranteed Obligations but shall not be limited with respect to
interest charges, costs of collection and reasonable fees and expenses incurred by or on behalf of
the Administrative Agent or the Las Cmces Lenders in enforcing any of their rights under this
Guarantee.
3.15 Taxes Ind Other Tues
(a) All payments to or for the beneﬁt of the Las Cmces lenders by the Guarantor
under this Guarantee or under any of the Guarantor Security Documents shall be
made free and clear of and without deduction or withholding for any and all Taxes
or withholding and all related liabilities other than Excluded Taxes (all such
Taxes. widiholdings and liabilities being referred to in this Section 3.15 as
"Withholding Tues") imposed by Canada (or my political subdivision or tinting
authority of it) or by any other Governmental Authority, unless such Withholding
Taxes are required by Applicable Law to be deducted or withheld. If the
Guarantor shall be required by Applicable Law to deduct at withhold any such
Withholding Taxes from or in respect of any amount payable tmder this
Guarantee or under any of the Guarantor Security Documents (i) the amount


, - 24 .

payable shall be increased (and for greater certainty, in the case of interest, the
amount ofinterest shall beinnreased)as maybenecesssry aoﬂrataﬁermakingall
required deductions or wiuxholdings (including deductions or Mthholdings
applicable to any additional amounts paid raider this Section 3.35), the 1.5:; Cmces

, Lenders receive an amount equal to the amount they would have received if no
such deduction or withholding had been made, (ii) the Guarantor shall make such
deductions or Mthhuldings, and (iii) the Guarantor shall immediately pay the full
amount deducted or withheld to the relevant Governmental Audrority in
accordance with Applicable Law,

(b) The Guarantor agrees to immediately pay any present or fumre stamp or
documentary taxes or any other excise or property taxes. charges, ﬁnancial
institutions duties. debits taxes or similar levies (all such taxes, charges, duties
and levies being referred to in this Section 3.15 as “Other Tues“) which arise
from any payment made by the Guarantor under this 61mm: or under any of
the Guanmnr Security Documents or ﬂow the execution. delivery or registration
of, or otherwise with respect to, this Guarantee or any ofthe Guarantor Security
Documents.

(c) The Guarantor shall indemnify the Las Cruees Lenders and the Administrative
Agent for the full amomtt of Wiﬁholding Taxes or Other Taxes (including,
without limitation, any Widtholding Taxes at Other Taxes imposed by any
jurisdiction on amounts payable by the Guarantor under this Section 3.15) paid by
the Lenders or the Administrative Agent in respect of payments received under
this Guarantee and any liability (including penalties, interest and expenses)
arising from or “nth respect 10 such Withholding Taxes or Other Taxes. whether
or not they were correctly or legally asserted. Payment under this
 shall be made within 30 days from the date the Administrative
Agent or the relevant Las Cruces Lender, as the case may be, makes written
demand for it. A certiﬁcate as to the amount of such Withholding Taxes or Other
Taxes submitted to the Guarantor by the Administrative Agent or the relevant Las
anes Lender shall be conclusive evidence, absent manifest error, of the mom
due from the Gummy: tn the Administrative Agent or the Les Cruees Lenders, as
the case may be.

(d) TheGummorshallﬁnnishmtheAdminisuaﬁveAgemandtbeLaanmes
Lenders the original or a certiﬁed copy of a. meipt evidmeing payment of
Withholding Taxes or Other Taxes made by the Guarantor within 30 days aﬁer
the date of any payment of Withholding Taxes or Other Taxes.

(e) In the event that the Guarantor makes payment of any amount pursuant to this
Section 3.15, the Administrative Agent or recipient Las Cruces Lender agrees that
it will take such reasonable steps as may reasonably be open to it to mitigate the
effects of the circumstances described in the foregoing Seeders; provided,
hDWEVel', that no Agent or Les Cluca Lender shall be obligated to (i) take any
such steps if, in its opinion, such steps would require it to achieve less than its
expected return under this Guarantee or ﬁle Credit Agreement or would have an
adverse effect upon its assets or ﬁnancial condition or would otherwise be


_ 25 .

disadvantageous to such Las Crimes bender in its sole discretion or (ii) achieve
any particular result or incur any liability to the Guarantor or the other Credit
Parties by virtue ofany such steps resulting in less than complete mitigation ofthe
relevant circumstances.

(i) If any Agent or Las Cruces Lender obtains a refund of tax or credit (a "Tax
Credit“) against a payment made by the Guarantor pursuant to this Section 3.15 (a
"Tax Payment“), and in the sole judgement of such Agent or Las Cruoes Lender,
such Tax Credit is attributable to such Tax Payment. then such Agent or Las
Cruces Lender, alter somal receipt of such Tax Credit, shall reunburse the
Goal-armor for such amount as such Agent or Las Cruces Lender shall remnath
determine to be the proportion of such Tu Credit as is in the sole judgement of
the Agent or Lus Cruoes lender reasonably amibmahle on such Tax Payment,-
provided, however, that no Agent or Les Cruoes Lender shall be mquired to make
any such reimbtn-semeut which would cause it to lose tlm beneﬁt of such Tax
Credit or would otherwise adversely affect any matter relating to such Agent or
Las Cmces Lender in connection with the assessment or payment of any Taxes
and subject to the Guarantor's obligation to promptly repay on detnand by the La:
(Runes Lender or Agent the mount of the Tax Credit if the Tax Credit is
subuquently disallowed or cancelled. Each Agent and Las Cruoes {ﬁnder shall
have absolute discretion as to whether to claim my Tax Credit, and if it does so
claim, the extent, order and mama in which it does so. No Agent or Las Cmces
Lender shall be obliged to disclose information regarding its tax affairs or
compmations to the Guarantor or the other Credit Parties,

(g) The provisions of this Section 3.!5 shall survive the termination of this Guarantee

_ pursuant to Section 8.5
3.16 Judgment Currency

(5) If for the purposes of obtaining judgment in any court it is necessary to convert all
or any amount in respect ofany part ofthe Guaranteed Obligations or any other
amount due to a Las Cruces Leader or the Administrative Agent in meet ofthe
Gimmtor‘s obligations under this Guarantee in any currency (the "Original
Currency") into another currency (the "Other Currency“), the Guarantor, to the
fullest extent that it may effectively do so, agrees that the rate of exchange used
shall be that at which, in accordance with normal banking procedtu'es. the Las
Cmoes Lender or Administrative Agent, as the case may be, could purchase the
Original Currency with the Other Currency on the Business Day preceding that on
which ﬁnal judgment is pﬂd or satisfied

(1:) The obligations of the Guarantor in respect of any sum due in the Original
Currency from it to any IJIs Cruces Lender shall, nohwithstanding any judgment
in any Other Currency, be discharged only to the extent that on the Business Day
following receipt by such Les Cruoes Lender of any stn-n adjudged to be so due in
such Other Currency such Las Cmccs Lender may, in accordance with its normal
banking prooedum, purchase the Original Currency with such Other Currency. If
the amount of the Original Currency so pmohased is less than the sum originally


. 25 .
dueto the LasCruues Lender intheOriginal Cmrency,the Guarantaragrees, use
separate obligation and notwithstanding any such judgmem, to indemnify the Les
Cmees Lender against such loss, and if the mount of the Original Currency so
purchased exceeds the sum originally due to the Las Cruces Lender in the
Original Currency, the Las Cruces Lender agrees to remit such excess to the
Guarantor.
A ARTICLE t
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES

In order to induce (i) the Administrative Agent and the Lenders to enter into the Credit
Agreement and, in the case of the Lenders, to make the Loans tlwretmder and (ii) the Permitted
Hedging Lenders to enter into the Pennitted Hedging Agreements, the Grmantor hereby
represenm and warrants unto the Administrative Agent and each Las Cruees Lender as set forth
in this Article 4. -
4.1 Organintion; Powers

The Guarantor and each Subsidiary of the Guarantor is organized, validly existing and in
good standing under the Applicable Laws of the jurisdiction of its organization, has all requisite
power and authority to carry on its business as new and formerly conducted and is qualiﬁed to
do business in, and is in good standing in, every jurisdiction where such qualiﬁcation is required.
4.2 Authorization; Enforceahility

The Transactions are within the corporate powers of the Guarantor and each Subsidiary
of the Guarantor that is a Credit Party and have been authorized by all necessary corporate ancL if
required, shareholder action. This Guarantee and the Financing Documents have been executed
and delivered by the Guarantor and each Subsidiary of the Guarantor that is a Credit Party and
constitute legal, valid and binding obligations of the Guarantor and each such Subsidiary,
enforceable in accordance with their terms, subject to applicable bankruptcy, insolvency,
reorganisation moratorium or other Applicable Laws affecting ereditnrs’ rights genemlly and
subject to general principles of equity, regardless of whether considered in a proceeding in equity
or at law.

43 Governmental Approvals; Nu Conﬂict:

The Transactions'(a) do not require any consent or approval of, registration or ﬁling with,
or any other action by, any Governmental Authority, except as expressly disclosed no the
Lenders, (b) will not violate in any material way any Applicable Law or the charter, lay-laws or
other organizational documents of the Grimmer or any Subsidiary of the Guarantor or any order
of any Governmental Authority, (0) will not violate in any material way or result in a default
under any indenture, agreement or other instrument binding upon the Guarantor or any
Subsidiary ofthe Guarantor or their respetxive assets, or give rise to a right thereunder to require
any paymem to be made, in excess of US $500,000. by the Guarantor or any Subsidiary of the
Guarantor. and (I!) will not result in the creation or imposition of any Lien on any asset of the
Guarantor or any Subsidiary of the Guarantor that is a Credit Party, except for any Lien arising in
favour of the Adminisn’stive Agent, for the beneﬁt of the Las Cruces Lenders and Inmet


- 27 -
Pei-mined Hedging Lenders under the Financing Documents or any Lien which would be a
Permitted Lien.
4.4 Finnneial Condition; No Material Adverse Change

(a) The Guarantor has furnished to the Administrative Agent and the Las Cruces
Lenders its consolidated balance sheet and statements of income, retained
earnings and changes in cash ﬂows (’1) as of end for the Fiscal Years ended
December 31, 2003 and 2004. reported on by its auditors, and (ii) as of and for the
most recently completed Fiscal Quarter and the portion of the Fiscal Year ended
as of the end of such Fiscal Quarter, certiﬁed by a Responsible Oﬁcer. Such
ﬁnancial statements present fairly, in all nmterial respects, the consolidated
ﬁnancial position and results of operations and cash ﬂows of the Guarantor as of
such dates and for such periods in accordance with GAAP, subject to year end
audit adjusnnents and the absence if any of footnotes in the case of the statements
referred to in clause (ii) above.

(b) Since December 31, 2004, there lm occurred no Material Adverse Change;

(c) All written information (including that disclosed in all ﬁnancial statements)
pertaining to the Guarantor, any Subsidiary of the Guarantor and OR Tedi (other
than projections) (the "Information") that has been made available to the Les
Cruoes Lenders or the Administrative Agent by the Guarantor or only authorized
representative of the Gnsrmnor, (i) on or before the Closing Date or, thereafter (ii)
at the prescribed time of delivery ofthe ﬁnancial statements and other information
pursuant to Section 5.1, taken as a whole, is, at the time fumished. complete and
correct in all material respects. To the best of the Guarantor‘s knowledge, none of
the information contains any untrue statement of a material fact at the time
furn'mhed, and none of them omits to state a material {not necessary to make the
statements contained herein or therein, in light of the cimnnstances under which
they were made, not misleading at the time ﬂimished The projections that have
been made available to the Les Cruees Lenders or the Administrative Agent by
the Guarantor or any representative of the Grmrantor have been prepared, and
where not prepared by the Guarantor. to the best of the Guzrantor’s knowledge
have been prepared, in good faith based upon reasonable assumptions.

4.5 Litigation ‘

(a) Except for the Disclosed Matters, there are no actions, suits or proceedings
(including any Tax-related matter): (i) by or before any arbitrator or
Governmental Authority pending against, or (ii) to the knowledge of the
Gomor, threatened against or aﬂecting, the Guarantor or any of its Subsidiaries
as to which there is a reasonable possibility of an adverse determination and that,
if adversely determined, would, individually or in the aggregate, constitute a
Material Adverse Change.

(b) Except for the Disclosed Matters and except with respect to any other matters
that, individually or in the aggregate. would not constitute a Material Adverse
Change, neither the Guarantor nor any of its Subsidiaries (1) ha failed to comply


. 23 .
with any Environmental Law or to obtain, maintain or comply with any permit,
license or other approval required under any Enviromnental Law, (ii) to
Guarantor‘s knowledge, has become subject to any actions, suits or proceedings
1 in respect of any alleged, threatened or pending Environmental Liability, (iii) has
received notice of any claim with respect to any actions, suits or proceedings in
respect of any alleged, threatened or pending Environmental Liability. or (iv)
lmows of any facts which would reasonably be expected to result in any actions,
suits or proceedings in respect of any Environmental Liability.
(e) Since the date of this Guarantee, except as disclosed in writing to the
Adnunistrative Agent, there has been no change in the status of the Disclosed
Matters that would, individually or in the aggregate, constitute a Material Adverse
Change.
 4.6 Compliance with Applicable Laws and Agreements
 Except for the Disclosed Matters, the Guarantor and each of its Subm’diaries is in
: compliance with all laws applimble to it or its property and all indenuues, agreements and other
instruments binding upon it or its property, except where the failure to do so, individually or in
the aggregate, would not constitute a Material Adverse Change. Except for the Disclosed
Matters, neither the Guarantor nor my Subsidiary of the Guarantor has violated or foiled to
obtain any Authorization necessary to the ownership of any of its property or assets or the
conduct of its business, where such violation or failure (in the event that Such a violation or
failure were asserted by any Person through appropriate action) constitutes a Material Adverse
Change.
4.? Taxes
The Guarantor and each of its Subsidinries has timely filed or caused to be ﬁled all Tax
remrnsandrepoxtsrequiredtohavebmn ﬁled andhaspaidorcausedto‘oepaid all Taxes
required to have been paid. by it (including all instalments with respect to the current period) and
has made adequate provision for Taxes for the omen: period, except Taxes that are being
contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and for which the Guarantor or such
Subsidiary, as applicable, has set aside on its books adequate reserves.
4.8 Ownerxhip of Property
The Guaranmr and each of its Subsidiaries own or have valid rights to the extent required
for the operation of their respective businesses, in all real and personal property that is material
to the operation of their respective businesses, free and clear of all Liens except (i) Liens
disclosed to the Lenders, and (ii) Permitted Liens.
4.9 Pension Plans
All material obligations of the Guarantor and, to its knowledge, each of its Subsidiaries ,
(including ﬁduciary, funding, investment and administration obligations) required to be ‘
performed in connection with their respective pension plans and the funding agreements therefor i
have been performed in all material respec’s on a timely basis except in such cases where a 


- 29 .
failme to have performed such material obligations could not be reasonably expected to
constitute a Material Adverse Change.
4.10 Disclosure
The Guarantor bu disclosed to the Administrative Agent and the Las Cruces lenders all
agreemens, instruments, corporate or other restrictions and matters, that, individually or in the
aggregate, would consu‘tute a Material Adverse Change. All material liabilities of the Guarantor
are reﬂected in the consolidated ﬁnancial statements of the Guarantor delivered by the Guarantor
or have otherwise been disclosed to the Administrative Agent in uniting.
4.11 Defaults
r None of the Guarantor or any Subsidiary of the Guarantor is in material default nor has
; any event or circumstance occurred which, but for the passage of time or the giving of notice, or
 both, would constittme a material default tmder any material agreement. or instrument to which it
is a party or by which it is bound, except as disclosed to the Lenders. No Default or Event of
Default has occurred and is 
4.12 Subsidiaries
The Guarantor has correctly disclosed in Schedule “E” the (i) names. (ii) form of legal
entity. (iii) Equity Securities issued and outstanding, (iv) Equity Securities owned by the
Guarantor or a Subsidiary of the Guarantor (and specifying such owner), and (v) jurisdictions of
organintion of all Subsidiaries of the Guarantor as at the date hereof, and of any Material
Subsidiaries of the Guarantor on any subsequent dates Unless otherwise indicated, all of the
outstanding share capital of each such Subsidiary is owned of record and beneﬁcially by the
Guarantor, there are no outstanding options, warrants or other rights to purchase share capital of
any such Subsidiary, and all such Equity Seem-ides so owned are duly authorized, validly issued,
fully paid and non~assessable, and were issued in compliance in all material respects with all
Applicable Laws, and are ﬂee and clear of all liars, except for Pcmitted Liens
4.13 Insurance _
All policies of ﬁre, liability, workers’ compensation, casualty, ﬂood, business
interruption and other forms of insurance owned or held by the Guarantor and each of its
Subsidiaries are (a) suﬂioient for material compliance with all requirements of Applicable Law
and of all agreanents to which the Guarantor or any Subsidiary ofthr Guarantor is a party, (it)
are valid and oustanding policies. (0) provide insurance coverage in at least such amounts and
against at least such risks (but including in any event public liability) in each case as are usually
insured aghast in the same general area by companies engaged in the same or a similar business
for the assets and operations of the Guarantor and each of its Subsidiaries, and (:1) will not
terminate or lapse by reason of, the Transactions. All such material policies are in ﬁtll force and
effect. all premiums with respect thereto hat'e been paid in accordance with their respective
terms, and no notice of cancellation or termination has been received with respect to any such ‘
policy. Neither the Guarantor nor any of its Subsidiaries maintains any formalized self-insurance 
program with respect to its assets or operations or material risks with respect thereto in excess of 
$100,000 in the aggregate The certiﬁcate: of insurance delivered to the Administrative Agent


‘ - 3o .
contains an accurate and complete description cfall material policies of insurance married or held
‘ by the Guarantor and each of its Subsidiaries as of the effective date (If such certiﬁcate.
4.14 Solvency
None of the Guarantor nor any Subsidiary of the Guarantor is an "insolvent person"
within the meaning ofthe Bankruptcy andl’nsalvency Act (Canada), REC. 1985, cB~3.
4.15 Environmental Matters
Except as disclosed in the Disclosed Matters:
(11) Environmental Laws, are. No property of the Gtmrantor or of any of its
Subsidiaries nor any operations conducted thereon violate any Environmental
_, Laws, except to the extent that any such violation does not oonstitune a Material
 Adverse Change.
0)) Notices, Permits, etc. All notices, penniB, licenses or similar Authorizations, if
any, required to be obtained or ﬁled pursuant to Enviromnerml Laws by the
Guarantor or its Subsidiaries in connection with the operation or use of any and
' all property of the mini-armor or its Subsidiaries, including but not limited to
treatment. mspomiun, storage, disposal or release of Heurdo‘us Materials into
the environment, have been duly obtained or ﬁled, except to the extent the failure
to obtain or ﬁle such notices, permits, licensee or similar Authorizations does not
constitute aMaterial Adverse Change.

(c) Hazardous Substances Carriers To the knowledge of the Guarantor, all
Hazardous Materials generated at any and all properties of the Guarantor or its
Subsidiaries have been treated, transported, stored and disposed of truly in
accordance with Environmental Laws, except to the extent tiratthe failure to do so
does not constitute a Material Adverse Change.

(d) Hazardous Material: Disposal To the knowledge of the Guarantor, no
Hazardous Materials have been disposed of or otherwise reler on onto any
property by the 61.1mm: or any of it: Snbsidiaria other than in compliance with
Environmental Laws, except to die extent that such disposal or release does not
constitute a Material Adverse Change.

(e) No Contingent Liability To the knowledge of the Guarantor, the Guarmtor and
its Subsidiaries have no material contingent liability in connection with any
release or threatened release of any Hazardous Materials into the environment
other than such contingent liabilities at any one time and from time to time that
could reasonably be expected to not exceed applicable insurance coverage or for
which adequate reserves for the payment thereof as required by GAAP have been
provided1 or which would not result in remedial obligations constituting a ‘
Material Adverse Change. 

i


.. 31 .
4.16 Fiscal Your
: The Fiscal Year oftheGuamutor endstme 3l ofeadr calendaryear,andthc
Guarantor‘s Fiscal Quarters end on the lam day of each of March, June, September and
December of each calendar year.
4.17 Intellectual Property Rights v .
The Guarantor and each of its Subsidiaries is the registered and beneﬁcial owner of, with
good and marketable title, ﬁ’ce ofall Liens other than Permitted Liens. to, or is a licensee under a
licence which, to the best of its knowledge, is in good standing of, all patents, patent
applications, trade marks, trade mark applications, made names, service marks, copyrights,
industrial designs, integrated circuit topographies, or other rights with respect to the foregoing
and other similar property, used in or necessary for the present and planned ﬁmn'e conduct ofis
 business, without any conﬂict with the rights of any other Person, other than as listed on the
 Disclosed Matters, or other than such conﬂicts which do not constitute a Material Adverse
 Change.
4.18 Ranking
The payment obligations of the Guarantor under this Agreement and tire other Loan
Documents to which it is a party rank at least (before taking into consideration the Liens securing
payment of such obligations) pari pom: in right of payment with all of the Guaranme other
indebtedness, other than any such Indebtedness which is preferred by mandatory provisions of
any Applicable Law.
ARTICLE 5
POSITIVE COVENANTS OF THE GUARANTOR
Until the occurrence of a Guarantee Termination Event, the Guarantor covomnts and
agrees with each of the Administrative Agent and the Las Cruces Lenders that the Guarantor
shall perform its obligations set forth in this Article 5.
5.1 Finanan Statements and Other Information
The Guarantor will fumish to the Administrative Agent and each Las Cruces Lender;
(a) as soon as available and in any event within 120 days alter the end of each Fiscal
Year of the Guarantor, its audited consolidated balance sheet and related
statements ofeperations, retained earnings and cash ﬂows as ofthe end of and for
such Fiscal Year, setting forth in each case in comparative form the ﬁgures for the
previous Fiscal Year, all reported an by KPMG LLP or other independent
auditors of recognized national standing (without a "going concern“ or like
qualiﬁcation or exception and without any qualiﬁcation or exception as to the
scope of such audit) to the effect that such consolidated ﬁnancial statements
present fairly in all material respects the ﬁnancial position and results of 
operations and cash ﬂows of the Guarantor and its Subsidiaries on a consolidated :
basis in accordance with GAAP consistently applied;


. 32 .

(b) assoonas availableand in any eventwithira codays aﬁertbe end ofeachofthe
ﬁrst three Fiscal Quarters of each Fiscal Year of the Guarantor, its unaudited
consolidated balance sheet and related statements ofcpenm'ons, retained earnings
andcaslrﬂowsasofthe end cfandforsrrch FiscalQuarterandthetbenelapsed
portion of the Fiscal Year which includes such Fiscal Quartz; setting forth in
each case in compuative form the ﬁgures for the corresponding period or periods
of (or, in the ease of the balance sheet, as of the end oi) the previous Fiscal Year,
all certiﬁed by a Responsible Ofﬁcer as presenting fairly in all material respects
the financial position and results of operations and cash ﬂows of the Guarantor
and its Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP
consistently applied, subject to normal year-end audit uljustments;

(c) (i) as soon as available and in any event within 120 days ofthe end of each Fiscal
Year of Pyhasalmi, Cayeli, or 0k Tedi respectively, the audited consolidated

 balance sheet and related statements of operatiom, retained earnings and cash '
3 ﬂows as at the end of and for such Fiscal Year of each such Person, setting forth
 in each case in comparative ﬁorrn the ﬁgures for the previous Fiscal Year, all
i reported on by independent auditors of recognized national standing in tin local
jurisdiction (without a "going concern" or like qualiﬁcation and without any
qualiﬁcation as to the scope of such audit) to the effect that such consolidated
ﬁnancial statements present fairly in all material respects the ﬁnancial position
and results of operations and cash ﬂows. of such Person on a consolidated basis in
accordance with GAAP, US GAAP or International Accounting Standards as the
case may be, consislnntly applied and (ii) from time to time such other ﬁnancial
information concerning such Persons as the Administrative Agent my reasonably
Inquire;
(d) concur-ready with the ﬁnancial statements required pursuant to Subsection 5.1(3)
and (b) above, 5 Compliance Certiﬁcate of the Guarantor, signed by a
Responsible Ofﬁcer;

(e) as soon as available and in any event within 60 days aﬁe- tlre end of each Fiscal

QuarteroftheGuarantoracopyofthequarterlyreportwithrespeettothe

‘ Guarantor's Operating Assets on a consolidated basis in such detail and covering
such aspects as the Administrative Agent may reasonably request (including a
comparison of actual to budgeted results);

(f) as soon as available and in any event within 60 days after the end of each Fiscal
Quarter oftbe Guarantor a report in form satisfactory to the Administrative Agmrt
as to all outstanding Inmet Permitted Hedging Agreements and covering such
matters and in such detail as the Administrative Agent may reasonably require;

(5) as soon as available and in any event prior to 45 days aﬁer the end of its Fiscal
Year an update of the consolidated ﬁnancial model of the Guarantor delivered to r
the Lenders on tire Closing Date consistent with the underlying life of mine plan 
formhoftheassetsreﬂectedﬂaereinandotlmwiseinfonnandsubstance z
satisﬁlctory to the Administrative Agent


. 33 .

(h) promptly utter the some become publicly available, notice that the following
materials have been posted on SEDAR: periodic and other reports, proxy
statemeuls and other materials ﬁled by the Guarantor with any securities
commission, stock exchange or similar entity, and all materials distributed out of
ﬁreordinzry comebytheGumormitssharebolderswhicleineachcase,m
material in mime;

(i) promptly alter the Guarantor learns of or has receipt of or makes a determination
in good faith of the existence or occurrence of any of the following, as the case
may be, a certiﬁcate oftbe Guarantor, signed by a Responsible Ofﬁcer, specifying
(i) any ofﬁcial written notice of any violation, possible Violation, non-compliance
or possible non-compliance, or claim made by any Governmental Authorin
pertaining to all or any part of the properties of the Guarantor, any of its

, Subsidiaries or O]: Tedi that constitutes a Material Adverse Change, (ii) any event

i that constitutes a Default or Event of Deﬁult, together with a detaild statement

’ specifying the nature thereof and the steps being taken to cure such Default or
Event of Default, (Iii) the receipt of any notice ﬁorn, or the taking of any other
action by, the holder of my promissory note, debenture or other evidence of
Indebtedness of the Guarantor or any of its Subsidiaries in an amount in excess of
Cdn. $20,000,000 (or its then Equivalent Amount) with respect to an actual or
alleged default, together with a detailed statement specifying the notice given or
other action taken by such holder and the more of the claimed default and what
action the Gum-auto: or the relevant Subsidiary is taking or proposes to take with
respect thereto. (iv) any delimlt or non oomplianoe of any Credit Party to any of
the Financing Documents with any of the terms and conditions thereof or any
notice of tenn'mation or other proceedings or actions which could reasonably be
expected to adversely affect any of the Financing Documents, (v) the dissolution,
merger or acquisition of any Subsidiary of the Guarantor. (vi) any evem or
condition not previously disclosed to the Administrative Agent, which violates
any Environmental Law and that, in the Gturanzot's reasonable opinion, is a
Material Adverse Change, (vii) any execution of, or material amendment to,
termination of, or material default under, any material collective bargaining
agreement, (viii) the institution of or any material adverse development in my
current or impending action, suit or proceeding, any governmental investigation,
or any arbitration before any court or arbitrator or any Governmental Authority
against the Guarantor or any of its Subsidiaries or any material property ofany of
them that is a Material Adverse Change, and (ix) any event, development or
condition that, in the (inventors amenable opinion, is a Material Adverse
Change;

(j) upon request by the Administrative Agent, a stuumury of the insurance coverages
of the Guarantor and its Subsidiaries, in form and substance reasonably
satisfactory to the Administrative Agent, and upon renewal of any insurance
policy, a copy of an insurance certiﬁcate summarizing the terms of such policy,
and upon request by the Administrative Agent, copies of the applicable policies;
and 7


. 34 -

0:) notice of any change in the currency in which the Guarantor reports its ﬁrmneial
statements promptly upon the occurrence of such change (provided that, for
greater certainty, the Guarantor shall not be required to obtain the consent oftlre
Lenders to change its reporting from Cdn. 3 to USS.) v

5.2 Existence; Conduct of Business

The Guarantor will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, do or cause to he done all
things necessary to preserve, renew and keep in full force and effect its legal existence, and
except to the extent that, in each case, the failure to do so would not constimte a Material
Adverse Change, obtain, preserve, renew and keep in full force and effect any and all rights,
licenses, permits, privileges and franchises necessary for the lawful conduct of its business.

; 53 Payment of Obligations
 The Guarantor will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, pay its obligations,

including Tax liabilities, that. ifnot paid, would constitute a Material Adverse Change before the
same shall become delinquent or in default, except where (a) the validity or amount thereof is
being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings, and (b) the Guarantor or such
Subsidiary has set aside on its books adequate reserves with respect thereto in accordrmce with
GAAP, US. GAAP or International Accuuming Standards, as the case may be.
5.4 Mnlntenance of Properties

The Guarantor- will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, keep and maintain all
property material to the conduct of its business in good working order and condition, ordinary
wearandtearexcepted,excepttotheextentthaithe failmewdosodoesnoteonstitutea
Material Adverse Change.
5.5 Books and Records; Inspection Rights

The Guarantor will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, keep proper books of
record and account in which fall, true and correct entries me made of all dealings and
transactions in relation to its business and activities. The Guarantor will, and will cause each of
its Subsidiaries to, permit any representatives, including the Administrative Agent and the
independent engineer of the Las Cruces Lenders, designated by the Administrative Agent or any
La: Cruoes Lender, upon reasonable prior notice, to visit and inspect its properties, to examine
and make extracts from its books and records, and to discuss its affairs, ﬁnances and condition
with its ofﬁcers and independent accountants, all at such reasonable times and intervals
provided that such request: do not materially disrupt the business operations ofthe Guarantor or
its Subsidiaries.
5.6 Compliance with Environments! Laws; Environmental Liability

The Guarantor will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, comply with all
Environmental Laws applicable to it or its property, except where non-compliance, individually
or in the aggregate, does not connitute a Material Adverse Change.


. 35 .
The Guarantor will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, inform the Administrative
Agent where (i) to the Guarantor’s knowledge, it has become subject to any Enviromncntal
Liability that constitutes a Material Adverse Change, (ii) it has received written notice of any
claim with respea to any Environmental Liability that consﬁmtcs a Material Adverse Change,
and (iii) to the Guarantor’s knowledge. there are reasonable grounds to believe there exists an
Enviromneotal Liability that constitutes a Material Adverse Change. The Guarantor will also
inform the Administrative Agent iﬁ to the Guarmtor’s knowledge, Ok‘Tedl or a Non-Controlled
Investment has become subject to an Environmental Liability that constimes a Material Adverse
Change.
5.7 Further Assurances
The Guarantor will and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to cure promptly any defects in
_: the execution and delivery of the Financing Documents to which it is a party, including this
: Guarantee. Upon request, the Guarantor will, at its expense, as promptly as practical, execute
and deliver to the Administrative Agent, all such other and further documents, agreemmts and
inmments (and cause each Subsidiary of the Guaranbor to take such action) in compliance with
or performance of the covenants and agreements of the Sumter or any Subsidiary of the
Guarantor in any of the Financing Documents, including this Guarantee, or to further evidence
and more fully describe the Collateral, or to correct any onrissions in any of the Financing
Documents, or more fully to state the security obligations set out herein or in any of the
Financing Documents contemplated herein, or to perfect, protect or preserve any Liens Created
pursuant to any of the Financing Documents, or to make any recordings, to ﬁle any notices, or
obtain any consents, all as may be necessary or appropriate in connection therewith.
5.8 Insurance
The Guarantor will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, maintain or cause to be
maintained. with ﬁnancially sound and reputable insurers, insurance with respect to their
respective properties and business against such liabilities, casualties, risks and contingencies and
in such types (including btniness interruption insurance and ﬂood insurance) and mounm as is
customary in the case ofPersons engaged in the same or similar businesses and similarly situated
and in accordance with any requirement of any Governmental Authority. In the case of any ﬁre,
accident or other casualty causing loss or damage to any properties of the Guarantor or any of its
Subsidiaries, all proceeds of such policies shall be used as determined by the Guarantor, to repair
or replace the damaged property; providedvthat if any such action would constitute a Memorial
Adverse Change, then the proceeds shall not be used as aforesaid but as directed by the
Administrative Agent.
5.9 Operation and Maintenance of Property
The Guarantor will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, manage and operate its
business or cause its business to be managed and operated (l) in accordance with prudent
industry practice and in compliance in all material respects with the terms and provisions of all
’ applicable licenses, leases, coon-acts and agreements, and (ii) in compliance in all material
respects with all Applicable Laws from time to time constituted with respect to the regulation, ;
ownership, management and operation of such businesss, except in either case where the failure ,i
to so comply, manage and operate does not constiuue a Material Advem Change. 5


. 35 .
5.10 ﬁnancial Covenants
"nae Gmramor will:
(a) Tangible Net Worth: Maintain at all drum Tangible Net Worth at a level not less
than CdnS—or, ifat any time tlm this covenant is tested, the Gum-amt
prepares its financing statements in USS, the Equivalent Amoimt as ofthe date the
change in reporting is reﬂective, plus in either case an amount equal to 50% cfthe
Guarantor’s cumulative positive annual net income on a consolidated basis
calculated initially from the ﬁrst Fiscal Yea cod following the ﬁrst anniversary of
the Closing Date and thematic:- at the end of each subsequent Fiscal Year, with no
deduction made where the Gummor‘s annual net income on a consolidated basis
is zero or less; the Gum‘s compliant: with this covenant shall be tested on
each Quarterly Date;
‘3 (h) Minimum Liquidity Requirement: Maintain at all times Liquidity of no less than
an emoum equal to the Guarantor's Proportionate Share of the Sponsor
Oontribmion Amount as per the most recent calculation of the Estimated 7
Completion Amount pmmmnt to the Credit Agreement; provided, that amounts
deposited with the Administrative Agent as security for (i) the Gusrantor‘s
obligations hereunder pursuant to Section 6.14 and (ii) the Gum-armors obligations
in respect of the outstanding letters of credit issued as permitted pursuant to
Section 6.2(d), will not be included in calculating "Liquidity" for the purpose of
the minimum liquidity requirement in this Section 5100:); and
(c) Current Ratio: Maintain at all times a Current Ratio measured at the end ofeaeh
Fiscal Quarter- of at lean’
5.11 Independent Engineer
The Administrative Agent may at the reasonable request of the Majority Lenders engage
an indepmdent engineer in the event that material technical problems occtu‘ with one or more of
the Strategic Assets and to report to the Lenders. The choice of the independent engineer will be
decided by mutual agreement between the Guarantor and the Administrative Agent with the
recommendation of the Majority Lenders. The Guarantor shall, and shall cause each of its
Subsidiaries as the case may be, and the Guarantor slmll use best eﬂ‘brts, without any obligation
on is part to make a monetary payment or provide other consideration (subject to the provisions
of the Guarantee relating to expenses), to cause 0k Tech and any Non-Controlled Investment to,
provide the independent engineer with (i) such information as the independent engineer may
reasonably require in ﬁndrerance of such reports, (ii) access to the mines, and (iii) the full co-
operation of representatives of the Guarantor, the Subsidiary, 0k Tedi or any Non-Controlled
Investment as the case may be.
5.12 Project Costs 3
The Gimmtor will fund its Proportionate Share ofthe Estimated Project Costs by way of 
Sponsor Contributions as provided in the Credit Agreement. 


.37.
5.13 Cost Overrun: -

In the event of Cost Overruns with respect to the Project, the Guarantor will fund its
Prop‘om’m Sim of such Cost Over-runs by way of Sponsor Conn-ibqu as provided in the
Credit Agreement, provided, for greater certainty, that if the Sponsors elect not to fund Cost
Oven-nus and instead repay the Guaranteed Obligations, the Guarantor shall have no timber
liability under this Section 5.13.

ARTICLE 6
NEGATIVE COVENANTS OF THE GUARANTOR

Untii the occurrence of a Guarantee Ten-ru‘rtntion Event, the Guarantor agrees with each
of the Administrative Agent and the Las ches Lenders that the Gimantor shall per-{om its
obligations set forth in this Article 6.

L 6.1 Indebtedness

The Guarantor will not, and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, create, incur,
assume orpermit to exist any Indebtedness, except:

(a) any Indebtedness created under this Guarantee or the other Financing Documents;

(b) any Indebtedness existing on the date hereof and disclosed on Schedule “D” and

any renewals or replacements thereof;

(0) (i) any Indebtedness of any Subsidiary of the Guarantor to the Guarantor, (ii) any

unsecured Indebtedness ofany Material Subsidiary of the Guarantor to any other
Material Subsidiary of the Guarantor, (iii) any indebtedness of the Guarantor to
any Material Subsidiary of the Guarantor provided that (A) such Mala-in]
Subsidiary has guaranteed the Guarantor's obligations to the Las Cruces Lenders
, hereunder and the Guarantor’s obligations to the Inmet Permitted Hedging
Lenders under the lime! Permitted Hedging Agreements. and (B) such
Indebtedness is fully postponw and subordinated to the Gmntor’s obligations to
the lenders herewider and the Guarantor’s obligations to the Inmet Permitted
Hedging Lenders under the Inmet Permitted Hedging Agreements, (iv) any
Indebtedness of CLC Copper ll (MK Gold) to CLC Copper 1, Leucndia, any
Affiliate of Leucadia or any Subsidiary of the Guarantor in respect of Sponsor
Contributions or amounts advanced in respect of the Exploration Properties to the
want permitted under the Credit Agreement, provided that such Indebtedness is
(A) postponed and subordinated to CLC Copper H's (MK Gold‘s) Indebtedness
arising under the Gumm- Security Documents and assigned to the Lenders as
security for same, or (v) any Indebtedness of CLC Copper I to Leueadia, any
Afﬁliate of Leucadia or any Subsidiary of the Guarantor in respect of Sponsor
Connibmions or amounts advanced in respect of the Exploration Properties to the
extent permitted under the Credit Agreement;
(d) any other Indebtedness of the Guarantor or any of its Subsidiaries not otherwise 
permitted hereunder incurred to ﬁnance the acquisition. construction or :
improvement of any ﬁxed or capital assets, including Capital Lease Obligations ‘


.33-
and any indebtedness assumed in connection with the Inquisition of any such
sssetsorsecuredbyaLienonmymxhassetspriortotheacqulsitionthereoﬂnnd
extensions, renewals and replacemean of any such Indebtedness that do not
increase the outstanding principal amount thereof; provided that the aggregate
principal amount of Indebtedness per-mimd by this Section 6.1(d) shall not
exceed, at any time, Cdn. $25,000,000 (or its then Equivalent Amount);

(e) any Indebtedness seemed vby Purchase Money Liens not exceeding Cdn.
$25,000,000 (or its then Equivalent Amount);

(1) any Indebtedness in respect of judgments that the Guarantor has determined in
good faith will be (and which are) stayed or discharged on or before the earlia- of
(i) 30 days of the rendering thereof or (ii) the date that the judgment creditor

_ commences to enforce the judgment;

(g) any indebtedness in respect of lnmet Permitted Hedging Agreemenm; the
Guarantor hereby aekxmwledges that Inme: Permitted Hedging Agreements made
available by any lnmet Permitted Hedging Lender will be at such lncnet Permitted
Hedging Lender's sole discretion and will be subject to separate credit approval
and documentation;

(h) Non—Recourse Indebtedness up in a maximum aggregate principal amount of Cdni
$75,000,000 (or its then Equivalent Amount) (i) for the acquisition undr'or
development of any resource property or Core Business Asset (excluding the
Project) that has not been in commercial production prior to the Closing Date or
(ii) for the acquisition of an Operating Asset (including existing indebtedness in
respect of such Operating Am that is assumed at the time of acquisition thereof),
in each case, by the Guarantor or a Subsidiary of the Guarantor. provided the
Administrative Agent, on behalf of the Lns Cruoes Lenders and the lnmct
Permitted Hedging Lenders, shall have received setisﬁctory conﬁrmation of the
non-reocm‘se nature of all such indebtedness (pursuant to an oﬁoer’s certiﬁcate
delivered to the Administative Agent by a Responsible Ofﬁcer and a letter from
counsel for the Guarantor or such Subsidiary outlining that the documermtion
with respect to such Non-Recomse Indebtedness (on its face) evidences some);

(i) Non-Recourse indebtedness associated with the reﬁnancing of Indebtedness
permitted under Section 6.l(l\) (in a maximum: principal amount not exceeding the
principal amount of such Indebtedness being reﬁnanced), upon substantially
similar or more favourable terms to the Guarantor or its Subsidiary, as the case

may be, provided the Administrative Agent, on behalf of the Les Crimes Lenders
and the knot Permitted Hedging Lenders, shall have reeeived satisfactory
conﬁrmation of the non-reoomse nature of such reﬁnanced indebtedness _
(pursuant to an nﬁicer’s certificate delivered to the Administrative Agent by a
Responsible Ofﬁcer and a letter from counsel for the Guarantor or such I
Subsidiary outlining that the documentation with respect to such Non-Recourse 5
Indebtedness (on its face) evidences same); 


. 39 .

(j) Subordan Debt (provided that satisfactory documentation evidencing the
subordination provisions and other terms in the deﬁnition of Subordinated Debt
are provided to the Administrative Agent);

(k) Indebtedness for which the proceeds are applied in pennanent prepayment of all
of the Guaranteed Obligations and the Inmet Permitted Hedging Obligations;

(l) unsecured Indebtedness in addition to the other indebtedness permitted by this
Section 61 not exceeding (3er $10,000,000 (or its then Equivalent Amount); and

(m) Indebtedness with respect to letters of credit or petformance bonds used or
required in the ordinary course of business which are cash collateralized in
accordance with Section 6.2(d).

 6.2 Liens
~ The Guarantor will not, and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, create, incur,
assume or permit to exist any Lien on any property or asset now owned or herasﬁer acquired by
the Guarantor or any of its Subsidiaries, or assign or sell any income or revenues (including
accounts receivable) or rights in respect of any thereof, except:

(a) Permitted Liens;

(b) any Liar on any property or asset of the Guarantor or any Subsidiary of the
Gtmrantor existing on tlr date hereof and disclosed to the Lenders including those
Liens securing Indebtedness permitted under Section 61(0); provided that such
Lien shall secure only those obligations which it secures on the date hereof;

(c) any Lien existing on any Operating Asset or Cote Business Asset prior to the
acquisition thereof by the Guarantor or any Subsidiary of the Guarantor, provided

that (i) such Lien is not creamd in contemplation of or in connection with such
acquisition, (ii) such Lien shall not apply to any other property or assets of the
Guarrmtnr or any Subsidiary of the Guarantor, and such Lien shall only secure
these obligations which it secures on the date of acquisition of the Operating
Asset or Core Business Asset; by the Guarantor or a Subsidiary of the Guarantor:

(d) Lin: by way of cash collateral not to exceed Cdni 525‘000900 (or its then
Equivalent Amount) in the aggregate to Secure letters of credit and performance
bonds used or required in the ordinary course of business or that have been
disclosed to the Lenders and any replacements or renewals thereof; and

(e) Lien on the shares of 0k Tedi arising under clause 15 of the Constitution of 0k
Tedi.

6.3 Fundamental Changes

(a) The Guarantor will not. and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, merge into
or amalgam: or consolidate with any other Person, or permit any other Person to ,
merge into or malgamate or consolidate with it, or sell, transfer, lease or 


- 44) .
otherwise dispose of (in one tt‘tmsactiott or in a series of transactions) all or
substantiallyallofitsassets,oralloranyoftheﬁquitySwmitiesofany
Subsidiary ofﬂie Guarantor from time to time (in each case, whether mw owned
or hereaﬁer acquired and except in each case to one or more wholly-owned
Afﬁliates of the Guarantor), or liquidate or dissolve, unless the suceem
corporation, in the case nfthc Guam-rm, is governed by the Applicable Laws of
Canada or a province thereof and, in the case of the Guarantor or any Subtn‘diary
of the Guarantor, the successor corporation has assumed all of the obligations of
_ theGuarantororsuehSubsidjary,a5thecascmaybeundcrﬂ1isGuaranteeandin
the opinion of all of the Lars Cruoes Lenders acting reasonably. such merger,
amalgamation or consolidation would not constitute a Material Adverse Change.
(b) The Guarantor will not, and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, engage to
; anymsterialexteminmiybusinessothorthanbusimsseseogagedinthe
§ exploration, acquisition, development, mining, milling, processing and sale of
 metals and minerals (collectively, the "Core Business").
 6.4 Investment:
‘ The Guarantor will not, and will not permit any Subsidiary to make or permit to exist any
investments except for (i) investments by the Guarantor or a Subsidiary of the Guarantor in the
Equity Securities of any other Subsidiary of the Guarantor; (ii) Cash Equivalents; or (iii)
investments permitted under Section 66.
6.5 Loam or Advances ,

The Guarantor will not, and will not permit any Subsidiary to make or permit to exist any
loans or advances exoept as permitted wider Section 6.1(c) and Section 6.9.

6.6 Acquisition:

The Guarantor will not, and will not permit any Subsidiary of the Guarantor to, purchase,
hold or acquire (including musuant to any arnalgmiatiou wiﬂ: any Person that was not a wholly
owned Subsidiary of the Guarantor prior In such amalgamation) any Equity Searing, evidences
of indebtedness or other securities (including any option, warrant or other right to acquire any of
the foregoing) of, any other Person, or purchase or otherwise acquire (in one transaction or a
series of transactions) any assets of any other Person, except (i) evidences of Indebtedness
permitted under Section 6.5; (ii) investments permitted under section 6.4; or (iii) acquisitions of
or investments in Core Business Assets, provided that such acquisition or investments under
items (1‘), (ii) and (iii) of this Section 6.6 will not. individually or in the aggregate, cause a
Default, Event of Default or constitute a Material Adverse Change and provided that such
acquisition or investment under items (i)I (ii) and (iii) of this Section 6.6 is made by way of a
cash payment, indebtedness permitted under Section 6.1 hereof, Indebtedness secured by Liens

permitted by Section 6.2 hereof or the issuance of Equity Securities or any combination thereof, 
all in accordance with the terms hereof. :


.41.
6.7 Hedging Agreements

Die Guarantor will not. and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, enter into any V
Hedging Transactions, other than under the Inmet Permitted Hedging Agreements, provided
that:

(a) The Guarantor and its Subsidiaries will not commit to deliver thereunder in excess

of 75% of its or their aggregate annual precimm or base metal production
(determined, in each case, on a consolidated basis) from pI‘OVBn and probable
mineral reserves (as calculated in accordance with National Instrument 4340]
Standards of Disclosure for Mineral Projects as promulgated by the Canadian
Securities Administrators) and contained in the annual life of mine plans provided
to the lenders from time to time hereunder;

 (b) all Existing Hedging Agreements will be permitted to remain secured pending

" run-off of such existing Hedging Transactions; and

(c) The Inmet Permitted Hedging Agreements shall provide that the Guarantor has
the ability to novels to other lnmet Permitted Hedging Lenders in the event that
this Guarantee is terminated and all of the obligations due and owing or to be
perfumed thereunder are satisfied.

6.8 Dividends etc.

The Guarantor will not, and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, declare any
dividends. or apply any of its assets to the purchase, redemption or other acquisition or
retirementof,orsetapartanysumforthepaymemofanydivideudson,efforthepurchase,
redemption or other acquisition or retirement of, or make any other distribution (by reduction of
capital or otherwise), in respect of. any of its shares in any Fiscal Year except:

(a) if there is no Default or Event of Default omsurnding, the Guarantor may pay cash

dividends or distributions (by reduction of capital or otherwise) provided that the
declaration and payment of any such dividend or distribution does not result in a
Default, Event of Default or Material Adverse Change,

03) The Guarantor may declare  pay dividends with respect to its Equity Securities
payable solely in additional Equity Securities,

(c) any Subsidiary of the Guarantor, including for greater certainty but subject to the
provisions ofthe Credit Agreement, the Compmy, may declare and pay dividends
to the Guarantor or any other Subsidiary of the Guarantor, and any wholly owned
subsidiary of the Guarantor and any Subsidiary of the Guarantor may redeem or
repurchase its own Equity Securities, and

(d) The Guarantor and its Subsidiaries may make payments pursuant to and in
accordance with stock option plans, proﬁt sharing plans and/or other beneﬁt plans
for management, directors or employees of tire Guarantor and its Subsidiaries. 1
Without limiting the foregoing, the Guarantor will not. and will not permit any 


. 42 -
other Subsidiary to, enter into or be party to, or make any payment under, any
, Synthetic Purchase Agreement.
6.9 Transactions with Amliates
The Guarantor will not, and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, sell, lease or otherwise
transfer any property or assets to, or pmhase, lease or otherwise acquire any property or assets
from, or otherwise engage in any other transactions with, any of its Afﬁliates, except (a) in the
ordinary course of business at prices and on terms and conditions not less favourable to the
Guarantor or such Subsidiary than could be obtained on an arm’s-length basis from unrelated
third parties, and (b) any payment in fmherance of any payment permitted by Section 6.8. The
Guarantor will not enter into any transaction or series of transactions. or permit any of its
Subsidiaries to enter into any transaction or series of motions, with Afﬁliates of the
Guarantor or such Subsidiaries which involve an outﬂow of money or other property Sam the
Guarantor or such Subsidiaries to an Afﬁliate of the Guarantor or such Subsidiaries, including
payment of management fees, administration fees, compensation, salaries, asset purchase
payments or any other type of fees or payments similar in nature, or the melding of loans, other
than on terms and conditions substantially as favourable to the Guarantor and soak Subsidiaries
as would be obtainable by the Guarantor and such Subsidiaries in a reasonably comparable
arm’s-length transaction with a Person other than an Aﬁiliate of the Guarantor or such
Subsidiaries. The foregoing restrictions shall not apply to: (i) the payment of reasonable and
customary fees to directors of the Guarantor who are not employees of the Guarantor, (ii) any
other transaction with any employee, ofﬁcer or director of the Guarantor or any of its
Subsidiaries pursuant to employee proﬁt sharing and/or beneﬁt plum mid compensation,
employee loans and non-competition arrangements in amounts customary for corporatiom
similarly situated to the Guarantor or any such Subsidiary and entered into in the ordinary course
of business and approved by the board of directors of the Guarantor or such Subsidiary, (iii) any
reimbmsernent of reasonable mn-of—pocket costs incurred by an Afﬁliate of the Guarantor on
behalf of or for the account of the Guarantor or any of its Subsidiaries, or (iv) for greater
certainty, subject to the Credit Agreement, the payment of reasonable fees by the Company to
the Guarantor in respect of the provision of this Guarantee, fees payable by the Company to the
Guarantor under the Construction Services Agreement and Management Services Agreement or
any reimbursement of Owner’s Costs by the Company to the Guarantor;
6.10 Repayment of Debt
The Guarantor will not, and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, repay, prepay,
redeem, repmchase, defense or otherwise make any payment on account of any Indebtedness for -
borrowed money except for (a) payment on account of Indebtedness hereunder, (b) any payment
consemai to in writing by the Majority Lenders, (e) lndebtainess for borrowed money permitted
by Section 641 provided that such repayment, prepayment, redemption, repurchase, defensanee or
other payment shall not be permitted if there is a Default or Event of Default oustnnrling or if
such repayment, prepayment, redemption, repurchase, defeasaoce or other payment could
reasonably be expected to result in a Default, Event of Default or Material Adverse Change.
6r11 Sales Ind Lenseth
The Gourmet will not enter into, or permit any ofits Subsidiaries to enter into, any 
arrangement, directly or indirectly, with any Person whereby the Guarantor or any such 


.43.
Subsidiary shell sell or transfer all or any part of any Strategic Assets, whether now oumed or
hereﬁer acquired, and whereby the Guarantor or any such Subsidiary shall then or thereaﬁer
rent or lease as lessee such Strategic Assets or any part thereof or other property which the
Guarantor or any such Subsidiary intends to use for substantially the same purpose or purposes
as the property sold or transferred, unless (i) the ten-us of such arrangement are consented to in
writing lay the Majority Lenders, and (ii) 100% of the net proceeds of such sale or transfer are
deposited to a cash collateral account securing the Guaranteed Obligations. -
6.12 Pension Plan Compliance
The Guarantor will (a) not minute, or permit a Subsidiary of the Guarantor to
tenninate, any registered pension plan in a manner, or take any other action with respect to any
registered pension plan, which, in each case, could reasonably be expected to result in any
material increase to the liability of the Guarantor or a Subsidiary of the Guarantor for the plan in
question, (b) make, and will cause its Subsidiaries to make, full payment when due of all
amounts which, under the provisions of any registered pension plan, agreement relating thereto
or Applicable Law, the Guarantor or a Subsidiary of the Guarantor is required to pay as
contributions thereto, except where the failure to make such payments would not constitute a
Material Adverse Change, and (e) fund and will cause its Subsidiaries to fund, ail pension plans
in accordance widt Applicable Laws and the terms of the applicable plan and any armorial
reports delivered thereunder.
6.13 Sale or Discount of Receivables
The Guarantor will not discount, sell or create a Lien in (with or without renew-5e}, or
pennit any of its Subsidiaries to discount or seli or create a Lien in (with or without recourse),
any of its notes receivable or accounts receivable except for Liens permitted unda- Section 6.2
hereof.
6.14 Asset Disposition
The Guarantor will not, and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to, enter into any Asset
Dispositions other than the following Asset Dispositions made on an arm’s length basis:
(2) Asset Dispositions of inventory sold in tire ordinary course of business upon
customary credit team;
(1:) Asset Dispositions of obsolete assets, including equipment, that are not material
in the aggregate;
(c) Asset Dispositions of personal property that is replaced within a reasonable time
(taking the location and availability of s'ooh property and replacement property
« into account), with property ofat least the same value;
(d) Asset Dispositions that are made in the ordinary course of business and that are
not in respect of Strategic Assets and are not, in the aggregate, material to the
Guarantor on a consolidated basis;


 - 44 :'
(e) Asset Dispositions that are made in the ordinary course ofbustness and which are
inmpectofnssmﬂmformpmofthesmtegicmmtdngmnwem
book value rm exceeding. (hiring the term of this Guarantee. Cdn $25,000,000
(or its then Equivalent Amnlmthther than those permitted under Section 6.l4(n),
Section 6.1403) and Section 6.14(e) above);
(f) Asset Dispositions of a funne acquired Operating Asset or Core Business Aset
ether than a Strategic Asset;
{3) except as pmvided in Section 6.1401) and Section 6.146) below, an Asset
Disposition of any Strategic Asset, provided that (i) such Asset Disposition has
been consented to by the Supezmnjority Lenders. and(ii)100% of the net
proceeds of such Asset Disposition are deposited with the Administrative Agent
: as smurity for the Guaranteed Obligations;
 (h) n
(i) m
6.15 Non-Controlled Investment:
915.16;
{a} Shares. Sharehuldhgs. Ordinary Sham
The Gummmrsball: (a) beaholdermdowneroﬂatau timegatlesst ISVoofﬁm issued
ordinary shares of 01: Tedi; and (b) shall not, without Majority Lender consent, take any neu'an
that could reasonably be expected to impair. diminish or led to the cessation at: (1) its
entitlement as n shareholder to the economic returns of 01: Tedi, (2) its rights as a shareholder
under the FRSA; and (iii) its Joint Control ofOk Tedi.
(b) Liens.
“me Grammar shall make or cause to be made any payment required pursuant to
Applicable Laws that may arise tmder Secu‘on 15 of the Constitution ofOk Tedi.
(c) Ditectws.
The Guarantor shall at all times, pursuant to Section 59(1) of the Constitution. have
appointed a Director to the Board (as deﬁned in the Constitution) of 0k Tedi. The Guarantor r
shall use its best cﬂ‘orts to cause it: appointee under Section 59(1) ufthe Consumﬁun to attend 
at, or participate in, all meetings or decisions required ofthe Board ofOk Tedi. The Guam-nor 3
shall inform: the Administrative Amt of any change of appointees to the Board ofOk Ted}. ‘


— 45 - '

(49 Dividends, Available Cash Flow.

Without Majority Lender consent, the Guarantor shall not, pursuant to Sections 95
through 110 of the Constitution, (1) agree to a reduction, or a delay in the availability (re:
payment of dividends), of the Available Cash Flow (as deﬁned in the Consdttnion) for any
ﬁnancial year of O): Tedi and (2) agree to the non-payment of scheduled dividend payments
pursuant to the Constitution, provided that, in the case of (l) and (2) above, any delay or deferral
that: arises as a consequence of a Delay Event in the availability of the Available Cash Flow
and/or payment of dividends, as the case may he, shall not, in each case, require Majority Lender
consent.

(e) Changes, Project Statement, Oil-er Shareholder Approvals.

Without Majority Lender consent (acting reasonably), the Guarantor shall not age: to

y (1) any change in the business of O]: Tedi (which shall remain limited to the scope of the Project
3 (as deﬁned in the FRSA) and as more particularly outlined in Secﬁonll of the FRSA), or
(2) any amendment to or variation of the FRSA.

The Guarantor hereby reiterates its expression in Section 3.1 of the FRSA and covenants
to maintain the intention set out therein as long as it is a shareholder of OK Tedi.

Without Majority Lender consent, the Guarantor shall not grant Shareholder approval to
(a) any of the matters set out in Subsections 3.5(aXiii) or (viii) of the FRSA, (b) any of the
nutter-s set out in Subsections 3.5(a)(i), (ii), (vi) or (vii) of the FRSA unless the Guarantor
determines in good faith that the granting of such approval could not reasonably be expected to
materially impair or diminish the Guarantor‘s (A) existing rights under the FRSA or (B) its Joint
Control of 0k Tedi; (c) the appointment of, or any change in, the Auditors (as deﬁned in the
FRSA) unless any successor thereto is an internationally recognized accounting ﬁrm and the
Administrative Agent is notiﬁed of such appointment or changes
6.16 Non-Controlled Investment:

With respect to Non-Controlled Investments, the Guarantor (i) agrees to abide by the
Consulting Documents or any other Ownership Agreement and all other project sndlor policy
documents of such Non—Controlled Investment, (1i) hereby conﬁnms its intention that the Person
in which the Guanth will have the Non-Controlled lnvesunent conduct its operations at all
times and in all respects in accordance with acceptable mining industry practice. and in
compliance with the Ownership Agreement where such Person is a party thereto, with the
primary pmposc of maximizing economic returns to those holding an interest in such Person,
taking into account community concerns, responsible environmental practice, the highest

possible regard for workplace safety and employee health and Applicable Laws of the
jurisdiction under which such Person is subject.


_ 45 .
' ARTICLE 7
EVENTS OF DEFAULT
7.1 Events of Detoult
‘ Each of the following events shall constitute an event of default under this Guarantee (in
each case an "Event of Default"):

(:1) the Guarantor shall (i) fail to pay any amount in respect of the Guaranteed
Obligations as the same shall become due and payable in accordance with the
terms and conditions of this Goat-wee; or (ii) fail to pay any amount: in respect of
the lame! Hedging Obligations as the same shall become due and payable in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the lnmet Permitted Hedging

, Agreements;
 (b) any representation or warranty made or deemed made by or on behalf of the
‘ Guaramm or my Subsidiary of the Guarantor in or in Camden with any
v Financing Document or any amendment or modiﬁcation thereof or waiver
thereunder, or in my report, certiﬁcate, ﬁnancial statement or other document
ﬁnished pursuant to or in connection with any Financing Ducument or any
amendment or modiﬁcation thereof or waiver thereunder. shall prove to have been
incorrect in any material respect when made or deemed to be made; provided that
if such incorrect reptesentation or warranty is reasonably capable of being cured
within 30 days, there shill be no Event of Default if such incorrect representation
or warranty is remedied within 30 days alien notice thereof ﬁum the
Administrative Agent to the Guarantor (which notice will be given at the request
of any Las Cruces Lender);

(c) the Guarantor shall fall to oWewe or perform any covenant, condition or
agreement contained in Section 5.1(i), Section 5.2 (with respect to the Guarantor‘s
existence only), Section Silo, Section 5.12 or any Section of Article 6;

(d) the Gtmmtor shall fail to observe on perform any covenant, condition or
obligation contained in this Guarantee (other than those speciﬁed in
Section 11(6), (0) or (c) above) or any other Financing Dominant. and such
failure shall continue unremedied for a period of 30 days after notice thereof ﬁrm
the Administrative Agent to the Gtwrantor (which notice will be given at the
request ofuny Las Cruces Lender);

(e) the Guarantor, any Material Subsidiary ofthe Guarantor or 0k Tedi:

(1) becomes insolvent. or generally does not or becomes unable to pay
its debts or meet its liabilities asthc same become due, or admit: in
writing its inability to pay its debts generally, or declares any
general moratorium on its indebtedness, or proposes a compromise
or arrangement between it and any elm: of its creditors; ;

(ii) commits an act of bankruptcy under the Bankruptcy and 
Imolvemy Act (Canada) or under analogous foreign law, or makes ‘


_ 47 .
an assignment cfits property for the general beneﬁt ofim craditors
under such Act or under analogous foreign law, or makes a
proposal (or ﬁles a notice of its innerm'on to do so) under such Act v
-, or under analogous foreign law;

(iii) institutes any proceeding seeking to adjudicate it an insolvent, or
seeking liquidation, dissolution, winding-up, morganizmion,
compromise, arrangement, adjustment, protection, moratorium,
relief, stay of proceedings of creditors generally (or any class of
creditors), or composition of it or its debts or any other relief,
Lmder any federal, provincial or foreign law now or hereafter in
eﬁect relating to bankruptcy, Winding—up, insolvency.
reorganization, receivership, plans of arrangement or relief or
protection of debtors (including the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act

‘ (Canada), the Companies' Creditors Arrangement Act (Canada)
and any applicable corporations legislation) or at common law or
in equity, or ﬁles an answer admitting the material allegations of a
petition ﬁled against it in any such proceeding;

(iv) applies for the appoinunen’t of. or the taking of possession by. a
receiver, interim receiver, receiver/manager, Sequestramr,
conservator, wmdian,  mines, liquidate: or other
similar oﬁioial for it or any substantial part of‘rts property; or

.f (v) threatens to do any of the foregoing, or takes any action. corporate
or otherwise, to approve, effect, consent to or authorize any of the
actions described in Section ‘r'.1(e) or Section 7.16), or otherwise
acts in furtherance thereof or fails to act in a timely and appropriate
manner in defame thereof,

(i) any petition is ﬁled, application made or other proceeding instituted against or in
respect of the Guarantor, any Material Subsidiary of the Guarantor or 0k Tedi:

(i) seeking to adjudicate it an insolvent;

(ii) seeking a receiving order against it under the Emma and
Insolvency Act (Canada) or under analogous foreign law;

(iii) seeking liquidation, dissolution, winding-up, reorganization,
compromise, arrangement, adjustment, protection, moratorium,
relief, stay of proceedings of creditors generally (or any class of
creditors), or composition of it or its debts or any other relief under
any federal, provincial or foreign law now or hereaﬁer in effect
relating to bankruptcy, windingarp, insolvency, remganlmtion,
roceivership, plans of arrangement onelief or protection of debtors
(including the Banbuplcy and Insolvency Act (Canada), the ,
Conqumies’ Creditors Arrangement Act (Canada) and any ,
applicable corporations legislation) or at common law or in equity; i
or


- 4s _

(iv) seeking the entry oi'an order for relief or the appointment of, or the
taking of possession by, a receiver. interim receiver,
receiver/manager, sequestrator, conservator, custodian,
administrator, trustee. liquidator or other similar ofﬁcial for it or
any aubsiantial pm of its property;

and such petition, application or proceeding continues undismissed, or unstayed
and in effect. for a period of 30 days aﬂer the lamination timeof, provided that if
an order, decree or judgment is granted or mtered (whether or not entered or
subject to appeal) against the Guarantor or any Material Subsidiary of the
Guarantor therelmder in the interim, such grace period will cease to apply, and
provided ftu'ther that if the Guarantor or any Material Subsidiary of the Guarantor
ﬁles an answer admitting the material allegations of a petition ﬁled agaimt it in
_ any such proceeding, such grace period will cease to apply;

(3) any other event occurs that, under the Applicable Laws of any applicable
jurisdiction, has an effect equivalent to any of the events referred to in either of
Section 7.1(e) or Section 7.1(f) above.

(h) one or more judgments for the payment of money in a emulative mount in
excess of Cdni $25,000,000 (or its then Equivalent Amount) in the aggregate is
rendered against the Guarantor or any Material Subsidiary of the Guarantor and
the Guarantor or the relevant Material Subsidiary, as the case may be, has not:

(i) provided for its discharge in accordance with its terms within 30
days ﬁramthedateofenlrytherenf, or

(ii) procured a stay of execution thereof within 30 days from the date
of entry thereof and, within such period or such longer period
during which execution of such judgment has been stayed,
appealed such judgment and caused the execution thereof to he
stayed during such applicable appeal period, or if such appeal has

been ﬁled such petition, application or proceeding is not, or does
not remain vacated, discharged or stayed, provided that if
enforcement and/or realization prooeedinga are lawfully
commenced in respect thereof in the interim, such grace period
will cease to apply;
(i) any property of the Guarantor or any Material Subsidiary of the Guarantor having
a fair market value in excess of Cdn. $25,000,000 (or its then Equivalent Amount)
in the aggregate: ’
(i) is seized (including by way of execution, attachment, garnishment, ’
levy or dismint), or
(ii) becomes subject to any Lien thereon Securing Indebtedness in ;
excess of Cdn. $25,000,000 (or its then Equivalent Amount) is 3
enforced, or 


.49.

(iii) becomes subject to any charging order or equitable execution of a
Goverrmrentnl Authority, or any writ of execution or distress
warranteximinrespeetoftheGuaranmroranyMaterial
Subsidiary of the Guarantor, or

(iv) is subject to seizure or distrnint by any sheriﬁ‘ or other Person
becomes lawfully entitled by operation of law or otherwise to seize
or distrain upon such property and in any case such seizure,
enforcement, execution. aturehment, garnishment, distraint,
charging Order or equitable execution, or other seizure or tight,
continues in eﬁ‘ect and is not released or discharged for more than
30 days or such longer period during which entitlement to the use
of such property continues with the Guarantor or any Material
Subsidiary of the Guarantor, or an appeal has not been ﬁled in

 respect of such charging order. writ of execution or distress

‘ war-rant within any applicable appeal period or if such appeal has
been ﬁled such charging order, writ of execution or distress
warrant is not, or does not remain vacated, discharged or stayed,
and the Guarantor or snob Material Subsidiary is contesting the
some in good faith and by appropriate proceedings, provided that if
tlwpropertyisremovedﬁ'omtlteuseoftheﬁuaramororsuch
Material Subsidiary, or is sold, in the interim, such grace period
will cease to apply;

6) one or more ﬁnal judynents, not involving the payment of money and not
otherwise speciﬁed in Section 7.10:) above, has been rendered against the
Guarantor or any Material Subsidiary of the Guarantor, the result of which
constitutes a Material Adverse Change, so long as the Guarantor or such Material
Subsidiary has not (i) provided for its discharge in accordance with its terms
within 30 days ﬂoor the date ofentry thereof, or (ii) procured a stay ofexecution
thereofwitlrin 30 days from the date of entry thereof and within such period, or
such longer period during which execution of such judgment has been stayed,
appealed such judgment and earned the execution thereof to be stayed during such
appeal, provided that if enforcement endJor realization proceedings are lawfully
commenced in respect thereof in the interim, such grace period will cease to
apply;

(1:) this Guarantee, any other Financing Document or any material obligation or other
provision hereof or thereof at anytime for any reason terminates or ceases to be in
full force and eﬁect and a legally valid, binding and enforceable obligation of the
Guarantor or any Material Subsidiary of the Guarantor. is declared to be void or
voidable or is repudiated. or the validity, binding eﬁ‘ect, legality or enforceability
hereoforthereofisatunytimeoomestedbythecizamntororanyllmerial
Subsidiary, or the Guarantor or any Material Subsidiary denies that it has any or
any limiter liability or obligation hereunder or therede or any action or ,
proceeding is corrunenced to enjoin or restrain the performance or observance by g
the Guarantor or any Material Subsidiary of the Guarantor 0f any material terms 
hereof or thereof or to question the validity or enforceability hereof or thereof, or ‘r


. so .
at any time it is unlawﬁrl or impossible for the Guarantor or any Material
Subsidiary of the Guarantor to perform any of its material obligations hereunder
, or thereunder;
(i) any Lien purported to be created by any Guarantor Security Document in
- Collateral with a fair market value or book value (whichever is greater) in excess.
individually or in the aggregate, of Cdn. $25,000,000 (or its then Equivalent
Amount) shall cease to he, or shall be asserted by the Guarantor or any Material
Subsidiary of the Guammorthat is a Credit Party not to be, a valid, perfected, ﬁrst
priority (except as otherwise expressly provided in this Guarantee or such
Security Document) Lien;
(m) a Material Adverse Change shall oemr and be continuing;
 (n) any event or condition acorns that results in any Indebtedness (other than ’
 Indebtedness owing hereunder) of any one or more of the Guarantor and its
5 Material Subsidiaries in an aggregate principal mount in mess of Cdn.
 $25,000,000 (or its then Equivalent Amozmt) becoming due prior to its scheduled
 maturity or that enables or permits (with or without the giving ofnotioe, the lapse
: ofn'me or both) the holder or holders of such Indebtedness or any trustee or agent
on its or their hehalfto cause any such Indebtedness to Meme due, or to require
the prepayment, repurchase, redemption or defeasanoe thereof, prior to its
scheduled maturity and such event or condition is not waived by the holders of
such Indebtedness or if such Indebtedness is permitted to be repaid under
Section 6‘10, the Guarantor fails to repay such Indebtedness, in either case within
10 Business Days aﬂer the commence of such event or condition; or
(o) a Change in Control other than as permitted under Section 6.3 of this Guarantee
shall occur.
7.2 Enforcement
The Guarantor acknowledges that pursuant to the Credit Agreement, if any Event of
Default described in Section 7.1 shall occur for any reason, whether voluntary or involtmtary,
and be continuing, the Administrative Agent may (acting with the consent of the Majority
Lenders), and upon the direction of the Majority Lenders, shrilll upon notioe or demand to the
Guanmtor and the Company, declare the Commitments under the Credit Agreement (if not
theretofore terminated) to be terminated and declare all or any portion of the outstanding
Principal Amount of the Loans under the Credit Agreement to be due and payable and any or all
other Obligations and all amounts in respect of the Guaranteed Obligations (excluding, however,
unless express instructions to the contrary are received from the relevant 'Las Cruces Lender,
lnmet Hedging Obligations in respect of any Permitted Hedging Agreement to which any Las
Cmces Leader is a party) to be due and payable whereupon the full unpaid amount ofsueh Loans 5
and any and all other obligations which shall he so declared due and payable shall be and S
become immediately due and payable, without further notice or demand and/or. as the case may 5
be, the Commitments shall terminate.


, . 51 .
7.3 mm Documents
Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default and all of the Guaranteed Obligations having
become immediately due and payable in accordance with the terms hereof, the security held by
the Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent. any Las Cruces Lender and/or any trustee on
behalf of or for the beneﬁt of the Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent and/or the Les
Cmccs Lenders pursuant to any of the Gtmtantur Security Documents shall become immediately
enforceable and the Majority Lenders may, in their absolute discretion, instruct the
Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent and/or the Lss Cmees Lenders to mks any and all
steps in order to enforce and realize upon the such security, in whole or in part, and to enforce
any and all rights and remedies under each ofthe Guarantor Security Documents,
7.4 Remedies Not Exclusive
; The Guanmtor expressly agrees that the rights and remedies of the Adminisuative Agent,
 the Collateral Agent and the La: Cruees Lenders tinder this Guarantee and the Guarantor
: Security Documents are cumulative and in addition to, and not in subsﬁmtian for, any righs m-
 remedies provided by law; any single or partial exercise by the Administrative Agent, the
I Collateral Agent andlor the Las Cruces Lenders of any right or remedy for a default or breach of
my term, covenant, condition or agreement in this Guarantee or any Gum-amm- Security
Document does not affect its or their rights and does not waive, alter, aﬁect, or prejudice any
other right or remedy to which the Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent and/or the Las
Cruces Lenders may be lawﬁdly entitled for the same default or breach Any waiver by the
Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent and/or any of the Las Cruees Lenders of the strict
observance of, performance of or compliance with any term. covenant, condition or agreement of
this Guarantee, any Guaramar Security Document and any indulgence by any of the
Adrninisumive Agent, the Collateral Agent or any of the Las Cmces Lenders is not a waiver of
any subsequent default.
7.5 Set-0ft
(a) In addition to any rights now or hereaﬁer granted under Applicable Law and not
by way of limitation of any such rights, each of the Las Cruces Lenders is
authorized a: any time, at such Las Cruces Lender’s option following the
occurtﬁme of an Event of Default which is continuing, without prior notice to the
Guarantor, In set-off and to appropriate and then remit to the Administrative
Agent and/or the Collateral Agent for distribution and application in accordance
with the Credit Agreement and the Guarantor Security Documents, any and all
deposits, matured or unmanned, general or special and any other indebtedness at
any time held by er owing by each ofthe [as Cruces Lenders to or for the credit
of or the account of the Guarantor against and on account of the obligatiuns and
liabilities of the Guarantor then due and payable to each of the Las Cmees ‘
Lenders under this Guarantee or any Guarantor Security Documents; including 
without limitation, all claims of any nature or description arising out of or ?
connected with this Guarantee. Each Las Cruces Lender exercising such right of
set-oﬁ‘ shall use its commercially reasonable (550115 to coordinate with the ‘
Administrative Agent and the Collateral Agent so as to reduce the possibility of 


_ 52 .
the Las Cruoes lenders collectively setting on“ amounts greater than the total of
such obligations and liabilities
(b) No mount which the Guarantor shall be obligated to pay or expend pursuant to
this Guarantee shall be reduced and the Guarantor shall not be relieved of any
obligations hereunder by reason of any right of net-off, compensation,
counterclaim or other cross-claims which the Guaramar might otherwise be
entitled to assert against the Compmy or any of the Las Cmoes Lenders.
ARTICLE 8
GENERAL
8.1 Noting, Etc.
 Any notice, direction, demand or other communication required or permitted to be given
 under this Guarantee shall. except as otherwise permitted herernider, be in writing and given by
’ delivering it or sending it by teteoopy or other similar form of recorded communication
addressed, ifto the Guarantor, to it at: Suite 1000, 330 Bay Street, Toronto, Ontario, Attention:
Vice-President, General Counsel, Telecnpier. (416) 368-4592 and if to the Lenders, the
Administrative Agent or the Collateral Agent, to the Administrative Agent at: Canadian Imperial
Bank of Commerce, BCE Place, PO. Box 500, lGl Bay Street, 8th Floor, Toronto, Ontario, M5}
258, Attention: Agency Manager, Facsimile: (416) 956-3830. Any such comrnluiication shall
be deemed to have been validly and effectively given (i) if personally delivemd, on the date of
such delivery if such date is a Business Day and such delivery was made prior to 4:00 pm
(Toronto time); and (ii) if transmitted by facsimile or similar means of recorded commication,
on the Business Day next following such date oftranstnission. Any party may change its address
for service from time to time by notice given in accordance with the foregoing and any
subsequent notice shall be sent to the party 81 its changed address.
8.2 Acknowledgement of Guarantor
The Guarantor achiawledges that the Credit Agreement may be amended from time to
time by agreement between the Lenders and the Company as set forth in the CreditAgreemem
without the consent of the Guarantor and that such amendments may modify substantially the
terms and conditions of the Credit Agreement as it wrists an the date hereof, including by
changing (or adding to) the covenants (ﬁnancial or otherwise) of the Company, or by changing
(or adding to) the Events of Default as provided therein, The Guarantor agrees that if any such
amendment occurs, this Guarantee will remain in full force and binding upon the Guarantor as if
such amendment were pan of the Credit Agreement on the date hereof. the Lenders and the
Company having no obligation to obtain die prior consent of the Guarantor with respect to any
such amendment or to notify the Guarantor in respect thereof; provided, however, that the
liability ofthe Guarantor hereunder shall not be increased in the event amendments are made to
the Credit Agreement which have the eﬁ'ect of increasing ﬁre principal amount of the Tranche A
Facility or the Tranche B Facility made available and/or the interest me(s) payable thereunder
when: such amendments have not been agreed to in writing by the Guarantor. z


. 53 .
83 Expensel; Indemnity

(a) The Guarantor shall pay (i) all reasonable out-of-pooket expenses incurred by the
Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent or any Las Cruces Lender, including
the reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of counsel for the Administrative
Agent, the Collateral Agent or any Las Cruccs Lender and all applicable Taxes, in
connection with the preparation and administration of this Guarantee and the
other Financing Documents (to the extem not otherwise paid by the Company
pinsuxnt to the Credit Agreement), (ii) all reasonable out-of-pooket expenses
incurred by the Admirzismrive Agent, the Collateral Agent and any Las Cruces
Lender, including the reasonable fees, charges and disbusements of counsel for
the Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent or any Les Cmces Lender and
applicable Taxes, in connection with any amendments, modiﬁcations or waivers
' of the provisions hereof or of any of the other Financing Documents, (whether or
 not the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby shall be consummated), and
 (iii) all out-of-pocket expemes incurred by the Administrative Agent, the
Collateral Agent or any Les Cmces wider, including the fees, clurges and
disbursements of any counsel for the Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent
or any Las Cruces Lender and all applicable Taxes, in connection with the
enforcement or protection of their rights in connection with this Guarantee,
including its rights under this Section 8.3(3), including all such out-oilpocket
expenses incurred during any workout restructuring or negotiations in respect of

the Guaranteed Obligations.

(h) The Guarantor shall indemnify the Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent
and each Las Cruces Lender. as well as each Related Party thereto and each
assignee of any of the foregoing Persons (each such Person and each such
assignee being called an "Indemnitee") against, and hold each lndemnitee
harmless from, my and all losses, claims, cost recovery actions, damages,
expenses and liabilities of whatsoever nature or kind and all reasonable out-of-
poclcet expenses (including due diligence expenses, reasonable travel expenses
and reasonable fees, charges) and all applicable Taxes to which any lndemnitee
may become subject arising out of or in connection with (i) the execution or
delivery of the Financing Documents or any agreement or insumrrent
contemplated thereby, the performance by the parties thereto of their respective
obligations thereunder, and the consummation of the Transactions or any other
transactions thereunder, (ii) any rental or prospective claim, litigation,
investigation or proceeding relating to the foregoing, whether based on contract,
tort or any other theory and regardless of whether any lndemnitee is a party
thereto, and any cost, liability or damage arising out of any settlement of any
action referred to above to which any lndemnitee is a party, (iii) any other aspect
of this Guarantee and the other Financing Documents, or (vi) the enforcement of
any lndemnitee’s rights hereunder and any related investigation, defence,
preparation of defence, litigation and enquiries; provided that such indemnity
shall not, as to any lndemm'tee, be available to the extent that such losses, claims, 
damages, liabilities or related expenses are determined by a court of competent §
jurisdiction by ﬁnal and nonappealable judgment to have resulted from the gross ,
negligence or wilful misconduct of such lndemnitee. In the evont that any claim, ’,


. 54 _
action, suit or proceeding. including, without limiting the generality of the
fmeguing, any inquiry or investigation (whether formal or informal) is brought or
institumd against any Indemnitee, the lndemm‘tees shall promptly notify the
Guammr and the Gummtor shall promptly retain counsel who shall be
reasonably satisfactory to the Indemutees to represent the Indemnitees in such
claim, action, order, suit or proceeding and the Glimmer shall pay all of the
reasonable fees and disbursements of such counsel relating to such claim, action,
order, suitor proceeding. In any such claim, action, order, suit or proceeding, the
lndemnitees shall have the rights to retain other counsel to act on their behalf,
» provided ﬁrst the fees and disbursements of such other counsel shall be paid by
the lndemnitees unless: (i) me Guarantor and the Indemnitees shall have mutually
agreed to the retention of such other counsel; or (ii) the named parties to any such
claim, action, order, suit or proceeding (including any added, third or impleaded
, Mes) include the Guarantor and the lndemnitees and representation of all such
5 parties by the same counsel would be inappropriate due to annual or potential
differing interests betwwn them (such as the availability of diﬂ‘erent defences).

(c) The Guarantor shall not men, and hereby waives (to the fullest extent permitted
by law), any claim against any lndemnitee, on any theory of liability, for special,
indirect, consequential or punitive damages (as opposed to direct or acmel
damages) arising out of, in motion with, or as a result of, any Financing
Doom-tent, or any agreement or instrument concernle thereby, or the
Transactions.

8.4 Possession
Possession of this instrument by the Administmive Agent or the Lenders shall be
conclusive evidence against the Guarantor that this instrument was not delivered in escrow or
pursuant to any agreement providing that it should not be eﬁ‘ective until any condition has been
complied with. None of the parties shall be bound by any representation or promise rustle by any
Person them which is not embodied herein.
8.5 Termination ' V
Subject to Section 3.11, the provisions of this Guarantee shall terminate and be of no
further force or effect upon the oocmrence of a Guarantee Termination Event.
8.6 Currency
All references in this guarantee to dollars, unless otherwise speciﬁcally indicated, are
expressed in US. currency.
8.7 Sum-errors Ind Assigns
This GImrannee shall be binding upon the Guarantor, its successors and assigns, and shall
enure to the beneﬁt of the Las Cruees Lenders, the Administrative Agent and their respective
successors and assigns. All rights ofthe Admirustrative Agent and the Las Cruoes lenders shall
be assignable and in any action brought by an assignee to enfome any such right, the Guarantor


. 55 .
shall not assert aginst the assignee any claim or defence which the Guarantor new has or
hereaﬁet may have against the Administrative Agent or any of the Las Cruces Lmders.
8.8 Sevenbﬂity
Ifany provision of this guarantee shall be deemed by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid or void, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
8.9 Governing Law; Jurisdiction; Consent to Service ofProeess

(a) This Guarantee shall be governed by and interpreted and enforced in accordance
with the laws of the Province of Ontario and the laws of Canada applicable
therein.

(b) The Guarantor hereby irrevocably and unconditionally submits, for itself and its
property, to the nomelusive jurisdiction of the Courts of the Province of
Ontario, and any appellate court thereof, in any action or proceeding arising out of
or relating to this Guarantee, or any other Financing Document or for recouiﬁon
or enforcement of anyjudgment. and each of the parties hereto hereby irrevocably
and Imconditionally agrees that all claims in respect of any such action or
proceeding may be heard and determined in Ontario. Each of the parties hereto
agrees that A ﬁnal judgment in any such action or preceeding shall be conclusive
and may be enforced in other jurisdictions by suit on the judgment or in any other
manner provided by Applicable Law. Nothing in this Guarantee shell affect any
right that the Administrative Agent, the Collateral Agent. or my Les Cruoes
Lender may otherwise have to bring any action or proceeding relating to this
Guarantee or any other Financing Document against the Guarantor or its
properties in the courts of any otherjurisdietion.

(c) The Guarantor hereby irrevocably and unconditionally waives, to the fullest
exrem it may legally and effectively do so, any objection winch it may now or
hereaﬁer have to the laying of venue of any suit, anion or proceeding arising out
of or relating to this Guarantee in any court referred to in Section 8.90)). Each of
the parties hereto hereby irrevocably waives. to the fullest extmt permitted by
law, any forum non conveniens defence to the maintenance of such action or
proceeding in any such court.

(d) Each party to this Guarantee irrevocably consents to service of process in the
manner provided for notices in Section 8.1. Nothing in this Guarantee will affect
the right of any party to this Guarantee to serve process in any other manner
permitted by Law.

8.10 Authority of Administrative Agent

The Guarantor acknowledges that the Administrative Agent has authority to act on behalf
of the Les Cruees Lenders in respect of all matters relating to the Loam Documents, including,
win-tout limitation, this Guarantee, and agrees to be bound by, and act on the faith of any notice
or other action of the Administrative Agent withom any requirement that the Administrative


.. 56 .
Agent produce any cvidmoe ofils mnhority to act on behalf ofthc Las Cmces Lenders in any
8.11 Counterparts; Facsimil:

This Guarantee  be execuwd in counterparts (and by different parties hereto on
diﬁcrcm counterparts), each of which shall constim an original. but all of which when 13km
together shall constitute a single scum Delivery of an executed original counterpart of a
signature page of this Agreement by facsimile shall be as effective as delivery of a. manually
cxwuted original counterpart of this Agreement.

[SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWsl


. 57 .
INWITNESSWREOFthepmﬁesmhvemcdthisGummm beexecmed
wmmwoﬁmummmodulyammduofmedaymdywﬁmmwﬁm.
INMET WING CORPORATION
Nunez Sievc 954:er \
we: v:(g—?FQS\ (Aer-<1" Genera (am 581
Pen
Name:
' Title:
CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF
COWS. uﬁngn Admmﬁve
> Agent and Colhtcnl Agent for the Lenders
and the Panama! Hedging Lndzn
Per:
Name:
Title:
For:
Name:
Title:


.57.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have caused this Guarantee 10 be executed
by their respective oﬁ'lcers thereunto duly authmized as of the day and year ﬁrst above written.
INMET MINING CORPORATION
Per.
Name:
Title:
Per:
' 3; Name: A
Title:
CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF
_ COMMERCE, acting as Administrative
Agent and Counters! Agent for the Lenders
and the Permitted Hedging Lenders
Per: 9%: E W
Name: Jens Paterson
7mg: tractor
Per: .
Name: Sean cum
Title: W m

