
EX-31.1 2 axas10-q06302016ex311.htm CEO CERTIFICATION Exhibit
Exhibit 31.1
CERTIFICATIONS
I, Robert L. G. Watson, certify that:    
    
1.I have reviewed this quarterly
report on Form 10-Q of Abraxas Petroleum Corporation.
2.
3.
4.
Based on my knowledge, this annual report does not contain any untrue statement of a material
fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the
period covered by this report.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in
this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations
and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report.
The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining
disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-
15(e)) and internal controls over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-
15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and
procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating
to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within
those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over
financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance
regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures, and
presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and
procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting
that occurred during the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is
reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent
evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit
committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal
control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s
ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a
significant role in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.
(a)
(b)
Date: August 9, 2016
/s/ Robert L.G. Watson
Robert L.G. Watson
Chairman of the Board, President and
Principal Executive Officer