
POS AM 1 northtexas.htm NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC. POS AM
27-4556048
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
1311
(Primary Standard Industrial
Classification Code Number)
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
 
 
POST EFFECTIVE AMENDMENT No. 6
TO FORM S-1
 
 
REGISTRATION STATEMENT UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
 
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
 
Nevada
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
 
5057 Keller Springs Road, Suite 300
Addison, Texas 75001
469-718-5572
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant's principal
executive offices)
 
VStock Transfer
18 Lafayette Place
Woodmere, N.Y. 11598
212-828-8436
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for
service)
 
COPIES OF ALL COMMUNICATIONS TO:
North Texas Energy, Inc.5057 Keller Springs Road, Suite 300, Addison, Texas 75001, 469-718-
5572
 
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to public:
As soon as practicable after this registration statement becomes effective.
_________________
 
If any of the securities being registered are being offered on a delayed or continuous basis
pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933, check the following box. [ ]
 
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under
the Securities Act, please check the following box and list the Securities Act registration
statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. [ ]
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act,
check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier
effective registration statement for the same offering. [ ]
 
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act,
check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier
effective registration statement for the same offering. [ ]
[ ]
Indicate by a check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accredited filer or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of "large accelerated
filer," "accelerated filer" and "smaller reporting company" in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. 
 
Large accelerated filer[ ]Accelerated filer
 
Non-accelerated filer [ ]Smaller reporting company[X]
 
EXPLANATORY NOTE
 
This Post-Effective Amendment No. 5 relates to the Registrant's Registration Statement on Form
S-1, as amended (File No. 333-178251), initially filed by the Registrant on March 11, 2013 and
declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 29, 2013. The
Registrant is filing this Post Effective Amendment No. 5 pursuant to Rule 415 for the purpose of
extending the time of the Registrant's offering of securities to the public for sale.  A copy of the
Board Resolution of the Registrant authorizing such extension is attached hereto as Exhibit "A".
This Post Effective Amendment does not otherwise modify any provision of the Registrant's
Registration Statement on Form S-1, as amended. Further, this amendment provides required
updated financial and operations information in the attached prospectus as required by
Regulation S-X of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
 
CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE
Proposed
Maximum
Offering
Price
Amount to
Per Share
be
Registered   
 
(1)
  
 
  2,000,000   $ 2.00
  2,000,000   $ 2.00
Proposed
Maximum
Aggregate
  
Offering
  
  $4,000,000  $ 545.60
  $4,000,000  $ 545.60
Amount of
Registration
  
Fee (2)
Title of Each Class of Securities to be
Registered
 
Common
Total
(1)
The proposed offering price per share was estimated solely for the purpose of calculating the
registration fee pursuant to Rule 457 of Regulation C.
 
Fees in the amount of $545.60 were previously paid in connection with the Form S-1 filed by
(2) North Texas Energy, Inc. on December 1, 2011 and February 6, 2013.
 
THE REGISTRANT HEREBY AMENDS THIS REGISTRATION STATEMENT ON SUCH DATE
OR DATES AS MAY BE NECESSARY TO DELAY ITS EFFECTIVE DATE UNTIL THE
REGISTRANT SHALL FILE A FURTHER AMENDMENT WHICH SPECIFICALLY STATES
THAT THIS REGISTRATION STATEMENT SHALL THEREAFTER BECOME EFFECTIVE IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 8(A) OF THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933 OR UNTIL THE
REGISTRATION STATEMENT SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE ON SUCH DATE AS THE
COMMISSION, ACTING PURSUANT TO SAID SECTION 8(A), MAY DETERMINE.
POST EFFECTIVE AMENDED PROSPECTUS NUMBER 5
Subject to completion, dated August 31, 2016
 
THE INFORMATION IN THIS PROSPECTUS IS NOT COMPLETE AND MAY BE CHANGED.
WE MAY NOT SELL THESE SECURITIES UNTIL THE REGISTRATION STATEMENT FILED
WITH THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION IS EFFECTIVE. THIS
PROSPECTUS IS NOT AN OFFER TO SELL THESE SECURITIES AND IT IS NOT
SOLICITING AN OFFER TO BUY THESE SECURITIES IN ANY JURISDICTION WHERE THE
OFFER OR SALE IS NOT PERMITTED.
 
North Texas Energy, Inc.
5057 Keller Springs Road, Suite 300 Addison, Texas 75001
469-718-5572
 
This prospectus relates to the sale of up to 2,000,000 shares of the common stock of
North Texas Energy, Inc.
Offering Made Without an Underwriter
See the Section Offering-Plan of Distribution in the Prospectus
 
This offering is self-underwritten and conducted on a "Best Efforts No Minimum" basis and will
terminate upon the earlier to occur of (i) the date upon which all 2,000,000 shares registered
hereunder have been sold, or (ii) the date upon which we terminate this offering. No arrangement
has been made to escrow funds received from the stock sales pending the completion of the
offering. In that regard, proceeds from sales of the common stock will be delivered directly to the
Company as sales occur. Directly funding the Company from the common stock sales exposes
investors to significant risks as disclosed further in the section The Offering-Plan of Distribution.
Because the offering has no set minimum and there is no plan to escrow the offering proceeds,
the Company may fail to raise enough capital to fund its business plan and operations and it's
possible that investors may lose substantially all of their investment. No underwriter or person
has been engaged to facilitate the sale of shares of common stock in this offering. There are no
underwriting commissions involved in this offering. The Company does not intend to sell any
specific minimum number or dollar amount of securities but will use its best efforts to sell the
securities offered.
 
A Total of Up to 2,000,000 Shares of Common Stock Par Value $ 0.00001 per Share
 Offered at $2 (Two Dollars) Per Share
OUR COMMON STOCK IS NOT TRADED ON ANY NATIONAL SECURITIES EXCHANGE
AND IS NOT QUOTED ON ANY OVER-THE-COUNTER MARKET.  THIS INVESTMENT
INVOLVES A HIGH DEGREE OF RISK. YOU SHOULD PURCHASE SHARES ONLY IF YOU
CAN AFFORD A COMPLETE LOSS OF YOUR INVESTMENT. SEE "RISK FACTORS"
BEGINNING ON PAGE 8 FOR A DISCUSSION OF RISKS APPLICABLE TO US AND AN
INVESTMENT IN OUR COMMON STOCK.
 
NEITHER THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION NOR ANY STATE
SECURITIES COMMISSION HAS APPROVED OR DISAPPROVED THESE SECURITIES, OR
DETERMINED IF THIS PROSPECTUS IS TRUTHFUL OR COMPLETE. ANY
REPRESENTATION TO THE CONTRARY IS A CRIMINAL OFFENSE.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
 
PROSPECTUS SUMARY
 
THE BUSINESS OF THE COMPANY
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE OIL AND GAS LEASE RIGHTS AND RESERVES
 
SUMMARY CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA
 
RISK FACTORS
 
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
 
USE OF PROCEEDS
 
MANAGMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
 
DIRECTORS, OFFICERS AND CONTROL PERSONS
 
TRANSACTIONS WITH RELATED PERSONS AND CERTAIN CONTROL PERSONS15
 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
 
RECENT SALES OF UNREGISTERED SECURITIES
 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS-CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
LITIGATION
 
STOCK TRANSFER AGENT
 
LEGAL MATTERS
1
 
2
 
3
 
6
 
6
 
8
 
9
 
10
 
13
15
 
15
 
16
 
32
 
32
 
32
EXPERTS
 
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
 
UNDERTAKINGS
 
SIGNATURES
 
EXHIBIT INDEX
32
 
32
 
33
 
35
 
36
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
 
THIS SUMMARY HIGHLIGHTS SELECTED INFORMATION AND DOES NOT CONTAIN ALL
THE INFORMATION THAT MAY BE IMPORTANT TO YOU. YOU SHOULD CAREFULLY
READ THIS PROSPECTUS, ANY RELATED PROSPECTUS SUPPLEMENT AND THE
DOCUMENTS WE HAVE REFERRED YOU TO IN "WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE
INFORMATION" ON PAGE 31 BEFORE MAKING AN INVESTMENT IN OUR COMMON
STOCK, INCLUDING THE "RISK FACTORS" SECTION BEGINNING ON PAGE 6 IN THIS
PROSPECTUS, REFERENCES TO " THE COMPANY," "WE," "US" AND "OUR" AND SO
FORTH REFER TO THE MERGED OR COMBINED COMPANIES AS ONE ALTOGETHER
SUBSEQUENT TO THE MERGERS AND COMBINATION OF THE RESPECTIVE
BUSINESSES INTO NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC. AND ITS SUBSIDIARIES.
 
HISTORY OF THE ORGANIZATION- NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
PURCHASE AND SALE AGREEMENT WITH REMINGTON OIL & GAS, INC.
 
North Texas Energy, Inc. ("NTE", "the Company", "we") was organized in Nevada in January
2011. We are a combination of two companies, each originally founded for the same purpose.
The predecessor to NTE is Remington Oil & Gas, Inc., a Nevada corporation, and its
predecessor is Remington Oil & Gas LLC., a Texas Limited Liability Company. During 2009,
Remington Oil & Gas, LLC acquired oil field leases in north Texas. In January 2010, Remington
Oil & Gas, Inc. acquired all of the outstanding ownership interests of Remington Oil & Gas, LLC.
In the process, Remington Oil & Gas, Inc. acquired the oil and gas leases in northern Texas that
had been previously assigned to Remington Oil & Gas, LLC. Effective in January 2011, North
Texas Energy, Inc. acquired Remington Oil & Gas, Inc. through a Purchase and Sale Agreement.
The Purchase and Sale Agreement (see exhibit 2.2) transferred title of Remington's well-head
equipment to North Texas Energy, Inc. and provided for the acquisition of all of the outstanding
shares of Remington Oil & Gas, Inc. by North Texas Energy, Inc. in a one-for-one share
exchange. North Texas Energy has begun producing crude oil on its oil and gas leases in
northern Texas. A complete description of the Company's operations and oil and gas properties
follows in the sections entitled "Oil and Gas Properties and Reserves". In order to execute its
business plan to recover the oil and gas reserves on its leased property, the Company prepared
and filed an S-1 Registration Statement for the sale of two million shares of its common stock.
The price of the common shares was set at $2.00 per share. The registration statement became
effective on March 29, 2013. The sale of the common shares was and is being conducted without
an underwriter. Since the Company's S-1 Registration Statement became effective on March 29,
2013, the Company by and through its CEO, Kevin Jones, beginning in June 2013 and through
June 30, 2016, issued 900,240 shares registered in the stock offering. The shares were sold at
the offering price of $2.00 per share yielding to the Company an equity capital infusion of
$1,800,480.  The Company also issued 1,500 shares of restricted stock for cash at $1.00 per
share to a private party. The total stock sales combined netted the Company $1,801,980 in
capital infusion. The Company continues to issue shares of its common stock in accordance with
the registration statement and will continue until all of the 2,000,000 shares are sold.
1
THE BUSINESS OF THE COMPANY
 
North Texas Energy, Inc. is a non-traditional crude oil and natural gas producing company. The
Company had acquired title to oil and natural gas leases in Milam and Upshur counties in the
state of Texas. The Company's Oil and Gas leases in Upshur County Texas acquired from
Remington Oil and Gas expired on December 18, 2013 and the Company chose not to renew
those leases and focus its efforts to begin production on its leases in Milam County Texas. Since
its operational beginnings in January 2014, the Company acquired additional leases.
 
The Company controls 100% of the working interests in the Milam County Texas leases. There is
substantial oil exploration and production currently in the areas in which the Company holds
ownership rights to the oil and gas reserves that the Company seeks to bring to market. The
Company's business is the re-entering of oil fields containing wells that used to produce crude
oil and employ newly proven methods to recover the remaining reserves of crude oil and natural
gas. The Company has increased the number of leased properties in order  to bring more
reserves of oil to the surface to sale to the market.
 
NTE is an Enhanced Oil Recovery ("EOR") company. EOR is a term used to describe a variety of
methods by which oil reserves are recovered from existing oil fields that were not completely
exhausted using standard methods. We are not an "exploration company" in the sense that our
business and our methods do not involve an attempt to explore for new oil reserves but rather to
exploit existing known oil fields using other than "standard" recovery methods. In simplified
terms, the "standard" methods of producing oil and natural gas from its location in natural
reservoirs in the earth is to drill a relief (well) into the reservoir and allow the reservoir's crude oil
to surface because of the natural pressure that exists in the reservoir structure underground.
Once a well is finished and well casing is in place, the oil and natural gas will surface under its
own pressure or with a small amount of suction introduced into the well. As the oil surfaces so
does the natural gas. The gas and oil are separated and stored or delivered directly to market.
 
Enhanced Oil Recovery methods identify the process(s) by which substantial amounts of oil and
gas that remain in a field reservoir, after standard recovery methods are exhausted, can be
recovered using a variety of methods of enhancing the natural pressure in a reservoir or using
some other method to release additional trapped oil in the reservoir. EOR allows for the recovery
of significantly more oil from the same field by introducing additional pressure or other geological
changes in the reservoir. The original well, well casing and well head equipment, are used in the
process.
 
During 2013, the Company successfully used an EOR method called "microbial injection" to
induce pressure in its oil field reservoirs and allow for the oil reserves to be recovered. Microbial
injection is the process by which nutrients or compounds are injected into an oil field to allow for
the natural enhancement of the movement and release of the oil out of the reserve. According to
the U.S. Department of Energy Fossil Energy report on Oil and Natural Technologies "Enhanced
Oil Recovery" "Conventional primary and secondary recovery operations often leave two-thirds
of the oil in the reservoir at the time of abandonment. Enhanced oil recovery methods have the
potential for recovering much of the remaining oil." - U.S. DOE. The concept is to use natural
environmental reactions to improve the recovery of oil trapped in porous media in the reservoir or
without sufficient pressure to allow the oil and gas to be expressed normally from the reservoir to
above ground. In each different oil field, the method by which EOR can be successful is
dependent on the oil field and reservoir structure. The uniqueness of each field may involve
unique EOR methods which can be any combination of methods involving the use of expertise in
the disciplines of geology, chemistry, and microbiology as well as fluid mechanics and a variety
of engineering applications.
 
In December 2013, the Company began producing crude oil from its oil and gas leases that had
been treated by the Enhanced Oil Recovery Method identified as "Microbial Injection" as
described earlier. In December 2013, the Company produced approximately 120 barrels of crude
oil from its refurbished wells that was sent to market and sold in January 2014.  During 2014 and
2015, the Company has produced an additional approximate total of 1,062 and 747 barrels of
crude oil, respectively, from its wells.
 
The Company relies on the science and practice of qualified petroleum engineers to identify oil
and gas reserves in oil fields that we wish to enter and begin producing operations (see
"Petroleum Engineer's Report" in the supplemental information attached to this prospectus).
Additionally, NTE will rely on oil reserve identification methods such as seismic analysis and
interpretation. We rely on engineering analysis and written reports that indicate (based on
professional opinion) the character and type of oil reserves that may be in any particular oil field
(See the section on "Risk Factors" for more information). Once NTE identifies an attractive field,
we attempt to enter into an agreement to acquire lease title to the field and begin the process of
producing oil and natural gas from the field using currently known effective EOR methods.
2
DESCRIPTION OF THE OIL AND GAS LEASE RIGHTS AND RESERVES
 
In order to determine the cost-effectiveness and feasibility of the Company's plan to produce oil
from its leased oil and gas properties, a professional petroleum engineer's Technical Report was
previously commissioned by the Company to determine the estimated hydrocarbon (crude oil
and natural gas) reserves in the geological structures under the ground leases. The reports
provide analytical data and conclusions that make estimates of the reserves the Company holds
title to in the  Minerva-Rockdale field. The Minerva-Rockdale field is shallow, dense,  and  known
to be rich in hydrocarbon reserves including oil and natural gas.  The leases are recorded in
Milam County TX and are on record and identified in the records of the Texas Railroad
Commission who has regulatory management authority over oil and gas leases in the state of
Texas.
North Texas Energy, Inc. is an 'Enhanced Oil Recovery' company whose primary function is to
increase the ultimate recovery of oil and gas from the wells it presently owns or will acquire in the
future in order to maximize value to its stockholders. At this time the registrant has only 'unproved'
reserves that are all located in the state of Texas in Milam County. NTE owns 100% working
interest in all of its leases of which all are now producing oil.   
 
THE COMPANY'S BRIEF OPERATING HISTORY
 
The Company and its predecessor had no field operations or activity in 2009 or from 2011 to
2012. The Company's predecessor had brief field operations during 2010. Beginning in 2010, the
Company obtained funding from the private sale of its common stock. Along with the use of those
funds and trade credit, the Company's predecessor began refurbishing and repairing the wells
existing on the leased property for production and use. Working capital in the form of
approximately $206,000 in cash from unregistered common stock sales along with trade credit
from suppliers and contractors of $98,000 was used in the process. Financial information
covering the Company's relevant operating history follows after this section (see the sections
"Management's Discussion and Analysis" and "Financial Statements").
 
In 2013 the Company began receiving the proceeds from its public offering of its common shares
related to its Registration Statement which became effective on March 29, 2013. Related to that
offering, the Company has issued a total of 900,240 shares of its common stock registered in the
offering as of June 30, 2016. The funds received from the sale of the 900,240 shares were used
to begin developing the Company's oil and gas properties, resulting in oil production in
December 2013 and subsequently.
 
THE OFFERING-PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
 
The original prospectus dated March 29, 2013 refers to the sale of 2,000,000 shares of the
Company's common stock. The Company had outstanding common stock totaling 5,831,000
shares at December 31, 2012 and intended to issue another 2,000,000 shares to the public in the
offering. Of the total outstanding shares, 831,000 of the Company's common shares were
originally issued in book entry form to be issued to the prior shareholders of Remington Oil and
Gas, Inc. in accordance with the Purchase and Sales Agreement.  The Company is amending its
original prospectus to allow for additional time to sell the remaining not yet sold shares originally
registered in its registration statement dated March 29, 2013.
Physical share certificates are issued upon the Company's transfer agent receiving the
appropriate documentation to complete the issuance of the stock certificates for those
outstanding shares. The offering of the shares is made by the Company through the best efforts
of its management and no underwriter is involved. The Company is responsible for all of the
costs of the offering. The shares may be sold by the Company to any qualified individual or entity
and are sold for cash only. This offering will terminate upon the earlier to occur of (i) the date
upon which all 2,000,000 shares registered hereunder have been sold, or (ii) the date upon
which we terminate this offering. It is likely that not all of the stock offered will be sold to investors
immediately. It is likely that a delayed sale of the securities will take place over an extended
period of time. The following table shows the possible outcomes for computing the Company's
outstanding stock given partial sales of the total offering given in percentage intervals.
3
Additional Shares Sold
Shares
Outstanding
at
June 30,
2016
250,000
 
Shares
750,000
 
Shares
750,000
 
Shares
1,099,760
 
Shares
6,835,740     7,085,740     7,335,740     7,585,740     7,935,500
    
 $1,801,980   $2,301,980   $2,801,980   $3,301,980   $ 4,001,500
Number of shares
outstanding
 
Gross Proceeds
 
Of the total number of shares outstanding and subscribed at June 30, 2016, approximately
5,000,000 are held by a "control person" and 831,000 shares are subscribed to and held by
private investors who acquired their stock via the stock exchange between Remington Oil & Gas,
Inc. and the Company effective January 12, 2011. Of the total outstanding shares, 831,000 of the
Company's common shares were originally issued in book entry form to be issued to the prior
shareholders of Remington Oil and Gas, Inc. in accordance with the Purchase and Sales
Agreement. Physical share certificates are issued upon the Company's transfer agent receiving
the appropriate documentation to complete the issuance of the stock certificates for those
outstanding shares.
Since the Company's S-1 Registration Statement became effective on March 29, 2013, the
Company by and through its CEO, Kevin Jones, beginning in June 2013 and through June 30,
2016, issued 900,240 shares registered in the stock offering. The shares were sold at the offering
price of $2.00 per share yielding to the Company an equity capital infusion of $1,800,480.  The
Company also issued 1,500 shares of restricted stock for cash at $1.00 per share to a private
party and issued 103,000 shares for services. The total stock sales combined netted the
Company $1,801,980 in capital infusion.
 
The Company has made no plans to place the proceeds of the offering in escrow or trust account.
The proceeds are to be used when available. Immediate use of the proceeds when received in
the Company's accounts regardless of the total received at any time during the offering has the
possibility of having a negative effect on investors. Because the offering has no set minimum and
there is no plan to escrow the offering proceeds, the Company may fail to raise enough capital to
fund its business plan and operations and it's possible that investors may lose all or substantially
all of their investment. North Texas Energy Inc. is registering 2,000,000 shares of its common
stock for offer and sale. There is currently no active trading market for our common stock, and
such a market may not develop or be sustained. We currently plan to have our common stock
listing on the OTCMarkets, subject to the effectiveness of this Registration Statement. The
Company will not offer the shares through a broker-dealer or anyone affiliated with a broker-
dealer. The Company is bearing all expenses in connection with the registration of the shares of
the Company. We are offering the shares on a "self-underwritten" basis directly through Kevin
Jones, our Chief Executive Officer and Director named herein, who will not receive any
commissions or other remuneration of any kind for selling shares in this offering except for the
reimbursement of actual out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the sale of the
common stock.
This offering is a self-underwritten offering, which means that it does not involve the participation
of an underwriter to market, distribute or sell the shares offered under this prospectus. We will sell
shares on a continual basis.
 
In connection with his selling efforts in the offering, Mr. Jones will not register as a broker-dealer
pursuant to Section 15 of the Exchange Act but rather will rely upon the "safe harbor" provisions
of Rule 3a4-1 under the Exchange Act. Generally speaking, Rule 3a4-1 provides an exemption
from the broker-dealer registration requirements of the Exchange Act for persons associated with
an issuer that participate in an offering of the issuer's securities. Mr. Jones is not subject to any
statutory disqualification, as that term is defined in Section 3(a) (39) of the Exchange Act. Mr.
Jones will not be compensated in connection with his participation in the offering by the payment
of commissions or other remuneration based either directly or indirectly on transactions in our
securities. Mr. Jones is not and has not been within the past 12 months, a broker or dealer, and is
not within the past 12 months, an associated person of a broker or dealer. At the end of the
offering, Mr. Jones will continue to primarily perform substantial duties for us or on our behalf
otherwise than in connection with transactions in securities. Mr. Jones has not participated in
selling an offering of securities for any issuer more than once every 12 months other than in
reliance on Exchange Act Rule 3a4-1(a)(4)(i) or (iii).
4
The price per share is fixed at $2.00. Prior to being quoted on any national public stock
exchange, the Company may sell its shares in private transactions to individuals or qualified
entities. Although our common stock is not listed on a public exchange, we intend to seek a
listing on the OTCMarkets. In order to be quoted on the Bulletin Board, a market maker must file
an application on our behalf in order to make a market for our common stock. There can be no
assurance that an agreement with a market maker to file the necessary documents with FINRA
which regulates the OTCMarkets, can be made nor can there be any assurance that such an
application for quotation will be approved. However, sales by the Company will be made at the
price of $2.00 per share.
 
The Company's shares may be sold to purchasers from time to time directly by and subject to the
discretion of the Company. Further, the Company will not offer its shares for sale through
underwriters, dealers, agents or anyone who may receive compensation in the form of
underwriting discounts, concessions or commissions from the Company and/or the purchasers of
the shares for whom they may act as agents. The shares sold by the Company may be
occasionally sold in one or more transactions.
 
In order to comply with the applicable securities laws of certain states, the securities will be
offered or sold in those only if they have been registered or qualified for sale; an exemption from
such registration or if qualification requirement is available and with which the Company has
complied. In addition and without limiting the foregoing, the Company will be subject to
applicable provisions, rules and regulations under the Exchange Act with regard to security
transactions during the period of time when this Registration Statement is effective. The
Company will pay all expenses incidental to the registration of the shares (including registration
costs pursuant to the securities laws of certain states).
5
SUMMARY CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA
We have prepared the following summary of our consolidated financial statements. The summary
of our consolidated financial data set forth below should be read together with our separate
audited financial statements and the notes thereto, as well as "Management's Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" included in this prospectus.
 
Consolidated Balance Sheets Data
Current assets
Oil and gas properties, full cost method   1,548,850     1,537,205
Total current liabilities
Asset retirement obligations
Total shareholders' equity
December 31,
June 30,
  
 
2016
2015
 
 
 (Unaudited)  
 
 $320,684   $ 14,425
543,877     227,665
   44,282
    44,282
   1,281,375     1,279,683
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
Six Months Ended
June 30,
2016
(Unaudited) (Unaudited) 
 $6,676
Total revenue
  $21,578   $70,615  
Total operating expenses   132,984     251,691     584,204     398,008  
   (126,308 )   (240,766 )   (562,626)   (327,793)
Operating loss
Net loss
   (126,308 )   (240,766 )   (562,626)   (327,793)
$10,925
2015
Year Ended
 
December 31,
 2015
2014
RISK FACTORS
 
Please consider the following risk factors and other information in this prospectus relating to our
business and prospects before deciding to invest in our common stock. This offering and any
investment in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the
risks described below and all of the information contained in this prospectus before deciding
whether to purchase our common stock. If any of the following risks actually occur, our business,
financial condition and results of operations could be harmed. The trading price of our common
stock could decline due to any of these risks, and you may lose all or part of your investment. The
Company considers the following to be the material risks for an investor regarding this offering.
North Texas Energy Inc. should be viewed as a high-risk investment and speculative in nature.
An investment in our common stock may result in a complete loss of the invested amount.
 
Lack of an Operating History
 
The Company has a very brief operating history. During its brief operating history, the Company
has only recognized a nominal revenue from its operations. The Company has used capital
provided by shareholders and trade credit to provide operations capital during its brief operating
history. The Company may not immediately realize any revenue from its operations unless it
obtains sufficient funding for its oil producing activities. The Company's brief operating history
and inability to yet realize any net income from its efforts should be considered as a substantial
risk to investors who purchase the securities of the Company.
6
Lack of Profitable Operations in Recent Periods
 
The Company has not yet had a fiscal period in which it realized a profit. The Company believes
that in order to realize a profit it must obtain financing to complete its oil well equipment. Without
such financing the Company will not be able to put equipment in place that would allow for
production to begin. The Company believes that the proceeds from the offering or some other
financing are essential to begin producing crude oil and recognize income from its oil field
operations.
 
Our Financial Position
 
The Company has minimal current resources from which to draw on to execute its business plan.
The Company has begun producing crude oil from its leased properties and relies partly on that
production to pay its short term obligations. During 2015, the Company produced and
sold approximately 747 barrels of crude oil at an average price of $37.41 per barrel. The
Company is still relying heavily on its ability to sell the securities contemplated by this offering in
order to provide much needed working capital for the execution of its business model. The
Company has diligently been making alternative plans for financing separate from the sale of its
common stock but has not yet been successful. Our business could fail if we do not obtain
adequate financing, resulting in the complete loss of an investment. If we are not successful in
earning revenue once we have started our activities, we may require additional financing to
sustain our business operations. Currently, we do not have any arrangements for alternative
methods of financing and can provide no assurances to investors that we will be able to obtain
any when required. Obtaining additional financing would be subject to a number of factors,
including the Company's operations results.
 
No assurance can be given that the Company will obtain access to capital markets in the future
or that adequate financing to satisfy the cash requirements of implementing our business model
will be available on acceptable terms. The inability of the Company to gain access to capital
markets or obtain acceptable financing could have a material adverse effect upon the results of
its operations and its financial condition.
 
Our Proposed Business is Inherently Risky
 
A significant risk factor directly affecting our business is the price of crude oil at market. The
market price at which the Company could sell its oil production to market is the price as stated for
"Western Intermediate Light Sweet Crude Oil". Since a low price of about $30 per barrel was
reached in 2008, the average price per barrel has fluctuated greatly. The average price per barrel
in 2015 was $50.13 per barrel according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration and the
average price per barrel for the six months ended June 30, 2016 has fallen below that price level
to $38.83. In our plans for recovering oil from our fields, we will need the price of crude oil at
market to stay above the price averaged at about $20 per barrel. Below the price of $20 per
barrel, we will have to carefully evaluate the timing and the methods we use for recovery of oil
and natural gas in order to make the process profitable. Price of oil has fallen significantly in the
last five years.
 
Environmental Impact Including New Legislation
 
As was discussed earlier in the section "The Business of Our Company", we are an oil and gas
production company that uses new processes that allow for the production of oil from existing
reservoirs that are residual reserves left after standard methods of relieving oil from known
reserves has been exhausted. The new methods involve introducing into the geology of a
reservoir, materials that have no known undesirable environmental impact on the geological
formation we are operating in. If in the future it is found that a not predictable undesirable impact
is related to our oil recovery methods, we may be prevented from using methods we now know to
be cost effective and safe such as the methods we now plan to use discussed also in the section
"The Business of Our Company". If in any case the method of recover that we choose is found to
have undesirable effects on the environment that we operate in or around, it might prevent us
from recovering oil in a cost-effective way. Of specific concern on an on-going basis, is how or if
our recovery process has any impact on the aquifer (drinking water) system contained in the
geological system we are attempting to recover oil in. Any undesirable impact to the drinking
water system would have a serious impact on our ability to continue operations.
7
Reliance on Experts
 
As was discussed earlier in the section "The Business of Our Company", we are entering
existing oil fields where oil reserves exist. The amount and type of reserves we intend to recover
are identified and characterized for us by experts in the petroleum business with many years of
experience using accepted methods of identifying and characterizing oil reserves in geological
formations. We know that previous recovery operations were successful and we know that
experts indicate that substantial reserves of crude oil and natural gas remain in the oil field
reservoir. What we don't know is how accurate the estimates of the experts are. If in fact the
experts' estimates of the amount and characterization of the reserves are that we intend to
recover are significantly inaccurate it would have a serious negative impact on our business.
 
Our Business as a "Going Concern"
 
In expressing an opinion on our financial statements, our auditor has expressed its opinion as to
our business being a "going concern". Such an opinion indicates that the business lacks
sufficient liquidity to remain operating as a business entity for the next 12 months. Specifically, if
our business fails to raise sufficient capital in order to conduct day-to-day business operations, it
will fail to operate completely. At this time, we have no arrangements other than issuing short
term debt and this offering to supply working capital needed to conduct day-to-day business. It is
possible that additional arrangements can be made above and beyond the offering but those
arrangements are not guaranteed.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
 
This prospectus contains "forward-looking statements," which include information relating to
future events, future financial performance, strategies, expectations, competitive environment,
regulation and availability of resources. These forward-looking statements include, without
limitation, statements concerning projections, predictions, expectations, estimates or forecasts as
to our business, financial and operating results, and future economic performance; and
statements of management's goals and objectives and other similar expressions concerning
matters that are not historical facts. Words such as "may," "should," "could," "would," "predicts,"
"potential," "continue," "expects," "anticipates," "future," "intends," "plans," "believes,"
"estimates" and similar expressions, as well as statements in future tense, identify forward-
looking statements.
 
Forward-looking statements should not be read as a guarantee of future performance or results,
and will not necessarily be accurate indications of the times at, or by, which such performance or
results will be achieved. Forward-looking statements are based on information available at the
time those statements are made or management's good faith belief as of that time with respect to
future events, and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual performance or
results to differ materially from those expressed in or suggested by the forward-looking
statements. Important factors that could cause such differences include, but are not limited to:
our ability to retain the continued service of our key professionals and to identify, hire and retain
 路
additional qualified professionals;
   
general economic conditions, nationally and globally, and their effect on the market for our
 路
services;
   
 路changes in laws, regulations, or policies; our ability to successfully manage our growth strategy;
   
other factors identified throughout this prospectus, including those discussed under the
 路
headings "Risk Factors
Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date the statements are made. You should not
put undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. We assume no obligation to update
forward-looking statements to reflect actual results, changes in assumptions, or changes in other
factors affecting forward-looking information, except to the extent required by applicable
securities laws. If we do update one or more forward-looking statements, no inference should be
drawn that we will make additional updates with respect to those or other forward-looking
statements.
8
USE OF PROCEEDS
The Company has evaluated its needs and intends to use proceeds of the offering from
additional sales in the following priorities.
Purpose
Additional Shares Sold
General Operations
Well Refurbishment & Preparation
Indirect Drilling Costs
Working Capital
Lease Acquisitions
Total of Offering (Actual Expenditures would be
net of any fees or commissions)
250,000    500,000     750,000     1,000,000 
 $50,000   $100,000   $150,000   $180,000  
   330,000    660,000     990,000     1,388,000 
   50,000     100,000     150,000     180,000  
   60,000     120,000     180,000     216,000  
   10,000     20,000
36,000
30,000
$500,000  $1,000,000  $1,500,000  $2,000,000
After the offering is complete, no material other funding aside from that generated by operations
is intended to be needed. Aside from reducing current liabilities in the form of existing trade
accounts payable, the proceeds are not being use to extinguish any prior debt or to acquire any
particular equipment or assets not identified in the prospectus or not used in our normal course of
business.
9
MANAGMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
 
Overview
 
North Texas Energy, Inc. is in its early stage of operation. The results of operations show how
capital intensive and profitless the oil and gas production business is at early stage. The
progress so far has been limited by severely limited access to working capital. One of the most
important economic factors in the U.S. economy is the successful exploration and production of
crude oil and natural gas. North Texas Energy, Inc. is committing its business and resources to
the production of crude oil and natural gas that remains in geological formations in oil fields that
have been previously explored and have produced significant amounts of crude oil already. Data
and research produced by the Department of Energy indicates that additional significant reserves
of crude oil and natural gas remain in fields that were once productive in the past. In recent years
and with the price of crude oil steady at about seventy-four dollars per barrel (since 2008), new
production methods have emerged as cost-effective in recovering the substantial remaining oil
that has not been recovered using standard methods. North Texas Energy, Inc. entered into the
business of recovering oil in previously drilled and producing fields in 2009 by acquiring oil and
natural gas leases in north Texas. NTE's predecessor operated in year 2010 for a short period of
time. During that time, the Company had access to private capital from sales of common stock to
shareholders. The capital from investment by private shareholders was limited and sales were
terminated late in 2010. The funds invested at that time were used mainly to begin the process of
refurbishing wells and preparing well head installations for re-use. The short operations history
will show that without on-going sources of working capital, the initial cost of getting wells and drill
bores functional to begin the process of recovering oil that remains in the geological formation
will not be met and significant delays in recovering the remaining oil would occur. However, the
Company has been producing oil on a steady level since January of 2014 and anticipates that
production will steadily increase as the Company adds leases and begins operating additional
wells. During 2015, the Company has produced and sold approximately 747 barrels of oil for sale
at an average price of $37.41 per barrel.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, CHANGES IN FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF
OPERATIONS
 
Results of Operations
 
Without additional investment capital from shareholders or other sources, the Company has no
short term source of liquidity. In order to bring wells on-line and produce crude oil and natural gas
to bring to market, significant amounts of working capital will be needed to continue. Accordingly,
the Company plans to systematically bring wells on-line that have the greatest initial production
possibility as capital is available. The Company's illiquid financial position could cause it to not
be able to continue producing oil in the near future unless working capital from the offering or
some other source of short term liquidity is developed.
 
Until 2013, the Company had no producing operations since inception. There was a nominal
revenue produced from oil and gas producing activities since the Company's inception because
of a shortage of working capital. Additional working capital is needed to complete the well
preparation phase of our business plan and increase the production of oil for market. We have at
this time not identified any source other than the offering for the needed liquidity to begin oil and
gas production. The production of oil and natural gas in early stage is capital intensive.
 
In December 2013, the Company began producing crude oil from its oil and gas leases. For the
year ended December 31, 2015, the Company had a net loss of $562,626 compared to a net loss
of $327,393 for the year ended December 31, 2014.
 
For the six months ended June 30, 2016, the Company had a net loss of $126,308. The majority
of the loss was attributed to general and administrative expenses of $91,225, primarily related to
travel expenses.
 
Significant amounts of capital and strong liquidity are essential to the success of our oil and gas
income producing activities. There is no guarantee that the liquidity and capital produced by the
offering depicted in this prospectus will provide sufficient liquidity to begin successful oil and gas
production at a level that would sustain self-supplied liquidity depending on the expected
production that is estimated in our engineering estimates of reserves. Successful results of
operations at this time will depend greatly on our ability to find external sources of liquidity.
10
For the Six Months Ended June 30, 2016 and 2015
 
For the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, the Company had net losses of $126,308 and
$240,766, respectively.
 
Revenues
 
Total production value of the oil for the six months ended June 30, 2016 was $6,676 compared to
a value of $10,925 for the six months ended June 30, 2015.
 
Operating Expenses
The Company had lease operating expenses of $9,017 and general operating expenses of
$123,967 for the six months ended June 30, 2016 compared to $75,473 and $176,218,
respectively, for the six months ended June 30, 2015. The Company incurred more lease
operating expenses due to repairing damages to the wells caused by severe weather conditions
during the six months ended June 30, 2015. The Company also incurred more travel expense
related to the trips the Company's management made to manage the wells and sell the
Company's shares during the six months ended June 30, 2015.
For the Years Ended December 31, 2015 and 2014
 
For the year ended December 31, 2015, the Company had a net loss of $562,626 compared to a
net loss of $327,393 for the year ended December 31, 2014.
Revenues
 
For the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company had revenues of $21,578 and
$70,615 respectively, from the sales of crude oil. The Company started to produce crude oil from
December 2013 and had its first sale in January 2014. The reason for the decrease is because
the wells were shut down for several months during 2015 due to damages caused by the severe
weather conditions.
Operating expenses
 
For the year ended December 31, 2015, the Company had an operating expenses of $584,204
compared to $398,008 for the year ended December 31, 2014. For the years ended December
31, 2015 and 2014, the Company has lease operating expense of $109,482 and $96,856,
respectively. The increase of lease operating expense is mainly because the Company had to do
some repairs due to the flooding in the area in 2015. For the years ended December 31, 2015
and 2014, the Company has legal and professional fees of $237,351 and $88,916, respectively.
The increase in legal and professional expense was mainly due to the issuance of 103,000
common shares to obtain geographical maps and professional services. For the years ended
December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company has general and administrative expenses of
$237,371 and $206,793, respectively. The Company incurred more travel expense related to the
trips the Company's management made to manage the wells and sell the Company's shares.
Liquidity
 
The Company began selling its common shares in accordance with its registration statement
which became effective on March 29, 2013. On March 29, 2014, the Company filed an
amendment of its Prospectus that relates to the common stock sales extending the time past the
original one year sales period. The Company will continue to sell shares as allowed and use
those funds for the further development of its oil and gas properties. The Company believes that it
can continue to sell its common stock and use those funds as well as the funds it generates from
crude oil production to continue its operations. The Company has no immediate sources of debt
or equity funding that is not related to the offering of its shares. The Company believes it can
avoid accumulating debt or using other non-traditional forms of financing to provide liquidity.
At June 30, 2016, our cash balance was $320,684.
11
Net cash used in operating activities was $147,296 for the six months ended June 30, 2016,
compared to net cash used in operating activities of $185,119 for the six months ended June 30,
2015. The change is mainly due to less payments made to the vendors and professional during
the current period.
Net cash used in investing activities was $11,645 for the six months ended June 30, 2016,
compared to $98,645 for the six months ended June 30, 2015. The change is mainly due to less
drilling activities during the current period.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the six months ended June 30, 2016 was
$465,200 compared to $241,850 for the six months ended June 30, 2015. The change is mainly
due the Company's receipt of $337,200 for subscriptions of common stock during the current
period.
Net cash used in operating activities was $344,994 for the year ended December 31, 2015,
compared to $282,903 for the year ended December 31, 2014. The change is mainly due to more
payments made to the vendors and professionals during the current year.
Net cash used in investing activities was $141,357 for the year ended December 31, 2015,
compared to $291,195 for the year ended December 31, 2014. The Company made less
payments to develop oil and gas properties in 2015.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2015 was $408,350
compared to $615,600 for the year ended December 31, 2014. During the year ended December
31, 2015 and 2014, the Company received proceeds from sale of common stock of $403,350 and
$615,600, respectively.
Without additional investment capital from shareholders or other sources, the Company has no
short term source of liquidity. In order to bring wells on-line and produce crude oil and natural gas
to bring to market, significant amounts of working capital will be needed to continue. Accordingly,
the Company plans to systematically bring wells on-line that have the greatest initial production
possibility as capital is available. The Company's illiquid financial position could cause it to not
be able to start producing oil in the near future unless working capital from the offering or some
other source of short term liquidity is developed.
 
Management does not believe that the Company's current capital resources will be sufficient to
fund its operating activity and other capital resource demands during the next year. Our ability to
continue as a going concern is contingent upon our ability to obtain capital through the sale of
equity or issuance of debt, and ultimately attaining profitable operations. There is no assurance
that we will be able to successfully complete any one of these activities.
 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
 
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a
current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or
expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material
to investors.
 
Critical Accounting Policies
 
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our
consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of the consolidated financial
statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of
assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience and
on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the
results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and
liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these
estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting
policies affect our most significant judgments and estimates used in preparation of our
consolidated financial statements.
12
Oil and Gas Properties
 
The Company uses the full cost method of accounting for exploration and development activities
as defined by the SEC. Under this method of accounting, the costs for unsuccessful, as well as
successful, exploration and development activities are capitalized as oil and gas properties.
Capitalized costs include lease acquisition, geological and geophysical work, delay rentals,
costs of drilling, completing and equipping the wells and any internal costs that are directly
related to acquisition, exploration and development activities but does not include any costs
related to production, general corporate overhead or similar activities. Proceeds from the sale or
other disposition of oil and gas properties are generally treated as a reduction in the capitalized
costs of oil and gas properties, unless the impact of such a reduction would significantly alter the
relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves of oil and natural gas attributable to a
country.
 
The Company categorizes its full cost pools as costs subject to amortization and costs not being
amortized. The sum of net capitalized costs subject to amortization, including estimated future
development and abandonment costs, are amortized using the unit-of-production method.
 
Oil and gas properties include costs that are excluded from capitalized costs being amortized.
These amounts represent costs of investments in unproved properties. The Company excludes
these costs on a country-by-country basis until proved reserves are found or until it is determined
that the costs are impaired. All costs excluded are reviewed quarterly to determine if impairment
has occurred. The amount of any impairment is transferred to the costs subject to amortization.
 
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
 
The Company does not believe that any recently issued effective pronouncements, or
pronouncements issued but not yet effective, if adopted, would have a material effect on the
accompanying financial statements.
DIRECTORS, OFFICERS AND CONTROL PERSONS
 
 
Mr. Kevin Jones  Chairman and CEO-Director
 
Mr. Jones is the 56-year-old founder of North Texas Energy, Inc. and holds BS, MS degrees, and
PhD (ABD) in Physics. For nearly two years, early 1997 through late 1999, Mr. Jones served as a
risk project manager for SRS Technologies. In late 1999, Mr. Jones joined General Dynamics
where he served as a project and later a program manager for various defense related programs
until late 2009. In late 2009, Mr. Jones joined ManTech International where he served as a
program manager until he began serving full time as the CEO of North Texas Energy, Inc. Mr.
Jones began serving as the director of North Texas Energy, Inc. in January 2011. None of Mr.
Jones' previous employers have any connection with North Texas Energy, Inc. He served as the
initial Secretary for the Board of Directors of Remington Oil & Gas, Inc. for two months, January
and February of 2010.
 
For the past 15 years, Mr. Jones has worked in program management and project management
capacities. He managed $3 million to $50 million programs from inception to completion. Mr.
Jones has managed programs and projects for the Missile Defense Agency, the Department of
Defense (Army, Navy, and Marines), and the Department of Homeland Security. As a program
manager, he was responsible for the executive management of a program (and it associated
projects) and ensured the program ran effectively and efficiently. He managed the development
and implementation of the programmatic scope, management plans, management schedules, life
cycle and logistics cost analyses, cost trade-off analysis, and programmatic risk management
assessments.
 
Mr. Jones has simultaneously managed disparate programs whereby different management
techniques were brought to bear in totally different ways to obtain the desired results. He has
built and led successful professional operations and he has turned dysfunctional operations into
efficient cost productive programs.
 
Sanah Marah  CFO
 
Mr. Sanah Marah Jr. is 40 years of age and has been a Finance and Accounting Professional for
the last 13 years. He attended the prestigious University of London and holds a Business and
Finance degree and also attended LeTourneau University and graduated with a B.A. Accounting.
He is a practicing Chartered Management Accountant, or C.M.A.
13
For the past 5 years, he served in two professional roles in which he managed budgets and
projects ranging from $100 million to $800 million. In 2009, Mr. Marah joined the Accounting
Team at Greyhound Lines Inc.'s (First Group America FGA Parent Company) corporate office in
Dallas, Texas where his main focus was Inventory Management for all the U.S. and Canadian
Operations and currently holds the position of Senior Accountant. He effectively managed all
aspects of U.S. and Canadian Operations area including, Fuel, Oil, Tires, Engine and Cores.
Components of these included Bus Refurbishment Project costing close to $200 million including
budget and cash flow projections and spending. Before joining Greyhound Lines Inc., Mr. Marah
pursued his private practice and he consulted with several companies including, Ascent Capital
Group and J.F. Entertainment. As a Finance Consultant, he performed all finance and accounting
roles from payables, receivables, cash management, budgeting & forecasting, inventory
management, merger and acquisitions, fixed assets management and payroll. 
 
Prior to private practice, Mr. Marah worked at Dean Foods Company, the largest Dairy Producer
and Manufacturer in the U.S. In his tenure between 2003 and 2007, he focused on the inter-
company reconciliations and eliminations for 45 entities. As a Senior Accountant, he introduced
a cashless inter-company confirmation process between sister companies. During the same
period, he performed Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) implementation and testing to ensure proper
internal controls. His last project before leaving was to ensure proper data integration and chart
of accounts conversion to a new platform while constantly managing the Internal Financial
Reporting for four divisions and the reconciliation of the financials between the General Ledger
and Hyperion.
 
Earlier in his career, Mr. Marah was an International Accounting Analyst for Blockbuster's
Corporate Office in Dallas Texas. In that capacity, he was responsible for the consolidations and
eliminations of all the international operations in Europe, Latin America and Asia. He ensured
minimal currency exposure and liabilities with the use of his hedging techniques. In addition, he
created commentary on profit and loss fluctuations for each global region and reconciled
statements from foreign GAAP to U.S. GAAP.
 
Mr. Marah began providing professional services to the Company on a part-time basis in January
2011 while continuing with Greyhound.
 
No Officer or Director has been or is subject to any legal proceeding as identified in Regulation
S-K Item 401(f)
 
TABLE OF OWNERSHIP OF DIRECTORS, OFFICERS AND CERTAIN CONTROL PERSONS
GREATER THAN 5%
Class of StockName & Address of Owner
Common
Kevin Jones-CEO, Director
5057 Keller Springs Road, Suite 300
Addison, Texas 75001
Number of
 
Shares
Portion of
  
 
Class (%)*
5,000,000   73.14
%
*Calculated based on 6,835,740 shares outstanding on August 30, 2016.
 
No other person or entity as defined in SEC Rule 13d-3(a) has any right of ownership of common
stock by the exercise of any; (1) warrant, option or right (2) conversion of any security agreement
(3) power to revoke any trust agreement voluntarily or by automatic function.
 
No compensation in any form including payments of cash or in equity has been paid to our
director. It is contemplated that the registrant would develop and approve a plan as soon as it has
adequate resources to do so. Any future plans would be commensurate with the service provided
and not exceed any industry standard for the size and performance of comparable companies in
the same industry. Currently, there is no employment agreements between the Company and its
officers.
14
Summary of Compensation
Name and
Non-Equity
Principal
Incentive
Option
Stock
Award  
Award  
Year Salary   Bonus  
Position
Plan
CEO
  $
  $
  $
2015 $26,292  $
   
   
   
Kevin Jones 2014   43,348   
   
   
   
 
 
   
CFO
2015   1,000    
   
   
   
   
   
   
Sanah Marah2014   1,000
-
-
 
-
-
-
-
 
-
-
-
-
 
-
-
-
-
 
-
-
TRANSACTIONS WITH RELATED PERSONS AND CERTAIN CONTROL PERSONS
 
Prior to becoming the President and Chief Executive Officer of North Texas Energy Inc., Kevin
Jones was the founding Secretary of the Board of Directors of Remington Oil &Gas, Inc. His total
service time was approximately two months in 2010. Mr. Jones has not at any time held any
equity interest in or beneficial interest in the securities of Remington Oil & Gas, Inc.
 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
 
The Company plans on offering its securities to the public without the assistance of an
underwriter. This is not an underwritten offering. The Company through its officers and directors
will distribute the stock by direct sale to qualified individuals and entities. Subject to the
termination of the Company intends to engage the services of brokerage firms that quote stock
prices and make markets in particular types of stock offerings that are members of the regulatory
agencies that govern and or control their use and participation in the market quotation and stock
selling services industry.
RECENT SALES OF UNREGISTERED SECURTIES
 
For the year ended December 31, 2013, the Company sold 1,500 shares of restricted stock to a
private party for cash.
15
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS-CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
)   (2,934
December
  
31,
  2015
  
  
  $14,425
    14,425
June 30,
 
 2016
 
 
 
 
 
 $320,684
 
   320,684
 
    
 
   1,551,784     1,540,139  
   (2,934
)
   1,548,850     1,537,205  
    
 
 $1,869,534   $1,551,630  
    
 
 
    
 
    
    
 
 
 $95,796
 
   382,200
   65,881
 
 
   543,877
 
    
   44,282
 
 
   588,159
$116,784
    45,000
    65,881
    227,665
     
    44,282
    271,947
68
69
 
   3,723,453     3,595,454  
   (2,442,147)   (2,315,839)
   1,281,375     1,279,683  
    
 
 $1,869,534   $1,551,630
(UNAUDITED)
Assets
Current assets
Cash
Total current assets
Oil and gas properties, full cost method
Costs not being amortized
Accumulated depletion, depreciation and amortization
Total oil and gas properties
 
Total assets
 
 
Liabilities and shareholders' equity
Current liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Common stock payable
Accrued lease obligations
Total current liabilities
 
Asset retirement obligations
Total liabilities
 
Commitments and contingencies
 
Shareholders' equity
Common stock, $0.00001 par value, 100,000,000 shares authorized,
6,835,740 and 6,771,740 shares issued, respectively
Additional paid-in capital
Accumulated deficit
Total shareholders' equity
 
Total liabilities and shareholders' equity
See notes to the unaudited consolidated financial statements.
16
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(UNAUDITED)
Revenues
 
Operating expenses:
Lease operating expenses
General and administrative expenses
Legal and professional fees
Total  operating expenses
Net operating loss
Net loss
 
Loss per common share  basic and diluted
 
Weighted average number of common shares outstanding - basic and
diluted
Six Months Ended June
 
30,
 
  2015
 2016
 
  $10,925
 $6,676
 
     
    
 
     
    
 
    75,473
   9,017
 
    137,390
   91,226
 
   32,741
    38,828
 
   132,984     251,691
 
   (126,308 )   (240,766 )
 $(126,308 ) $(240,766 )
    
 
)
 $(0.02
) $(0.04
6,804,802     6,512,000
See notes to the unaudited consolidated financial statements.
17
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(UNAUDITED)
Cash Flows From Operating Activities:
Net loss
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used operating
activities:
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Stock issued for services
Accounts receivable
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
 
Cash Flows From Investing Activities:
Payments for unproved oil and gas properties
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
 
Cash Flows From Financing Activities:
Proceeds from sale of common stock
For the Six Months Ended 
 
 June 30,
 
 2016
 
 
 
 
 $(126,308 ) $ (240,766 )
2015
6,000
    5,369
)   44,278
-
 
   -
   (20,988
 
   (147,296 )   (185,119 )
 
    
 
    
   (11,645
)
)
   (11,645
 
    
    
 
 
   128,000
)   (98,645
)   (98,645
     
     
    241,850
Proceeds from subscription of common stock
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
 
Net increase (decrease) in cash
Cash at beginning of period
Cash at end of period
 
Supplemental Cash Flows Information:
Cash paid for interest
Cash paid for income taxes
 
 
See notes to the unaudited consolidated financial statements.
18
337,200
   465,200
    
   306,259
   14,425
 $320,684
    
    
 $-
 $-
-
    241,850
     
    (41,914
    92,426
  $ 50,512
     
     
  $ -
  $ -
)
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(UNAUDITED)
 
 
Note 1  Business and Organization
 
North Texas Energy, Inc. ("the Company") was incorporated in the State of Nevada on January
12, 2011. The Company intends to focus on re-entering non-producing oil fields and re-starting
production with existing oil and gas wells. On February 25, 2011, the Company entered into a
Purchase and Sale Agreement with Remington Oil & Gas, Inc. ("Remington") to acquire
Remington's interest in an oil and gas lease in Upshur and Milam County, Texas along with
wellhead equipment and certain lease obligations.
 
Note 2  Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
 
Basis of Presentation
 
The accompanying unaudited interim consolidated financial statements of North Texas Energy,
Inc. have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America and the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"),
and should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and notes thereto
contained in the Company's annual report on Form 10-K. In the opinion of management, all
adjustments, consisting of normal recurring adjustments, necessary for a fair presentation of
financial position and the results of operations for the interim periods presented have been
reflected herein.  The results of operations for interim periods are not necessarily indicative of the
results to be expected for the full year. Notes to the consolidated financial statements which
would substantially duplicate the disclosure contained in the audited consolidated financial
statements for the most recent fiscal year ended December 31, 2015 have been omitted.
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash equivalents are highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months or less.
Periodically, the Company may carry cash balances at financial institutions in excess of the
federally insured limit of $250,000. The amount in excess of the FDIC insurance at June 30, 2016
was $70,684.
Oil and Gas Properties
 
The Company uses the full cost method of accounting for exploration and development activities
as defined by the SEC. Under this method of accounting, the costs for unsuccessful, as well as
successful, exploration and development activities are capitalized as oil and gas properties.
Capitalized costs include lease acquisition, geological and geophysical work, delay rentals,
costs of drilling, completing and equipping the wells and any internal costs that are directly
related to acquisition, exploration and development activities but does not include any costs
related to production, general corporate overhead or similar activities. Proceeds from the sale or
other disposition of oil and gas properties are generally treated as a reduction in the capitalized
costs of oil and gas properties, unless the impact of such a reduction would significantly alter the
relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves of oil and natural gas attributable to a
country.
 
The Company categorizes its full cost pools as costs subject to amortization and costs not being
amortized. The sum of net capitalized costs subject to amortization, including estimated future
development and abandonment costs, are amortized using the unit-of-production method.
 
Oil and gas properties include costs that are excluded from capitalized costs being amortized.
These amounts represent costs of investments in unproved properties. The Company excludes
these costs on a country-by-country basis until proved reserves are found or until it is determined
that the costs are impaired. All costs excluded are reviewed annually to determine if impairment
has occurred. The amount of any impairment is transferred to the costs subject to amortization.
The Company currently only owns unproved properties. As of June 30, 2016, management
believes that there is no impairment for the Company's unproved oil and gas properties.
19
Ceiling Test and Impairment
 
Under the full cost method of accounting, a ceiling test is performed each quarter for proved
properties. The full cost ceiling test is an impairment test prescribed by SEC Regulation S-X. The
ceiling test determines a limit, on a country-by-country basis, on the book value of oil and gas
properties. The capitalized costs of proved oil and gas properties, net of accumulated
depreciation, depletion, amortization and impairment("DD&A") and the related deferred income
taxes, may not exceed the estimated future net cash flows from proved oil and gas reserves,
calculated using the average oil and natural gas sales price received by the Company as of the
first trading day of each month over the preceding twelve months (such prices are held constant
throughout the life of the properties) with consideration of price change only to the extent
provided by contractual arrangement, discounted at 10%, net of related tax effects. If capitalized
costs exceed this limit, the excess is charged to expense and reflected as additional
accumulated DD&A.  The Company has no proved properties subject to the full cost ceiling test
as of June 30, 2016.
 
Asset Retirement Obligations
 
Asset retirement obligations ("ARO") represent the future abandonment costs of tangible assets
such as platforms, wells, service assets, pipelines, and other facilities. The fair value of a liability
for an asset's retirement obligation is recorded in the period in which it is incurred if a reasonable
estimate of fair value can be made, and that the corresponding cost is capitalized as part of the
carrying amount of the related long-lived asset. The liability is accreted to its then present value
each period, and the capitalized cost is depreciated over the useful life of the related asset. If the
liability is settled for an amount other than the recorded amount, an adjustment is made to the full
cost pool, with no gain or loss recognized, unless the adjustment would significantly alter the
relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves. The ARO assets, which are carried
on the balance sheet as part of the full cost pool, will be included in our amortization base for the
purposes of calculating depreciation, depletion and amortization expense. For the purposes of
calculating the ceiling test, the future cash outflows associated with settling the ARO liability is
included in the computation of the discounted present value of estimated future net revenues.
The liability is adjusted for any changes in the estimate of the liability and for the disposal of
previously held oil and gas leases net of accretion expense.
 
Revenue Recognition
 
The Company generally sells crude oil and natural gas under short-term agreements at
prevailing market prices. Revenues are recognized when the products are delivered, which
occurs when the customer has taken title and has assumed the risks and rewards of ownership,
prices are fixed or determinable, and collectability is reasonably assured.
 
Income Taxes
 
Deferred income taxes are provided on a liability method whereby deferred tax assets and
liabilities are established for the difference between the financial reporting and income tax basis
of assets and liabilities as well as operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax
assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more
likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax
assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of
enactment.
 
Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon sufficient future taxable income during the
period that deductible temporary differences and carry-forwards are expected to be available to
reduce taxable income. At June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 the Company has recorded a
100% valuation allowance as management has no assurance that deferred tax assets will be
realized.
 
At June 30, 2016, the Company had net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $1.3
million that will expire between 2031 through 2036.
20
Net Loss Per Common Share
 
Basic net loss per share is computed by dividing the net loss attributable to common
shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period.
Diluted net loss per share is computed by dividing the net loss attributable to common
shareholders by the weighted-average number of common and common equivalent shares
outstanding during the period. Common share equivalents included in the diluted computation
represent shares issuable upon assumed exercise of stock options and warrants using the
treasury stock and "if converted" method. For periods in which net losses are incurred, weighted
average shares outstanding is the same for basic and diluted loss per share calculations, as the
inclusion of common share equivalents would have an anti-dilutive effect. For the six months
ended June 30, 2016 and 2015, there are no potentially dilutive shares.
 
Use of Estimates
 
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to
make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at year-end and the reported amounts of revenues
and expenses during the year and the reported amount of proved natural gas and oil reserves.
Management bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we
believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making
judgments that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these
estimates and changes in these estimates are recorded when known.
 
Subsequent Events
 
The Company has evaluated all transactions through the date the consolidated financial
statements were issued for subsequent event disclosure consideration.
 
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
 
In August 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standards Update
2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements  Going Concern. The update provides U.S.
GAAP guidance on management's responsibility in evaluating whether there is substantial doubt
about a company's ability to continue as a going concern and about related footnote disclosures.
For each reporting period, management will be required to evaluate whether there are conditions
or events that raise substantial doubt about a company's ability to continue as a going concern
within one year from the date the financial statements are issued. The amendments in this
Update is effective for the annual period ending after December 15, 2016, and for annual periods
and interim periods thereafter. The Company is currently evaluating the effects of ASU 2014-15
on the consolidated financial statements.
The Company does not believe that any other recently issued effective pronouncements, or
pronouncements issued but not yet effective, if adopted, would have a material effect on the
accompanying financial statements.
 
Note 3  Going Concern
As shown in the accompanying financial statements, the Company has incurred losses from
operations and has generated limited revenue at this time. These factors raise substantial doubt
about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying consolidated
financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is
unable to continue as a going concern. In addition to the offering of securities for sale to the
public, the Company currently is diligently searching for other short-term and long-term sources
of liquidity for its producing operations.
 
Note 4  Oil and Gas Properties
 
The Company's oil and gas properties at June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 were located
adjacent to each other in the State of Texas in the United States and all in Milam County.
During the six months ended June 30, 2016, the Company invested $11,645 in the drilling of new
wells.
21
Note 5  Accrued Lease Liabilities
 
The Company has an accrued lease liability to KADs Oil, Inc., the lessor of the leases in Milam
County, Texas which the Company currently owns. As a result of the Purchase and Sale
Agreement with Remington, the Company assumed the leasehold obligation of $50,000.
Payments are to be made when oil and gas is recovered and delivered to market at the rate of
25% of the sale price after all operating expenses.
 
On May 10, 2011, the Company entered into an oil, gas and mineral lease agreement for its oil
and gas properties located in Milam County, Texas. Pursuant to the lease agreement, the
Company will pay the lessor $15,881 for the lease which is recorded as an accrued leasehold
liability on the Company's balance sheets at June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015.
 
Note 6  Equity
 
During the six months ended June 30, 2016, the Company issued 64,000 shares of common
stock for cash of $128,000.
During the six months ended June 30, 2016, the Company received $337,200 for subscriptions of
common stock. Shares for these subscriptions have not been issued yet.
Note 7  Subsequent Events
 
Subsequent to June 30, 2016, the company received $7,150 for subscription of 3,575 shares of
common stock. These shares have not been issued. 
22
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of
North Texas Energy, Inc.
Addison, Texas
 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of North Texas Energy, Inc. as
of December 31, 2015 and 2014 and the related consolidated statements of operations,
shareholders' equity and cash flows for each of the years then ended. North Texas Energy, Inc.'s
management is responsible for these financial statements. Our responsibility is to express an
opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of
its internal control over financial reporting. Our audit included consideration of internal control
over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the
circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
Company's internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion. An
audit also includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures
in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates
made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We
believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of North Texas Energy, Inc. as of December 31, 2015 and
2014 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the years then ended in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that North
Texas Energy, Inc. will continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 3 to the consolidated
financial statements, North Texas Energy, Inc. has suffered losses from operations and has not
secured sufficient funding for its operations. These factors raise substantial doubt about its ability
to continue as a going concern. Management's plans in regard to these matters are also
described in Note 3. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that
might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. 
 
/s/ GBH CPAs, PC
 
GBH CPAs, PC
www.gbhcpas.com
Houston, Texas
 
June 28, 2016 
23
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
Assets
Current assets
Cash
Accounts receivable
Total current assets
Oil and gas properties, full cost method
Costs not being amortized
Accumulated depletion, depreciation and amortization
Total oil and gas properties
 
Total assets
 
Liabilities and shareholders' equity
Current liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
Common stock payable
Accrued lease liabilities
Total current liabilities
 
Asset retirement obligations
Total liabilities
 
Commitments and contingencies
 
Shareholders' equity
Common stock, $0.00001 par value, 100,000,000 shares authorized,
6,771,740 and 6,467,065 shares issued, respectively
Additional paid-in capital
Accumulated deficit
Total shareholders' equity
 
Total liabilities and shareholders' equity
 
See notes to the consolidated financial statements.
24
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
)   (2,934
December
  
31,
  2014
  
  
  $92,426
    5,369
    97,795
December
 
 
31,
 
 2015
 
 
 
 
 
 $14,425
 
   -
 
   14,425
    
 
   1,540,139     1,398,782  
   (2,934
)
   1,537,205     1,395,848  
    
 
 $1,551,630   $1,493,643  
 
    
    
 
 
    
 
 $116,784
   45,000
 
 
   65,881
 
   227,665
    
 
 
   44,282
 
   271,947
$110,521
    40,000
    65,881
    216,402
     
    44,282
    260,684
65
68
 
   3,595,454     2,986,107  
   (2,315,839)   (1,753,213)
   1,279,683     1,232,959  
    
 
 $1,551,630   $1,493,643
For the Year Ended
Revenues
Operating expenses:
Lease operating expense
Depletion and accretion
Legal and professional fees
General and administrative expenses
Total operating expenses
 
Net loss
 
Basic and diluted loss per common share
 
Weighted average number of common shares outstanding - basic and
diluted
See notes to the consolidated financial statements.
25
2014
  $70,615
December 31,
 
 2015
 
 $21,578
 
    
 
   109,482     96,856
 
   -
    5,443
 
   237,351     88,916
 
   237,371     206,793  
   584,204     398,008  
    
 
 $(562,626 ) $(327,393 )
 
    
 $(0.09
)
) $(0.05
6,606,102    6,328,533
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
Additional
  
Paid-In
  Amount  Capital
Total
Accumulated  
  Deficit
$2,410,510  $(1,425,820 ) $984,752  
     
     
     
 
    575,600  
    575,597     -
     
     
     
 
)   (327,393 )
    (327,393
    -
     
     
     
 
    2,986,107    (1,753,213 )   1,232,959 
     
     
 
     
    413,350  
    413,348     -
     
     
     
 
    (10,000 )
    (10,000 )   -
     
     
     
 
    205,999     -
    206,000  
     
     
     
 
)   (562,626 )
    (562,626
    -
     
     
     
 
  $3,595,454  $(2,315,839 ) $1,279,683
Common Stock
 Shares
 
  6,179,265  $ 62
Balance, December 31, 2013
 
 
Issuance of common stock for cash  287,800     3
 
 
-
Net loss
 
 
 Balance, December 31, 2014
 
 
Issuance of common stock for cash  206,675     2
 
 
   
-
Shares cancelled
  (5,000
   
 
 
Shares issued for services
  103,000     1
 
   
 
-
  -
Net loss
 
   
 
  6,771,740  $ 68
Balance, December 31, 2015
-
   
  6,467,065    65
)
See notes to the consolidated financial statements.
26
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
5,443
2014
For the Year Ended  
 
 
 December 31,
 
 2015
 
 
 
 
Cash Flows From Operating Activities:
 
 
Net loss
 $(562,626) $(327,393)
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used operating activities:    
 
   -
Depletion and accretion
 
Shares issued for services
   206,000     -
 
     
    
Changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
    (5,369
   5,369
Accounts receivable
)
Inventory
   -
    1,013
 
   6,263
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
    43,403  
   (344,994)   (282,903)
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
 
    
 
    
Cash Flows From Investing Activities:
 
   (141,357)   (291,195)
Payments for unproved oil and gas properties
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
   (141,357)   (291,195)
 
    
 
    
Cash Flows From Financing Activities:
 
Proceeds from sale of common stock
   408,350     615,600  
   408,350     615,600  
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
    
 
 
Net increase (decrease) in cash
   (78,001 )   41,502  
   92,426     50,924  
Cash at beginning of year
 $14,425   $92,426  
Cash at end of year
 
    
 
     
 
    
Supplemental Cash Flows Information
     
 
 $-
Cash paid for interest
  $-
Cash paid for income taxes and financing
 $-
 
  $-
     
    
Noncash investing activities:
 
  $15,616  
 $-
Net change in asset retirement costs
Payable for purchase of oil and gas properties
 $-
  $55,932
See notes to the consolidated financial statements. 
27
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
Note 1 - Business and Organization
 
North Texas Energy, Inc. ("the Company") was incorporated in the State of Nevada on January
12, 2011. The Company intends to focus on re-entering non-producing oil fields and re-starting
production with existing wells. On February 25, 2011, the Company entered into a Purchase and
Sale Agreement with Remington Oil & Gas, Inc. ("Remington") to acquire Remington's interest in
an oil and gas lease in Upshur and Milam County, Texas along with wellhead equipment and
certain lease obligations.
 
Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
 
Basis of Presentation
 
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles in the United States ("GAAP") and include the accounts of the
Company and those of its wholly owned subsidiary. All significant intercompany accounts and
transactions have been eliminated.
 
Cash and Cash Equivalents
 
Cash equivalents are highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months or less.
 
Accounts Receivable
 
Accounts receivable are stated at the historical carrying amount net of write-offs and allowance
for uncollectible accounts. The carrying amount of the Company's accounts receivable
approximates fair value because of the short-term nature of the instruments.
 
The Company's reported balance of accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts,
represents management's estimate of the amount that ultimately will be realized in cash. The
Company reviews the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts on an ongoing basis,
using historical payment trends, the age of the receivables and knowledge of the individual
customers or joint interest owners. When the analysis indicates, management increases or
decreases the allowance accordingly. However, if the financial condition of our customers were
to deteriorate, additional allowances might be required.
 
Inventory
 
From time to time, crude oil production volumes may be stored as inventory and sold at a later
time. Inventory is carried at the lower of production cost or market value. The first-in, first-out
method is used for the crude oil inventory.
 
Oil and Gas Properties
 
The Company uses the full cost method of accounting for exploration and development activities
as defined by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). Under this method of
accounting, the costs for unsuccessful, as well as successful, exploration and development
activities are capitalized as oil and gas properties. Capitalized costs include lease acquisition,
geological and geophysical work, delay rentals, costs of drilling, completing and equipping the
wells and any internal costs that are directly related to acquisition, exploration and development
activities but does not include any costs related to production, general corporate overhead or
similar activities. Proceeds from the sale or other disposition of oil and gas properties are
generally treated as a reduction in the capitalized costs of oil and gas properties, unless the
impact of such a reduction would significantly alter the relationship between capitalized costs
and proved reserves of oil and natural gas attributable to a country.
28
The Company categorizes its full cost pools as costs subject to amortization and costs not being
amortized. The sum of net capitalized costs subject to amortization, including estimated future
development and abandonment costs, are amortized using the unit-of-production method.
 
Oil and gas properties include costs that are excluded from capitalized costs being amortized.
These amounts represent costs of investments in unproved properties. The Company excludes
these costs on a country-by-country basis until proved reserves are found or until it is determined
that the costs are impaired. All costs excluded are reviewed annually to determine if impairment
has occurred. The amount of any impairment is transferred to the costs subject to amortization.
 
Ceiling Test and Impairment
 
Under the full cost method of accounting, a ceiling test is performed each quarter for proved
properties. The full cost ceiling test is an impairment test prescribed by SEC Regulation S-X. The
ceiling test determines a limit, on a country-by-country basis, on the book value of oil and gas
properties. The capitalized costs of proved oil and gas properties, net of accumulated
depreciation, depletion, amortization and impairment("DD&A") and the related deferred income
taxes, may not exceed the estimated future net cash flows from proved oil and gas reserves,
calculated using the average oil and natural gas sales price received by the Company as of the
first trading day of each month over the preceding twelve months (such prices are held constant
throughout the life of the properties) with consideration of price change only to the extent
provided by contractual arrangement, discounted at 10%, net of related tax effects. If capitalized
costs exceed this limit, the excess is charged to expense and reflected as additional
accumulated DD&A. The Company has no proved properties subject to the full cost ceiling test
as of December 31, 2015.
 
Asset Retirement Obligations
 
Asset retirement obligations ("ARO") represent the future abandonment costs of tangible assets
such as platforms, wells, service assets, pipelines, and other facilities. The fair value of a liability
for an asset's retirement obligation is recorded in the period in which it is incurred if a reasonable
estimate of fair value can be made, and that the corresponding cost is capitalized as part of the
carrying amount of the related long-lived asset. The liability is accreted to its then present value
each period, and the capitalized cost is depreciated over the useful life of the related asset. If the
liability is settled for an amount other than the recorded amount, an adjustment is made to the full
cost pool, with no gain or loss recognized, unless the adjustment would significantly alter the
relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves. The ARO assets, which are carried
on the balance sheet as part of the full cost pool, will be included in our amortization base for the
purposes of calculating depreciation, depletion and amortization expense. For the purposes of
calculating the ceiling test, the future cash outflows associated with settling the ARO liability is
included in the computation of the discounted present value of estimated future net revenues.
Revenue Recognition
 
The Company recognizes sales revenues for crude oil based on the amount sold to purchasers
when delivery to the purchaser has occurred and title has transferred. This occurs when a tanker
lifting has occurred.
 
Income Taxes
 
Deferred income taxes are provided on a liability method whereby deferred tax assets and
liabilities are established for the difference between the financial reporting and income tax basis
of assets and liabilities as well as operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax
assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more
likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax
assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of
enactment.
 
Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon sufficient future taxable income during the
period that deductible temporary differences and carry-forwards are expected to be available to
reduce taxable income. At December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company has recorded a 100%
valuation allowance as management believes it is likely that no deferred tax assets will be
realized.
 
At December 31, 2015, the Company had net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $1.2
million that will expire between 2031 through 2035.
29
Net Income (Loss) Per Share
 
Basic net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing the net income (loss) attributable to
common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during
the period. Diluted net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing the net income (loss)
attributable to common shareholders by the weighted-average number of common and common
equivalent shares outstanding during the period. Common share equivalents included in the
diluted computation represent shares issuable upon assumed exercise of stock options and
warrants using the treasury stock and "if converted" method. For periods in which net losses are
incurred, weighted average shares outstanding is the same for basic and diluted loss per share
calculations, as the inclusion of common share equivalents would have an anti-dilutive effect. As
of December 31, 2015 and 2014, there were no potentially dilutive shares.
 
Use of Estimates
 
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to
make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at year-end and the reported amounts of revenues
and expenses during the year and the reported amount of proved natural gas and oil reserves.
Management bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we
believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making
judgments that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these
estimates and changes in these estimates are recorded when known.
 
Subsequent Events
 
The Company has evaluated all transactions through the date the consolidated financial
statements were issued for subsequent event disclosure consideration.
 
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
 
The Company does not believe that any other recently issued effective pronouncements, or
pronouncements issued but not yet effective, if adopted, would have a material effect on the
accompanying financial statements.
 
Note 3 - Going Concern
 
As shown in the accompanying financial statements, the Company has incurred losses from
operations, has not generated significant revenue and has not secured continuous funding for the
operation of its oil and gas producing activities. These factors raise substantial doubt about the
Company's ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying consolidated financial
statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to
continue as a going concern. In addition to the offering of securities for sale to the public, the
Company currently is diligently searching for other short-term and long-term sources of liquidity
for its producing operations.
 
Note 4  Oil and Gas Properties, Full Cost Method
 
The Company's oil and gas properties at December 31, 2015 and 2014 are located in the State
of Texas in the United States and are all in Milam County.
 
During 2014, the Company transferred $1,395,848 from costs subject to amortization to unproved
properties as the wells were only producing insignificant volumes of crude oil.
 
30
During the year ended December 31, 2014, the Company added two additional oil and gas
leases. The added leases contain a total of five wells. The Company paid $6,133 and $8,720,
respectively, as cash consideration for the acquisition of the leases.
 
On October 10, 2014, the Company also entered into a lease agreement to lease an additional
221 acres in Milam County. The Company paid $11,083 for the additional lease and as of
December 31, 2015, the Company has not execute the drilling permit.
 
For the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, the Company invested $141,357 and
$235,263, respectively, in the development of its oil and gas infrastructure and wells and
acquisition of new lease properties discussed above.
Note 5  Accrued Lease Liabilities
 
The Company has an accrued lease liability to KADs Oil, Inc., the lessor of the Company's
leases in both Upshur and Milam County, Texas. As a result of the Purchase and Sale
Agreement with Remington, the Company assumed the leasehold obligation of $50,000.
Payments are to be made when oil and gas is recovered and delivered to market at the rate of
25% of the sale price after all operating expenses. No payment has been made as of December
31, 2015.
On May 10, 2011, the Company entered into an oil, gas and mineral lease agreement for its oil
and gas properties located in Milam County, Texas. Pursuant to the lease agreement, the
Company will pay the lessor $15,881 for the lease which is recorded as an accrued leasehold
liability on the Company's balance sheets at December 31, 2015 and 2014.
 
Note 6  Asset Retirement Obligation
 
The following table provides a reconciliation of the changes in the estimated present value of
asset retirement obligations.
Beginning asset retirement obligations $ 44,282
Change of estimate
Addition
Accretion expense
Ending asset retirement obligations
-
   -
   -
 $ 44,282
December 31,
December 31,
 
 
2015
2014
 
 
 
  $ 25,844
)
    (2,645
    18,260
 
 
    2,823
  $ 44,282
Note 7  Equity
 
During the year ended December 31, 2015, the Company issued 206,675 common shares for
$413,350. The Company received $40,000 cash in 2014 for sale of 20,000 common shares
which have not been issued. During the year ended December 31, 2014, the Company also
issued 287,800 common shares for $575,600.
During the year ended December 31, 2015, two investors canceled their subscriptions of 5,000
common shares and returned the shares to the Company. The Company returned $5,000
previously received and recorded a stock payable of $5,000 for the amount to be returned.
Note 8  Subsequent Events
 
Subsequent to December 31, 2015, the Company issued 64,000 common shares for cash of
$128,000.
Subsequent to December 31, 2015, the Company received $220,000 for subscriptions of
common stock. Shares for these subscriptions have not been issued yet.
31
LITIGATION
The Company has not been a party to any legal action. Further, the Company is not aware of any
impending legal action that would have any significant impact on the Company's business
operations or liquidity.
 
STOCK TRANSFER AGENT
 
Our stock transfer agent is: Securities Transfer Corporation, 2591 Dallas Parkway, Suite 102,
Frisco, TX 75034. The contact numbers are: Office (972) 963-0012 and FAX (972) 633-0088. The
website is: stctransfer.com.
 
LEGAL MATTERS
 
The validity of the securities offered hereby has been passed upon for us by securities counsel
Mintz & Fraade, P.C. as shown in Exhibits 5.1.
 
EXPERTS
 
The financial statements as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 and for the years then ended have
been audited by GBH CPAs, PC, an independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth
in its report, and are included in reliance upon such report given on the authority of such firm as
experts in accounting and auditing.
 
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
 
We have filed with the SEC a registration statement on Form S-1 under the Securities Act of
1933 with respect to the Common Stock offered hereby. This prospectus, which constitutes a part
of the registration statement, does not contain all of the information in the registration statement
and the exhibits of the registration statement. For further information with respect to us and the
shares being offered under this prospectus, we refer you to the registration statement, including
the exhibits and schedules thereto.
 
You may read and copy the registration statement of which this prospectus is a part at the SEC
Public Reference Room, which is located at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. You
can request copies of the registration statement by writing to the SEC and paying a fee for the
copying cost. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for more information about the operation
of the SEC Public Reference Room. In addition, the SEC maintains an Internet web site, which is
located at www.sec.gov which contains reports, proxy and information statements and other
information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC. You may access the
registration statement of which this prospectus is a part at the SEC Internet web site. We are
subject to the information reporting requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and we
will file reports, proxy statements and other information with the SEC.
32
UNDERTAKINGS
The undersigned registrant hereby undertakes:
1.
To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective amendment
to this registration statement:
i. To include any prospectus required by section 10(a) (3) of the Securities Act of 1933.
To reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration
statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the
aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the registration
statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of securities
offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was
registered) and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering
range may be reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule
424(b) if, in the aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than 20%
change in the maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the "Calculation of Registration
Fee" table in the effective registration statement.
 
To include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously
disclosed in the registration statement or any material change to such information in the
registration statement;
ii.
iii.
That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such
post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the
securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be
the initial bona fide offering thereof.
 
To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities
being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
2.
3.
4.
That, for the purpose of determining liability of the registrant under the Securities Act of 1933 to
any purchaser in the initial distribution of the securities: The undersigned registrant undertakes
that in a primary offering of securities of the undersigned registrant pursuant to this registration
statement, regardless of the underwriting method used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if
the securities are offered or sold to such purchaser by means of any of the following
communications, the undersigned registrant will be a seller to the purchaser and will be
considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
i.
ii.
iii.
Any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrant relating to the offering
required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
 
Any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of the undersigned
registrant or used or referred to by the undersigned registrant;
 
The portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material
information about the undersigned registrant or its securities provided by or on behalf of the
undersigned registrant; and
33
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.
viii.
Any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by the undersigned registrant to
the purchaser.
 
Any provision or arrangement exists whereby the registrant may indemnify a director, officer
or controlling person of the registrant against liabilities arising under the Securities Act, or
 
The underwriting agreement contains a provision whereby the registrant indemnifies the
underwriter or controlling persons of the underwriter against such liabilities and a director,
officer or controlling person of the registrant is such an underwriter or controlling person
thereof or a member of any firm which is such an underwriter, and
 
The benefits of such indemnification are not waived by such persons.
 
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be
permitted to directors, officers and controlling persons of the registrant pursuant to the
foregoing provisions, or otherwise, the registrant has been advised that, in the opinion of the
Securities and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as
expressed in the Act and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for
indemnification against such liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of expenses
incurred or paid by a director, officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful
defense of any action, suit or proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling
person in connection with the securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the
opinion of its counsel the matter has been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court
of appropriate jurisdiction the question whether such indemnification by it is against public
policy as expressed in the Act and will be governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
5.
For purposes of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, the information
omitted from the form of prospectus filed as part of this registration statement in reliance upon
Rule 430A and contained in a form of prospectus filed by the registrant pursuant to Rule 424(b)
(1) or (4) or 497(h) under the Securities Act shall be deemed to be part of this registration
statement as of the time it was declared effective.
6.
For the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each post-
effective amendment that contains a form of prospectus shall be deemed to be a new
registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such
securities at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
34
SIGNATURES
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this
registration statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized in
the City of Addison, State of Texas, on August 31, 2016.
 
   North Texas Energy, Inc.
  
 By:/s/ Kevin Jones
   Kevin Jones
   Chief Executive Officer and Director
  
 By:/s/ Sanah Marah
   Sanah Marah
   Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
 
 
35
EXHIBITS
 
EXHIBIT
NUMBER
A
2.2
3.1
3.2
 
5.1
 
23.1
99.1
36
DESCRIPTION OF EXHIBIT
Unanimous Written Consent of the Sole Director in lieu of a meeting of the
Board of Directors
 
Purchase and Sales Agreement (Previously filed 2/23/2012)
 
Articles of Incorporation of North Texas Energy, Inc. (Previously filed
12/30/2011)
 
By-Laws of North Texas Energy, Inc. (Previously filed 12/30/2011)
 
Opinion of Legal Counsel-Issuance of Stock (Previously filed 2/6/2013)
 
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
 
M W Balch Lease and New Diana Field 3-year EUR (Previously filed
5/16/2012)
Exhibit A
 
 
 
UNANIMOUS WRITTEN CONSENT OF
THE SOLE DIRECTOR
  
IN LIEU OF A MEETING OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
 
-OF-
 
NORTH TEXAS ENERGY, INC.
 
 
 
The undersigned, being the sole director of North Texas Energy, Inc. (the "Company"), a Nevada
Corporation, does hereby consent to the adoption of the following resolution by written consent,
without a meeting of the Board of Directors of the Company, pursuant to the Nevada General
Corporate Law.
 
WHEREAS, the sole director believes that it is in the best interest of the Company to approve an
extension of time with respect to the Company's offering of two million (2,000,000) shares of the
Company's Common Stock, par value $.001 per share, which were registered under the
Securities Act of 1933, effective  March 29, 2013.
 
NOW THEREFORE IT IS:
 
RESOLVED, that the sole director of the Company, hereby authorizes and empowers, in the
name and on behalf of the Company, to execute such document and to take such additional
action as he may deem necessary or desirable in order to implement the intent and purpose of
the foregoing resolution.
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned has executed this Written Consent as of the August
31, 2016.
 
 
/s/ Kevin Jones
Kevin Jones
Chairman
 
 
 
37