
Intrepid Mines Limited (ASX: IAU) ("Intrepid" or "Company") is pleased to present its June 2016

quarterly report. All amounts are in Australian dollars unless otherwise stated.

- Commencement of the 2016 drilling program on 31 May 2016, focussing on “Target H” and
induced polarization (IP) survey of “Lulu”

- External review ofthe Kitumba project completed

- Cash balance $50.6 million at 30 June 2016

Kitumba Project, Zambia (Intrepid 100%)

A review of the Kitumba Project was commissioned by the new Board of Directors during the first

quarter of 2016. The review was designed to determine whether the mining and processing concept

that was contemplated in the updated PreeFeasibility Study is consistent with the most recent

geological information and current market environment.

This review was completed during the reporting period and has recommended some additional ore

characterisation and sample analysis on existing drill core to provide a better understanding of the

ore types and to delineate the extent and distribution of the oxide and sulphide ores in the deposit.

This proposed additional baseline work on the characterisation ofthe copper mineralisation (ore,

typing) would enable more conventional or streamlined processing options to be studied, with the

intent to significantly reduce capital and operating costs ofthe project, reducing the risks associated

with the future development ofthe property.

Chairperson Peter Love said: llThe Board believes that the proposed additional ore characterisation

and sample analysis work would improve the risk profile ofthe project if it were completed.

However, it is not considered to be essential at this point in time, particularly given the current state

of the resources market. The depressed copper price has made your Board extremely cautious of

committing to any additional expenditures on the Kitumba project, particularly given the relatively

high capital cost associated with the project and the difficulty of securing development finance in

the current market.

The Board will make a determination on the merits of carrying out the additional work

recommended by the review. It is believed this will only be when market conditions for new copper

projects show a clear sign of improvement.”


The Board confirms that the Company is committed to doing what is possible to progress the project 
on a cost effective basis. The Company has since embarked on an exploration program for the 2016 
drilling season and will continue to assess future exploration and project development options. 
 
Mumbwa Exploration, Zambia (Intrepid 100%) 
Exploration activities commenced on 31 May 2016 following a full target review of the work 
conducted in 2015 and the development of a plan for the 2016 exploration program.  
 
The 2016 drilling program is focused on Target H where the Company had successful results in the 
2015 drilling campaign. Approximately 1,100m of drilling is planned for Stage 1 of the program, with 
a further 1,900m of drilling planned for Stage 2 pending the results of Stage 1. Refer to the image 
below setting out the prioritised Mumbwa targets.
During the month of June 2016, the Company completed approximately 800m of the Stage 1 
program. In the period 1 July 2016 to 20 July 2016, the Company had drilled a further 600m, 
completing the Stage 1 program and commencing on Stage 2 of the planned drilling program. 
Results from the drilling will be reported as the assay results become available over the current 
quarter and into the fourth quarter of 2016. 
 
In addition, an Induced Polarization (IP) geophysical survey was conducted on the Lulu Target during 
June 2016. The results of the survey and the potential for further action based on the results are 
currently being considered to determine whether any targets require further drill-testing. 
 
Health, Safety and Environment  
There were no safety or environmental incidents reported during the quarter.
Corporate Social Responsibility and Sustainability Issues in Zambia
Intrepid sees commitment to sustainable development and building responsible relationships with 
the communities around the Project as fundamental to success. The Company continues to fulfil its 
obligations to the communities by actively supporting a range of specific social and community 
projects aimed at benefitting the local people, with an emphasis on education and primary health.  
 
Intrepid has continued its community support program in the Kitumba area with the primary focus 
being on the local Kitumba and Kafwikamo Community Schools, with ongoing contributions to the 
building of additional classrooms and on-site accommodation and furnishings. 
 
2. Corporate 
 
During the June 2016 quarter the Company continued with its cost reduction initiatives.  Mr Mark 
Davison was appointed as Chief Financial Officer of the Company following the restructure of the 
Company’s finance and accounting function.  The Company intends to close its Sydney office in the 
September 2016 quarter and take all Australian based administrative functions virtual. This will 
further reduce Australian overhead costs. 
 
As at 30 June 2016 the Company had cash on hand of $50.6 million.  As advised in the AGM Notice of 
Meeting dated 22 April 2016, approximately $24.3 million, representing $0.07 per share, is proposed 
to be returned to Shareholders subject to an appropriate Class Ruling from the Australian Taxation 
Office on the tax treatment of this return of capital.   
 
As at the date of this quarterly report, the Company is presently waiting for the Class Ruling in 
connection with the tax treatment of the proposed $0.07 per share return of capital to be issued by 
the Australian Taxation Office. 
 
At the Company’s Annual General Meeting held 31 May 2016, all resolutions put to shareholders 
were carried.
3. Tenement summary 
 
Intrepid’s portfolio of mining and exploration assets held at 30 June 2016 is summarised in the table 
below.
Concession
Location
Tenement Number  Current Quarter  Previous Quarter
Kitumba Mining Licence  Zambia
19820-HQ-LML
Musafwa Permit
Kachindu Permit
Kabwera Permit
Nyoko Permit
Zambia
Zambia
Zambia
Zambia
14265-HQ-LPL
14266-HQ-LPL
14267-HQ-LPL
16385-HQ-LPL
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This release contains certain forward-looking statements relating to, but not limited to, Intrepid’s 
expectations, intentions, plans and beliefs. Forward-looking information can often be identified by 
forward-looking words such as ‘anticipate’, ‘believe’, ‘expect’, ‘goal’, ‘plan’, ‘intend’, ‘estimate’, 
‘may’ and ‘will’ or similar words suggesting future outcomes, or other expectations, beliefs, plans, 
objectives, assumptions, intentions or statements about future outcomes, or statements about 
future events or performance. Forward-looking information may include reserve and resource 
estimates, estimates of future production, unit costs, costs of capital projects, and timing of 
commencement of operations and is based on current expectations that involve a number of 
business risks and uncertainties. 
 
Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statement 
include, but are not limited to, failure to establish estimated resources and reserves, the grade and 
recovery of ore which is mined varying from estimates, capital and operating costs varying 
significantly from estimates, delays in obtaining or failures to obtain required governmental, 
environmental or other project approvals, inflation, changes in exchange rates, fluctuations in 
commodity prices, delays in the development of projects and other factors. Forward-looking 
statements are subject to a variety of known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that 
could cause actual events or results to differ materially from those expressed or implied. 
 
Shareholders and potential investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking 
information. By its nature, forward-looking information involves numerous assumptions, inherent 
risks and uncertainties, both general and specific, that contribute to the possibility that the 
predictions, forecasts, projections and various future events will not occur. Intrepid undertakes no 
obligation to update publicly or otherwise revise any forward-looking information whether as a 
result of new information, future events or other such factors which affect this information, except 
as required by law.
Statements relating to copper reserve and resource estimates are expressions of judgment, based 
on knowledge and experience and may require revision based on actual production experience. Such 
estimates are necessarily imprecise and depend to some extent on statistical inferences and other 
assumptions, such as copper prices, cut-off grades and operating costs, which may prove to be 
inaccurate. Information provided relating to projected costs, capital expenditure, production profiles 
and timelines are expressions of judgment only and no assurances can be given that actual costs, 
production profiles or timelines will not differ materially from the estimates contained in this 
announcement. 
 
CORPORATE INFORMATION 
 
Directors & Executive Management
Offices
Australia 
Level 5, Suite 502, 
78- 80 William Street, 
Woolloomooloo,  
NSW 2011, Australia
Zambia 
Suite 1A, Al Jahazi Villas 
155 Kabulonga Road 
Kabulonga, Lusaka 
Zambia
Peter Love – Chairperson 
Richard Baumfield - Non-Executive Director 
Peter Evans - Non-Executive Director  
Andrew Crawford –  Company Secretary
Tony De Santis – Acting Chief Executive Officer  
Mark Davison – Chief Financial Officer
Contact 
Telephone: +61 2 9357 9000 (Australia) 
Telephone: +260 211 268 502 (Zambia) 
Facsimile: + 61 2 9332 1336 
Website: www.intrepidmines.com.au 
Email: info@intrepidmines.com