
MAZARIN INC.
FORM 52-109FV2
CERTIFICATION OF INTERIM FILINGS
VENTURE ISSUER BASIC CERTIFICATE

I. Mario Simard. Chief Financial Ofﬁcer of Mazarin Inc.. certify the following:

1. Review: I have reviewed the interim ﬁnancial report and interim MD&A (together. the “interim ﬁlings")
of Mazarin Inc. (the issuer) for the interim period ended June 30, 2016i

2. No misrepresentations: Based on my knowledge, having exercised reasonable diligence, the
interim ﬁlings do not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
required to be stated or that is necessary to make a statement not misleading in light of the
circumstances under which it was made, with respect to the period covered by the interim ﬁlings.

3. Fair presentation: Based on my knowledge having exercised reasonable diligence, the interim
ﬁnancial report together with the other financial information included in the interim ﬁlings fairly
present in all material respects the ﬁnancial condition, ﬁnancial performance and cash ﬂows of the
issuer, as of the date and for the periods presented in the interim ﬁlings.

m. es wet as, who

Mario Simard

Chief Financial Ofﬁcer

NOTE TO READER

In contrast to the certiﬁcate required for non-venture issuers under Regulation 52409 respecting Certiﬁcation of

Disclosure in lssuers’ Annual and Interim Filings (c. V-1,1, r. 27) (Regulation 52-109), this Venture Issuer Basic

Certiﬁcate does not include representations relating to the establishment and maintenance of disclosure controls and

procedures (DC&P) and internal control over ﬁnancial reporting (ICFR). as deﬁned in Regulation 52-109. In particular.

the certifying ofﬁcers ﬁling this certiﬁcate are not making any representations relating to the establishment and
maintenance of:

i) controls and other procedures designed to provide reasonable assurance that Information required to be
disclosed by the issuer in its annual ﬁlings, interim ﬁlings or other reports ﬁled or submitted under securities
legislation is recorded. processed, summarized and reported within the time periods speciﬁed in securities
legislation: and

iii a process to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of ﬁnancial reporting and the preparation
of ﬁnancial statements for external purposes in accordance with the issuer's GAAP

The issuer's certifying ofﬁcers are responsible for ensuring that processes are in place to provide them with sufﬁcient

knowledge to support the representations they are making in this certificate, Investors should be aware that inherent

limitations on the ability of certifying ofﬁcers of a venture issuer to design and implement on a cost effective basis

DC&P and ICFR as deﬁned in Regulation 52409 may result in additional risks to the quality, reliability, transparency

and timeliness of interim and annual ﬁlings and other reports provided under securities legislation.

___—._____—_.—__———

M,O. 2008-16, Sch. 52~109FV2; MD. 201047, 5. 5.

