
31 August 2016
ASX Announcement
CLEANSING PROSPECTUS
Dynasty Resources Limited (DMA or the Company) advises that it has released a cleansing prospectus
(“Prospectus”) pursuant to section 708A(11) of the Corporations Act. The purpose of the Prospectus is to
remove any trading restrictions in relation to the Placement Shares issued as per the Company’s
announcement to the ASX on 10 August 2016.
Enquiries:  
Lewis Tay 
Managing Director 
(08) 6316 4414
Dynasty Resources Limited ABN 80 110 385 709 
83 Brisbane Street, Perth 6000 Western Australia 
T: +61 8 6316 4414  F: +61 8 6316 4404  E: info@dynastyresources.com.au   
www.dynastyresources.com.au
DYNASTY RESOURCES LIMITED 
ACN 110 385 709
PROSPECTUS
For the offer of up to 1,000 Shares in the capital of the Company at an issue price of $0.05 
per Share to raise up to $50 (before expenses).
This  Prospectus  has  been  prepared  primarily  for  the  purpose  of  section  708A(11)  of  the 
Corporations  Act  to  remove  any  trading  restrictions  on  the  sale  of  Shares  issued  by  the 
Company prior to the Closing Date.
IMPORTANT NOTICE
This document is important and should be read in its entirety.  If after reading this Prospectus you 
have any questions about the Shares being offered under this Prospectus or any other matter, then 
you should consult your stockbroker, accountant or other professional adviser.
The Shares offered under this Prospectus should be considered speculative.
T A B L E   O F   C O N T E N T S
CORPORATE DIRECTORY .............................................................................................. 1
TIMETABLE AND IMPORTANT NOTES ............................................................................ 2
DETAILS OF THE OFFER .................................................................................................. 4
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE OFFER ........................................................................... 7
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ATTACHING TO SHARES ........................................................ 8
RISK FACTORS .............................................................................................................. 8
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ...................................................................................... 18
DIRECTORS’ AUTHORISATION .................................................................................... 26
DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................... 27
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
CORPORATE DIRECTORY
Directors
Registered Office
83 Brisbane Street 
PERTH  WA  6000 
 
Telephone:   +61 8 6316 4414 
Facsimile:   
+61 8 6316 4404  
 
Email:  info@dynastyresources.com.au 
Website: 
http://www.dynastyresources.com.au/
Solicitors
Steinepreis Paganin 
Lawyers and Consultants 
Level 4, The Read Buildings  
16 Milligan Street  
PERTH  WA  6000
Auditor*
BDO East Coast Partnership 
Level 11, 1 Margaret St 
SYDNEY  NSW  2000
Lewis Tay 
Executive Chairman 
 
Bin Wang 
Non-Executive Director  
 
Qinzhou Yuan 
Non-Executive Director 
 
Bo Xin Dong 
Alternate Director for Bin Wang 
 
Company Secretary 
 
Louise Edwards 
Company Secretary 
 
Share Registry*
Security Transfer Registrars Pty Limited  
770 Canning Highway 
Applecross  WA  6153 
 
Telephone: +61 8 9315 2333 
Facsimile: +61 8 9315 2233
* These entities have not been involved in the preparation of this Prospectus and have not 
consented to being named in this Prospectus.  Their names are included for information 
purposes only.
1
2.
TIMETABLE AND IMPORTANT NOTES
2.1
Timetable
Action
Lodgement of Prospectus with the ASIC and ASX
Opening Date
Closing Date*
Date
31 August 2016
31 August 2016
5:00pm WST on 1 
September 2016
Expected date of Official Quotation of the Shares
6 September 2016
* The Directors reserve the right to bring forward or extend the Closing Date at any time after the 
Opening Date without notice. As such, the date the Shares are expected to commence trading on ASX 
may vary with any change in the Closing Date.
2.2
Important Notes
This  Prospectus  is  dated  31  August  2016  and  was lodged  with  the  ASIC  on  that 
date.    The  ASIC  and  its  officers  take  no  responsibility  for  the  contents  of  this 
Prospectus or the merits of the investment to which this Prospectus relates.
No Shares may be issued on the basis of this Prospectus later than 13 months after 
the date of this Prospectus.
The Offer is only available to those who are personally invited to accept the Offer.  
Applications for Shares offered pursuant to this Prospectus can only be submitted 
on an original Application Form which accompanies this Prospectus.
This  Prospectus  is  a  transaction  specific  prospectus  for  an  offer  of  continuously 
quoted securities (as defined in the Corporations Act) and has been prepared in 
accordance with  section  713  of  the Corporations  Act.    It  does  not  contain  the 
same  level  of  disclosure  as  an  initial  public  offering  prospectus.    In  making 
representations  in  this  Prospectus  regard  has  been  had  to  the  fact  that  the 
Company  is  a  disclosing  entity  for  the  purposes  of  the  Corporations  Act  and 
certain  matters  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  known  to  investors  and 
professional advisers whom potential investors may consult.
2.3
Web Site – Electronic Prospectus
A copy of this Prospectus can be downloaded from the website of the Company 
at  http://www.dynastyresources.com.au.    If  you  are  accessing  the  electronic 
version  of  this  Prospectus  for  the  purpose  of  making  an  investment  in  the 
Company,  you  must  be  an  Australian  resident  and  must  only  access  this 
Prospectus from within Australia.
The  Corporations  Act  prohibits  any  person  passing  onto  another  person  an 
Application  Form  unless  it  is  attached  to  a  hard  copy  of  this  Prospectus  or  it 
accompanies the complete and unaltered version of this Prospectus. Any person 
may  obtain  a  hard  copy  of  this  Prospectus  free  of  charge  by  contacting  the 
Company.
The Company reserves the right not to accept an Application Form from a person 
if it has reason to believe that when that person was given access to the electronic 
Application Form, it was not provided together with the electronic Prospectus and 
any  relevant  supplementary  or  replacement  prospectus  or  any  of  those 
documents were incomplete or altered.
2
2.4
Risk Factors
Potential investors should  be aware that subscribing for Shares in the Company 
involves a number of risks.  The key risk factors of which investors should be aware 
are set out in Section 5.1 of this Prospectus.  These risks together with other general 
risks  applicable  to  all  investments  in  listed  securities  not  specifically  referred  to, 
may affect the value of the Shares in the future.  Accordingly, an investment in 
the Company should be considered highly speculative.  Investors should consider 
consulting their professional advisers before deciding whether to apply for Shares 
pursuant to this Prospectus.
2.5
Overseas Investors
The distribution of this Prospectus in jurisdictions outside Australia may be restricted 
by law and therefore persons into whose possession this document comes should 
seek advice on and observe any such restrictions.  Any failure to comply with these 
restrictions constitutes a violation of those laws.  This Prospectus does not constitute 
an offer of Shares in any jurisdiction where, or to any person to whom, it would be 
unlawful to issue in this Prospectus.
2.6
Forward-looking statements
This Prospectus contains forward-looking statements which are identified by words 
such as ‘may’, ‘could’, ‘believes’, ‘estimates’, ‘targets’, ‘expects’, or ‘intends’ and 
other similar words that involve risks and uncertainties.
These  statements  are  based  on  an  assessment  of  present  economic  and 
operating conditions, and on a number of assumptions regarding future events 
and actions that, as at the date of this Prospectus, are expected to take place.
Such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and 
involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other important 
factors, many of which are beyond the control of our Company, the Directors and 
our management.
We  cannot  and  do  not  give  any  assurance  that  the  results,  performance  or 
achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements contained 
in  this  prospectus  will  actually  occur  and  investors  are  cautioned  not  to  place 
undue reliance on these forward-looking statements.
We have no intention to update or revise forward-looking statements, or to publish 
prospective  financial  information  in  the  future,  regardless  of  whether  new 
information, future events or any other factors affect the information contained in 
this prospectus, except where required by law.
These  forward  looking  statements  are  subject  to  various  risk  factors  that  could 
cause  our  actual  results  to  differ  materially  from  the  results  expressed  or 
anticipated in these statements.  These risk factors are set out in Section 6 of this 
Prospectus.]
2.7
Disclaimer
No person is authorised to give any information or to make any representation in 
connection with the Offer described in this Prospectus which is not contained in 
this  Prospectus.    Any  information  not  so  contained  may  not  be  relied  upon  as 
having been authorised by the Company or any other person in connection with 
the Offer.  You should rely only on information in this Prospectus.
3
3.
DETAILS OF THE OFFER
3.1
Offer
Under this Prospectus, the Company invites investors identified by the Directors to 
apply for up to 1,000 Shares at an issue price of $0.05 per Share to raise up to $50 
(before expenses).
The Offer will only be extended to specific parties on invitation from the Directors.  
Application Forms will only be provided by the Company to these parties.
All of the Shares offered under this Prospectus will rank equally with Shares on issue 
at the date of this Prospectus.
3.2
Objective
The  Company  is  seeking  to  raise  only  a  nominal  amount  of  $50  under  this 
Prospectus and, accordingly, the purpose of this Prospectus is not to raise capital.
The primary purpose of this Prospectus is to remove any trading restrictions that 
may have attached to Shares issued by the Company prior to the Closing Date.
Relevantly,  section  708A(11)  of  the  Corporations  Act  provides  that  a  sale  offer 
does not need disclosure to investors if:
(a)
the relevant securities are in a class of securities that are quoted securities 
of the body; and
(b)
either:
(i)
(ii)
a prospectus is lodged with the ASIC on or after the day on which 
the relevant securities were issued but before the day on which 
the sale offer is made; or
a prospectus is lodged with ASIC before the day on which the 
relevant  securities  are  issued  and  offers  of  securities  that  have 
been made under the prospectus are still open for acceptance 
on the day on which the relevant securities were issued; and
(c)
the prospectus is for an offer of securities issued by the body that are in 
the same class of securities as the relevant securities.
3.3
Opening and Closing Date of the Offer
The Opening Date of the Offer will be 31 August 2016 and the Closing Date for the 
Offer will be 5.00pm AWST on 1 September 2016.
The Directors reserve the right to close the Offer early or extend the Closing Date 
(as the case may be), should it be considered by them necessary to do so.
3.4
Application for Shares
Applications  for  Shares  must  be  made  by  investors  at  the  direction  of  the 
Company  and  must  be  made  using  the  Application  Form  accompanying  this 
Prospectus.
Payment for the Shares must be made in full at the issue price of $0.05 per Share.
4
Completed  Application  Forms and  accompanying cheques, made payable  to 
“Dynasty  Resources  Limited”  and  crossed  “Not  Negotiable”,  must  be mailed  or 
delivered  to  the  address  set  out  on  the  Application  Form  by  no  later  than  the 
Closing Date.
3.5
Minimum subscription
There is no minimum subscription in respect of the Offer.
3.6
Oversubscriptions
No oversubscriptions will be accepted by the Company.
3.7
Issue of Shares
This  Prospectus  has  been  issued  primarily  to  cleanse  the  issue  of  Shares  on  or 
before the date of this Prospectus.  As such, it is not anticipated that the Company 
will issue any Shares under this Prospectus.
In the event that the Directors decide to issue Shares under this Prospectus, the 
issue  of  Shares  under  the Offer  will  take place as soon  as practicable  after  the 
Closing Date.  Application moneys will be held in a separate subscription account 
until  the  Shares  are  issued.    This  account  will  be  established  and  kept  by  the 
Company  in  trust  for  each  Applicant.    Any  interest  earned  on  the  application 
moneys  will  be  for  the  benefit  of  the  Company  and  will  be  retained  by  the 
Company  irrespective  of  whether  any  Shares  are  issued  and  each  Applicant 
waives the right to claim any interest.
The Directors will determine the recipients of all the Shares.  The Directors reserve 
the right to reject any application or to allocate any Applicant fewer Shares than 
the number applied for.
Where the number of Shares issued is less than the number applied for, the surplus 
moneys will be returned by cheque as soon as practicable after the Closing Date.  
Where no  issue of  Shares  is made,  the amount  tendered  on  application will  be 
returned in full by cheque as soon as practicable after the Closing Date.  Interest 
will not be paid on moneys refunded.
3.8
ASX listing
Application for Official Quotation of the Shares offered pursuant to this Prospectus 
will be made within 7 days of the date of this Prospectus.  If ASX does not grant 
Official  Quotation  of  the  Shares  offered  pursuant  to  this  Prospectus  before  the 
expiration of 3 months after the date of issue of the Prospectus, (or such period as 
varied  by  the  ASIC),  the  Company  will  not  issue  any  Shares  and  will  repay  all 
application  monies  for  the  Shares  within  the  time  prescribed  under  the 
Corporations Act, without interest.
The fact that ASX may grant Official Quotation to the Shares is not to be taken in 
any way as an indication of the merits of the Company or the Shares now offered 
for subscription.
3.9
Restrictions on the distribution of the Prospectus
The distribution of this Prospectus outside the Commonwealth of Australia may be 
restricted by law.
5
This  Offer  does  not,  and  is  not  intended  to,  constitute  an  offer  in  any  place  or 
jurisdiction in which,  or  to  any  person  to whom,  it  would not  be lawful  to  make 
such an offer or to issue this Prospectus.
Residents of countries outside Australia should consult their professional advisers 
as  to  whether  any  government  or  other  consents  are  required,  or  whether  any 
formalities need to be observed should they wish to make an application to take 
up  Shares  on  the  basis  of  this  Prospectus.    The  return  of  a  duly  completed 
Application Form will be taken to constitute a representation and warranty that 
there has been no breach of such laws and that all approvals and consents have 
been obtained.
3.10
Enquiries
Any  questions  concerning  the  Offer  should  be  directed  to  Louise  Edwards, 
Company Secretary, on +61 8 6316 4414.
6
4.
PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE OFFER
4.1
Purpose of the Offer
The primary purpose of this Prospectus is to remove any trading restrictions that 
may have attached to Shares issued by the Company prior to the Closing Date 
(including  prior  to  the  date  of  this  Prospectus).    All  of  the funds  raised  from  the 
Offer will be applied towards the expenses of the Offer. Refer to Section 7.8 of this 
Prospectus for further details relating to the estimated expenses of the Offer.
4.2
Effect of the Offer on capital structure
The effect of the Offer on the Company’s capital structure is set out below.
Shares1
Shares currently on issue
Shares offered under this Prospectus
Total Shares on issue on completion of the Offer2
Notes:
Number
506,326,341
1,000
506,327,341
1.
The  rights  and  liabilities  attaching  to  the  Shares  are  summarised  in  Section  5  of  this 
Prospectus.
2.
This assumes the Offer is fully subscribed.
4.3
Financial effect of the Offer
After  expenses  of  the  Offer  of  approximately  $8,100,  there  will  be  no  proceeds 
from the Offer.  The expenses of the Offer (exceeding $50) will be met from the 
Company’s existing cash reserves.
As such, the Offer will have an effect on the Company’s financial position, being 
receipt  of  funds  of  $50  less  costs  of  preparing  the  Prospectus  of  approximately 
$8,100.
7
5.
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES ATTACHING TO SHARES
5.1
Shares
The following is a summary of the more significant rights and liabilities attaching to 
Shares being offered pursuant to this Prospectus.  This summary is not exhaustive 
and  does  not  constitute  a  definitive  statement  of  the  rights  and  liabilities  of 
Shareholders.  To obtain such a statement, persons should seek independent legal 
advice.
Full  details  of  the  rights  and  liabilities  attaching  to  Shares  are  set  out  in  the 
Constitution,  a  copy  of  which  is  available  for  inspection  at  the  Company’s 
registered office during normal business hours.
(a)
General meetings
Shareholders are entitled to be present in person, or by proxy, attorney or 
representative to attend and vote at general meetings of the Company.
Shareholders may requisition meetings in accordance with section 249D 
of the Corporations Act and the Constitution of the Company.
(b)
Voting rights
On a show of hands every Shareholder present having the right to vote 
at the meeting has one vote.  On a poll every Shareholder present has 
one vote for each fully paid Share and, the case of a partly paid Share 
or Shares held by the Shareholder, a fraction of a vote equivalent to the 
proportion  which  the  amount  paid  (but  not  credited)  is  of  the  total 
amounts paid and payable (excluding amounts credited) on the Share 
or Shares held.
(c)
Dividend rights
The Directors may from time to time declare a dividend to be paid to the 
Shareholders  entitled  to  the  dividend.  The  dividend  as  declared  shall 
(subject  to  the  Constitution,  the  rights  of  any  preference  Shareholders 
and to the right of the holders of any shares created or raised under any 
special  arrangement  as  to  dividend)  be  payable  on  all  Shares  in 
accordance with Section 254W of the Act.
(d)
Winding-up
If the Company is wound up, the liquidator may, with the authority of a 
special  resolution,  divide  among  the  Shareholders  in  kind  the  whole  or 
any part of the property of the Company, and may for that purpose set 
such value as he considers fair upon any property to be so divided, and 
may  determine  how  the  division  is  to  be  carried  out  as  between  the 
Shareholders or different classes of Shareholders.
(e)
Transfer of Shares
Generally,  Shares  in  the  Company  are  freely  transferable,  subject  to 
formal  requirements,  the  registration  of  the  transfer  not  resulting  in  a 
contravention of or failure to observe the provisions of a law of Australia 
and  the  transfer  not  being  in  breach  of  the  Corporations  Act  and  the 
Listing Rules.
8
(f)
Future increase in capital
The allotment and issue of any Shares is under the control of the Directors 
of the Company.  Subject to restrictions on the issue or grant of securities 
contained in the Listing Rules, the Constitution and the Corporations Act 
(and  without  affecting  any  special  right  previously  conferred  on  the 
holder  of  an  existing  share  or  class  of  shares),  the  Directors  may  issue 
Shares as they shall, in their absolute discretion, determine.
(g)
Variation of rights
Under section 246B of the Corporations Act, the Company may, with the 
sanction of a special resolution passed at a meeting of Shareholders vary 
or abrogate the rights attaching to Shares.
If at any time the share capital is divided into different classes of shares, 
the rights attached to any class (unless otherwise provided by the terms 
of issue of the shares of that class), whether or not the Company is being 
wound up, may be varied or abrogated with the consent in writing of the 
holders of three quarters of the issued shares of that class, or if authorised 
by  a  special  resolution passed  at  a  separate meeting of  the holders of 
the shares of that class.
The Shares are quoted on ASX.
(h)
Partly paid shares
The  Directors  may,  subject  to  compliance  with  the  Constitution,  the 
Corporations  Act  and  the  Listing  Rules,  issue  partly  paid  shares  upon 
which there are outstanding amounts payable.
(i)
Dividend reinvestment and share plans
The  members  of  the  Company,  in  general  meeting,  may  authorise  the 
Directors to implement and maintain dividend reinvestment plans (under 
which any member may elect that dividends payable by the Company 
be reinvested by way of subscription for fully paid shares in the Company) 
and any other share plans (under which any member may elect to forego 
any dividends that may be payable on all or some of the shares held by 
that member  and  to  receive  instead  some other  entitlement,  including 
the issue of fully paid shares).
(j)
Directors
The Constitution states that the minimum number of Directors is three.
(k)
Powers of the Board
Except as otherwise required by the Corporations Act, any other law, the 
Listing Rules or the Constitution, the Directors have power to manage the 
business  of  the  Company  and  may  exercise  every  right,  power  or 
capacity of the Company to the exclusion of the members (except to sell 
or dispose of the main undertaking of the Company).
(l)
Share buy backs
Subject to the provisions of the Corporations Act and the Listing Rules, the 
Company may buy back shares in itself on terms and at times determined
9
by the Directors.
(m)
Unmarketable parcels
The Constitution permits the Board to sell the shares held by a shareholder 
if they comprise less than a marketable parcel within the meaning of the 
Listing Rules. The procedure may only be invoked once in any 12 month 
period and requires the Company to give the shareholder notice of the 
intended  sale.  If  a  shareholder  does  not  want  his  shares  sold,  he  may 
notify the Company accordingly.
(n)
Capitalisation of profits
The Company may capitalize profits, reserves or other amounts available 
for distribution to members.
(o)
Capital reduction
Subject to the Corporations Act and the Listing Rules, the Company may 
reduce its share capital.
(p)
Preference shares
The Company may issue preference shares including preference shares 
that are liable to be redeemed. The rights attaching to preference shares 
are  those  set  out  in  the  Constitution  unless  other  rights  have  been 
approved by special resolution of the Company.
10
6.
RISK FACTORS
6.1
Introduction
The Shares offered under this Prospectus are considered highly speculative.  An 
investment in the Company is not risk free and the Directors strongly recommend 
potential  investors  to  consider  the  risk  factors  described  below,  together  with 
information  contained  elsewhere  in  this  Prospectus  and  to  consult  their 
professional advisers before deciding whether to apply for Shares pursuant to this 
Prospectus.
There  are  specific  risks  which  relate  directly  to  the  Company’s  business.    In 
addition,  there  are  other  general  risks,  many  of  which  are  largely  beyond  the 
control of the Company and the Directors.  The risks identified in this Section, or 
other risk factors, may have a material impact on the financial performance of 
the Company and the market price of the Shares.
The following is not intended to be an exhaustive list of the risk factors to which the 
Company is exposed.
6.2
Company specific
(a)
Operational Risks
The current and future operations of the Company, including exploration, 
appraisal may be affected by a range of factors.
A summary of factors that may affect the operations of the Company, 
include:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
geological conditions;
alterations to joint venture programs and budgets;
unanticipated 
difficulties 
encountered  in  geophysical  surveys,  drilling  and  production 
activities;
operational
and
technical
mechanical failure of operating plant and equipment, industrial 
and environmental accidents, acts of terrorism or political or civil 
unrest and other force majeure events;
(v)
industrial action, disputation or disruptions;
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
unavailability  of  aircraft  or  drilling  equipment  to  undertake 
airborne  electromagnetic  and  other  geological  and 
geophysical investigations;
unexpected shortages or increases in the costs of consumables, 
spare parts, plant and equipment;
prevention  or  restriction  of access by  reason  of  political  unrest, 
outbreak  of  hostilities,  and  inability  to  obtain  consents  or 
approvals;
current  exploration  operations of  the  tenements  are  subject  to 
the  Company’s  ability  to  obtain  a  wide  range  of  permits, 
licenses,  and  approvals  and  there  is  no  guarantee  that  such
11
permits, licenses and approvals will be granted or will be granted 
in a timely matter;
(x)
restriction of access to infrastructure by regulatory bodies.
(b)
Joint Venture Parties, Contractors and Contractual Disputes
The  Company  is  a  party  to  a  joint  venture  agreement  in  respect  of  its 
Goldstone Project.  The Company is thereby reliant upon its joint venture 
partners complying with their obligations.
With respect to this issue, the Directors are unable to predict the risk of:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
financial failure or default by a participant in any joint venture to 
which the Company is or may become a party; or
insolvency  or  other  managerial  failure  by  any  of  the  operators 
and  contractors  used  by  the  Company  in  its  exploration 
activities; or
insolvency or other managerial failure by any of the other service 
providers used by the Company or its operators for any activity.
(c)
Additional Requirements for Capital
The Company’s capital requirements depend on numerous factors. The 
availability of equity funding is subject to market risk at the time and there 
is no guarantee that the Company will be able to secure any additional 
funding  or  be  able  to  secure  funding  on  terms  favourable  to  the 
Company.  Any additional equity financing will dilute shareholdings, and 
debt  financing,  if  available,  may  involve  restrictions  on  financing  and 
operating  activities.  If  the  Company  is  unable  to  obtain  additional 
financing  as  needed,  it  may  be  required  to  reduce  the  scope  of  its 
operations, scale back its exploration programmes and may result in loss 
of tenure, as the case may be.
(d)
Exploration Risks
is
Exploration 
inherently  associated  with  risk.  Notwithstanding  the 
experience, knowledge and careful evaluation a company brings to an 
exploration project there can be no assurance that recoverable mineral 
resources  will  be  identified.  Even  if  identified,  other  factors  such  as 
technical  difficulties,  geological  conditions,  adverse  changes 
in 
government  policy  or  legislation  or  lack  of  access  to  sufficient  funding 
may  mean  that  the  resource  is  not  economically  recoverable  or  may 
otherwise  preclude  the  Company  from  successfully  exploiting  the 
resource.
(e)
Financial Leasing Risks
The  Company  recently  completed  an  acquisition  of  U.S.A.  Nongbiao 
Puruina  Group  Agricultural  Holding  Limited  (Nong  Biao),  which  holds  a 
75% interest in Shanghai Chan Mao Finance Lease Co., Ltd (Chen Mao).  
Chen Mao has been granted a financial leasing licence by the relevant 
authorities in Shanghai.  Neither Nong Biao nor Chen Mao has generated 
material revenue or profit since their incorporation and neither holds any 
material  assets  other  than  the  financial  leasing  licence  held  by  Chen 
Mao.
12
There  is  a  risk  that  the  Company  will  not  generate  revenue  from  the 
financial leasing business held by Chen Mao.  In this regard, the financial 
leasing business is subject to the following risks:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
the  risk  that  a  lessee  defaults  on  a  loan  used  to  acquire 
equipment and the value of the collateral decreases resulting in 
the Company being unable to recover the full value of its loan;
the  risk  that  the  Company  does  not  have  sufficient  access  to 
capital to fund acquisitions of equipment to lease to customers;
the  sovereign  risk  of  operating  in  China,  including  (without 
limitation) changes in the terms of relevant legislation, changes 
to the terms of the leasing licence (including capital contribution 
requirements),  changes  to  royalty  arrangements,  changes  to 
taxation  rates  and  concessions  and  changes  in  the  ability  to 
enforce legal rights;
the  income  and  expenditure  of  the  Company  are  and  will  be 
taken into account in Australian currency whereas any revenues 
generated  through  the  financial 
leasing  business  will  be 
denominated  in  Chinese  currency,  exposing  the  Company  to 
the fluctuations and volatility of the rate of exchange between 
the  Australian  dollar  and  the  Chinese  yuan  as  determined  in 
international markets; and
(v)
the  risk  that  the  capital  lent  by  Nong  Biao  to  Chen  Mao  is not 
recoverable.
6.3
Mining Industry specific
(a)
Mining and exploration risks
The primary business of the Company is exploration for, and commercial 
development of mineral ore bodies, which is subject to the risks inherent 
in these activities. Its operations are still in the exploration and evaluation 
phase.    The  current  and  future  operations  of  the  Company  may  be 
affected by a range of factors, including:
(i)
(ii)
geological conditions;
limitations on activities due to seasonal weather patterns;
(iii)
alterations to joint venture programs and budgets;
(iv)
unanticipated 
difficulties 
encountered in trenching, drilling, development, production and 
treatment activities;
operational
and
technical
(v)
mechanical failure of operating plant and equipment;
(vi)
adverse  weather  conditions, 
accidents, industrial disputes and other force majeure events;
industrial  and  environmental
(vii)
unavailability of drilling, mining, processing and other equipment;
(viii)
unexpected shortages or increases in the costs of consumables, 
spare parts, plant and equipment and labour;
13
(ix)
(x)
(xi)
(xii)
prevention  of  access  by  reason  of  political  or  civil  unrest, 
outbreak of hostilities, inability to obtain regulatory or landowner 
consents or approvals;
terms  imposed  by  government  on  development  of  mining 
projects including conditions such as equity participation, royalty 
rates and taxes;
delays 
development approvals; and
in  completing
feasibility
studies  and  obtaining
risks  of  default  or  non-performance  by  third  parties  providing 
essential services.
No assurance can be given that future exploration will be successful or 
that a commercial mining operation will eventuate.
The ultimate success and financial viability of the Company depends on 
the discovery and delineation of economically recoverable ore reserves, 
design and construction of efficient mining and processing facilities, and 
competent  operational  and  managerial  performance.  There  is  no 
assurance that exploration and development of the mineral interests held 
by  the  Company,  or  any  other  projects  that  may  be  acquired  by  the 
Company in the future, will result in the discovery of an economic deposit.  
Even if an apparently viable deposit is identified,  there is no guarantee 
that it can be profitably exploited by the Company.
Development  of  a  commercial  mining  operation  is  also  dependent  on 
the Company’s ability to obtain necessary titles and governmental and 
other regulatory approvals on a timely basis.
(b)
Resource estimations
Resources estimates are expressions of judgement based on knowledge, 
experience  and  resource  modelling.    As  such,  resource  estimates  are 
inherently imprecise and rely to some extent on interpretations made.
Additionally,  resource  estimates  may  change  over  time  as  new 
information  becomes  available.    Should  the  Company  encounter 
mineralisation or geological formations different from those predicted by 
past drilling, sampling and interpretations, resource estimates may need 
to  be  altered  in  a  way  that  could  adversely  affect  the  Company’s 
operations.
(c)
Environmental
The  Company’s  projects  are  or  may  be  subject  to  various  laws  and 
regulations  regarding  environmental  matters  and  the  discharge  of 
hazardous  wastes  and  materials.    As  with  all  mineral  projects,  the 
Company’s  projects  are  expected  to  have  a  variety  of  environmental 
impacts  should  development  proceed.  Development  of  any  of  the 
Company’s  projects  will  be  dependent  on  the  Company  satisfying 
environmental  guidelines  and,  where  required,  being  approved  by 
government authorities.
The  Company  intends  to  conduct  its  activities  in  an  environmentally 
responsible manner and in accordance with all applicable laws, but may 
still  be  subject  to  accidents  or  other  unforeseen  events  which  may
14
compromise  its  environmental  performance  and  which  may  have 
adverse financial implications.
(d)
Competition
The Company competes with other companies, including major mineral 
exploration  and  mining  companies.    These  companies  will  likely  have 
greater financial and other resources than the Company and, as a result, 
may be in a better position to compete for future business opportunities.  
Many of the Company’s competitors not only explore for and produce 
minerals, but also carry out downstream operations on these and other 
products  on  a  worldwide  basis.    There  can  be  no  assurance  that  the 
Company can compete effectively with these companies.
(e)
Operating risks
The  operations  of  the  Company  may  be  affected  by  various  factors, 
including failure to locate or identify mineral deposits, failure to achieve 
predicted grades in exploration and mining, operational and technical 
difficulties  encountered  in  mining,  difficulties  in  commissioning  and 
operating plant and equipment, mechanical failure or plant breakdown, 
unanticipated metallurgical problems which may affect extraction costs, 
adverse  weather  conditions,  industrial  and  environmental  accidents, 
industrial disputes, and unexpected shortages or increases in the costs of 
consumables, spare parts, plant and equipment.
No assurances can be given that the Company will achieve commercial 
viability through the successful exploration and/or mining  of its projects. 
Until  the Company  is able to  realise value from  its projects,  it  is likely  to 
incur ongoing operating losses.
(f)
Weather condition risk
Field  operations  including  drilling  may  be  delayed  due  to  extreme 
weather conditions such as flooding, storms or cyclones.
(g)
Community risk
Carrying out activities on site may affect the neighbouring communities 
and  local  authorities.  This  can  be  of  particular  concern  where  the 
Company  is  operating  in  heavily  populated  areas.  In  this  situation  the 
Company would plan to carry out community consultation to take into 
account  these  concerns.  However,  there  is  a  risk  that  in  some 
circumstances  there  could  be  higher  than  normal  community  concern 
which  could  result  in  a  project  being  denied  permission  to  proceed  or 
having  permission  withdrawn  or  having  conditions 
imposed  on 
continuation  of  the  activities  which  make  it  unacceptable  to  the 
Company to proceed with those activities.
6.4
General risks
(a)
Economic
General economic conditions, movements in interest and inflation rates 
and  currency  exchange  rates  may  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the 
Company’s exploration, development and production activities, as well 
as on its ability to fund those activities.
15
(b)
Market conditions
Share market conditions may affect the value of the Company’s quoted 
securities  regardless  of  the  Company’s  operating  performance.    Share 
market conditions are affected by many factors such as:
(i)
(ii)
general economic outlook;
introduction of tax reform or other new legislation;
(iii)
interest rates and inflation rates;
(iv)
changes in investor sentiment toward particular market sectors;
(v)
the demand for, and supply of, capital; and
(vi)
terrorism or other hostilities.
The market price of securities can fall as well as rise and may be subject 
to  varied  and  unpredictable  influences  on  the  market  for  equities  in 
general  and  resource  exploration  stocks  in  particular.    Neither  the 
Company  nor  the  Directors  warrant  the  future  performance  of  the 
Company or any return on an investment in the Company.
(c)
Dividends
Any  future  determination  as  to  the  payment  of  dividends  by  the 
Company will be at the discretion of the Directors and will depend on the 
financial  condition  of  the  Company,  future  capital  requirements  and 
general business and other factors considered relevant by the Directors.  
No assurance in relation to the payment of dividends or franking credits 
attaching to dividends can be given by the Company.
(d)
Taxation
The acquisition and disposal of Shares will have tax consequences, which 
will differ depending on the individual financial affairs of each investor.  
All potential investors in the Company are urged to obtain independent 
financial  advice  about  the  consequences  of  acquiring  Shares  from  a 
taxation viewpoint and generally.
To the maximum extent permitted by law, the Company, its officers and 
each of their respective advisors accept no liability and responsibility with 
respect to the taxation consequences of subscribing for Shares under this 
Prospectus.
6.5
Speculative investment
The above list of risk factors ought not to be taken as exhaustive of the risks faced 
by the Company or by investors in the Company.  The above factors, and others 
not specifically referred to above, may in the future materially affect the financial 
performance  of  the  Company  and  the  value  of  the  Shares  offered  under  this 
Prospectus
Therefore, the Shares to be issued pursuant to this Prospectus carry no guarantee 
with respect to the payment of dividends, returns of capital or the market value 
of those Shares.
16
Potential  investors  should  consider  that  the  investment  in  the  Company  is 
speculative  and  should  consult  their  professional  advisers  before  deciding 
whether to apply for Shares pursuant to this Prospectus.
17
7.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
7.1
Litigation
As  at  the  date  of  this  Prospectus,  the  Company  is  not  involved  in  any  legal 
proceedings and the Directors are not aware of any legal proceedings pending 
or threatened against the Company.
7.2
Continuous disclosure obligations
The  Company  is  a  “disclosing  entity”  (as  defined  in  section  111AC  of  the 
Corporations Act) for the purposes of section 713 of the Corporations Act and, as 
such, is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations.  Specifically, like all 
listed  companies,  the  Company  is  required  to  continuously  disclose  any 
information it has to the market which a reasonable person would expect to have 
a material effect on the price or the value of the Company’s securities.
This  Prospectus  is  a  “transaction  specific  prospectus”.    In  general  terms  a 
“transaction specific prospectus” is only required to contain information in relation 
to the effect of the issue of securities on the Company and the rights attaching to 
the securities.  It is not necessary to include general information in relation to all of 
the assets and  liabilities,  financial  position,  profits and losses or  prospects of  the 
issuing company.
This Prospectus is intended to be read in conjunction with the publicly available 
information in relation to the Company which has been notified to ASX and does 
not include all of the information that would be included in a prospectus for an 
initial public offering of securities in an entity that is not already listed on a stock 
exchange.  Investors should therefore have regard to the other publicly available 
information in relation to the Company before making a decision whether or not 
to invest.
Having  taken  such  precautions  and  having  made  such  enquires  as  are 
reasonable,  the  Company  believes  that  it  has  complied  with  the  general  and 
specific  requirements  of  ASX  as  applicable  from  time  to  time  throughout  the  3 
months before the issue of this Prospectus which required the Company to notify 
ASX of information about specified events or matters as they arise for the purpose 
of ASX making that information available to the stock market conducted by ASX.
Information  that  is  already  in  the  public  domain  has  not  been  reported  in  this 
Prospectus other than that which is considered necessary to make this Prospectus 
complete.
The Company, as a disclosing entity under the Corporations Act states that:
(a)
it is subject to regular reporting and disclosure obligations;
(b)
(c)
copies of documents lodged with the ASIC in relation to the Company 
(not  being  documents 
in  section  1274(2)(a)  of  the 
Corporations Act) may be obtained from, or inspected at, the offices of 
the ASIC; and
referred  to
it will provide a copy of each of the following documents, free of charge, 
to  any  person  on  request  between  the  date  of  issue  of  this  Prospectus 
and the Closing Date:
(i)
the  annual  financial  report  most  recently  lodged  by  the 
Company with the ASIC;
18
(ii)
(iii)
any half-year financial report lodged by the Company with the 
ASIC after the lodgement of the annual financial report referred 
to  in  (i)  and  before  the  lodgement  of  this  Prospectus  with  the 
ASIC; and
any continuous disclosure documents given by the Company to 
ASX  in  accordance  with  the  ASX  Listing  Rules  as  referred  to  in 
section 674(1) of the Corporations Act after the lodgement of the 
annual  financial  report  referred  to  in  (i)  and  before  the 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC.
Copies of all documents lodged with the ASIC in relation to the Company can be 
inspected at the registered office of the Company or an ASIC office during normal 
office hours.
Details  of  documents  lodged  with  ASX  since  the  date  of  lodgement  of  the 
Company’s  latest  annual  financial  report  and  before  the  lodgement  of  this 
Prospectus with the ASIC are set out in the table below:
Date
Description of Announcement
10/08/2016
Change in substantial holding
10/08/2016
Appendix 3B
10/08/2016
Issue of Shortfall Shares and Placement of Securities
29/07/2016
Quarterly Cashflow Report
29/07/2016
Quarterly Activities Report
22/07/2016
Change of Director’s Interest Notice
22/07/2016
Change of Director’s Interest Notice
22/07/2016
Appendix 3B
22/07/2016
Entitlement Issue Close of Offer and Subscriptions – 
amended
20/07/2016
Entitlement Issue Close of Offer and Subscriptions
04/07/2016
North Shaw Lithium Project Update
30/06/2016
Entitlement Issue Extended Closing Date/Dispatch 
Prospectus
27/06/2016
Change of Director’s Interest Notice
23/06/2016
Entitlement Issue – Dispatch of Letters of Shareholders
21/06/2016
Appendix 3B
17/06/2016
Entitlement Issue Prospectus
17/06/2016
Non-Renounceable Entitlement Issue
17/06/2016
Appendix 3B
17/06/2016
Placement of Securities
08/06/2016
North Shaw Lithium Project and Tenement Changes
12/05/2016
Proposed Placement of Securities
19
Date
Description of Announcement
29/04/2016
Quarterly Cashflow Report
29/04/2016
Quarterly Activities Report
23/03/2016
Reinstatement (24/03/2016)
23/03/2016
Half-Year Financial Report 31 December 2015
16/03/2016
Suspension from Official Quotation
08/02/2016
Change of Auditor
02/02/2016
Appendix 3B and Cleansing Statement
02/02/2016
Placement of Securities
29/01/2016
Quarterly Cashflow Report
29/01/2016
Quarterly Activities Report
22/01/2016
Appendix 3B and Cleansing Statement
22/01/2016
Placement of Securities
23/12/2015
Completion of Transaction With Nong Biao
18/12/2015
Proposed Placement of Securities
07/12/2015
Change of Director's Interest Notice
01/12/2015
Change of Director's Interest Notice
23/11/2015
Update on Agreement with Nong Biao
04/11/2015
Change of Director's Interest Notice
13/10/2015
Quarterly Cashflow Report
13/10/2015
Quarterly Activities Report
30/09/2015
Final Director's Interest Notice
30/09/2015
Appendix 3B
25/09/2015
Results of Annual General Meeting
24/09/2015
Board Changes and Withdrawal of AGM Resolution
23/09/2015
Lapse of Options
18/09/2015
Heads of Agreement with Nong Biao Ltd
26/08/2015
Notice of Annual General Meeting/Proxy Form
31/07/2015
Appendix 4G and 2015 Corporate Governance Statement
31/07/2015
Annual Report to shareholders
ASX  maintains  files  containing  publicly  available  information  for  all  listed 
companies.  The Company’s file is available for inspection at ASX during normal 
office hours.
The  announcements  are  also  available  through  the  Company’s  website 
http://www.dynastyresources.com.au/.
20
7.3
Market price of Shares
The Company is a disclosing entity for the purposes of the Corporations Act and 
its Shares are enhanced disclosure securities quoted on ASX.
The highest,  lowest  and  last market  sale prices  of  the Shares  on  ASX  during the 
three  months immediately  preceding the date  of  lodgement  of  this Prospectus 
with the ASIC and the most recent dates of those sales were:
Highest
Lowest
Last
7.4
Details of substantial holders
Price
$0.063
$0.045
$0.052
Date
15 July 2016 and
18 July 2016
8 August 2016
30 August 2016
Based on publicly available information as at 31 August 2016, those persons which 
(together with their associates) have a relevant interest in 5% or more of the Shares 
on issue are set out below:
Shareholder
Shares
Interest (%)
Cyberstore Technology Limited
203,899,300
40.27
In the event the Offer is fully subscribed, there will be no change to the substantial 
holders on completion of the Offer.
7.5
Directors’ Interests
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Prospectus, no Director nor any 
firm  in  which  such  a  Director  is  a  partner,  has  or  had  within  2  years  before  the 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC, any interest in:
(a)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
(b)
property  acquired  or  proposed  to  be  acquired  by  the  Company  in 
connection with its formation or  promotion  or  the Offer  pursuant  to  this 
Prospectus; or
(c)
the Offer,
and  no  amounts  have  been  paid  or  agreed  to  be  paid  (in  cash  or  Shares  or 
otherwise) to any Director or to any firm in which any such Director is a partner or 
director,  either  to  induce  them  to  become,  or  to  qualify  them  as,  a  Director  or 
otherwise  for  services  rendered  by  them  or  by  the  firm  in  connection  with  the 
formation or promotion of the Company or the Offer.
Security holdings
The relevant interest of each of the Directors in the securities of the Company as 
at the date of this Prospectus is set out in the table below.
21
Director
Lewis Tay
Bin Wang
Bo Xin Dong
Qingzhou Yuan
Shares
4,159,302
Nil
15,026,9961
1,168,582
Notes: 
1.
Remuneration
2,000,000  of  these  shares  are  held  by  Shanghai  Hywood  Capital  Management  in 
which Bo Xin Dong has a Relevant Interest.
The Constitution of the Company provides that the non-executive Directors may 
be paid for their services as Directors, a sum not exceeding such fixed sum per 
annum as may be determined by the Company in general meeting, where notice 
of  the  amount  of  the  suggested  increase  and  the  maximum  sum  that  may  be 
paid shall have been given to shareholders in the notice convening the meeting. 
The determination of non-executive Directors’ remuneration within that maximum 
will be made by the Board having regard to the inputs and value to the Company 
of  the  respective  contributions  by  each  non-executive  Director.    The  current 
amount has been set at an amount not to exceed $200,000 per annum.
The  remuneration  of  executive  Directors  is  decided  by  the  Board,  without  the 
affected  executive  Director  participating  in  that  decision-making  process  and 
may be paid by way of fixed salary or commission.
The table below sets out the remuneration provided to the current Directors of the 
Company and their associated companies during the last financial year prior to 
the  date  of  this  Prospectus  and  their  current  remuneration  at  the  date  of  this 
Prospectus, inclusive of directors fees and consultancy fees.
Director
Financial year 
ended 30 June
Financial year 
ended 30 June
Current financial 
year ending 30
Lewis Tay
Bin Wang
Qinzhou Yuan
Bo Xin Dong
2015
$144,000
$36,000
Nil
Nil
2016
$126,000
$27,000
$27,000
Nil
June 2017*
$120,000
$24,000
$24,000
Nil
* Current fees approved by the Board annualised for the full year. The Board may however vary 
these fees prior to the end of  the financial year, subject to compliance with the terms of the 
Company’s constitution.
7.6
Interests of experts and advisers
Other than as set out below or elsewhere in this Prospectus, no:
(a)
person  named  in  this  Prospectus  as  performing  a  function  in  a 
professional,  advisory  or  other  capacity 
in  connection  with  the 
preparation or distribution of this Prospectus;
(b)
promoter of the Company; or
22
(c)
underwriter (but not a sub-underwriter) to the issue or a financial services 
licensee named in this Prospectus as a financial services licensee involved 
in the issue,
holds, or has held within the 2 years preceding lodgement of this Prospectus with 
the ASIC, any interest in:
(d)
the formation or promotion of the Company;
(e)
any property acquired or proposed to be acquired by the Company in 
connection with:
(i)
(ii)
its formation or promotion; or
the Offer; or
(f)
the Offer,
and  no  amounts  have  been  paid  or  agreed  to  be  paid  and  no  benefits  have 
been given or agreed to be given to any of these persons for services provided in 
connection with:
(g)
the formation or promotion of the Company; or
(h)
the Offer.
Steinepreis Paganin has acted as the solicitors to the Company in relation to the 
Offer.  The Company estimates it will pay Steinepreis Paganin $3,000 (excluding 
GST  and  disbursements)  for  these  services.    During  the  24  months  preceding 
lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC, Steinepreis Paganin has been paid 
fees totalling approximately $36,000 (excluding GST and disbursements) for legal 
services provided to the Company.
7.7
Consents
Chapter 6D of the Corporations Act imposes a liability regime on the Company 
(as  the  offeror  of  the  Securities),  the  Directors,  the  persons  named  in  the 
Prospectus  with  their  consent  as  Proposed  Directors,  any  underwriters,  persons 
named  in  the  Prospectus  with  their  consent  having  made  a  statement  in  the 
Prospectus and persons involved in a contravention in relation to the Prospectus, 
with  regard  to  misleading  and  deceptive  statements  made  in  the  Prospectus. 
Although the Company bears primary responsibility for the Prospectus, the other 
parties involved in the preparation of the Prospectus can also be responsible for 
certain statements made in it.
Each of the parties referred to in this Section:
(a)
(b)
does not make, or purport to make, any statement in this Prospectus other 
than those referred to in this Section; and
in  light  of  the  above,  only  to  the  maximum  extent  permitted  by  law, 
expressly  disclaims  and  takes  no  responsibility  for  any  part  of  this 
Prospectus other than a reference to its name and a statement included 
in this Prospectus with the consent of that party as specified in this Section.
Steinepreis Paganin has given its written consent to being named as the solicitors 
to  the  Company  in  this  Prospectus.    Steinepreis  Paganin  has  not  withdrawn  its 
consent prior to the lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC.
23
7.8
Estimated expenses of Offer
The  total  expenses  of  the  Offer  are  estimated  to  be  approximately  $8,100  as 
follows:
Expense
ASIC Fees
ASX Fees
Legal Fees
Miscellaneous,  printing  and  other 
expenses
($)
$2,350
$1,750
$3,000
$1,000
Total
8,100
7.9
Electronic Prospectus
ASIC has exempted compliance with certain provisions of the Corporations Act 
to allow distribution of an electronic prospectus and electronic application form 
on the basis of a paper prospectus lodged with the ASIC, and the publication of 
notices  referring  to  an  electronic  prospectus  or  electronic  application  form, 
subject to compliance with certain conditions.
If you have received this Prospectus as an electronic Prospectus, please ensure 
that you have received the entire Prospectus accompanied by the Application 
Form.  If you have not, please phone the Company on + 61 8 6316 4414 and the 
Company will send you, for free, either a hard copy or a further electronic copy 
of the Prospectus, or both.
The Company reserves the right not to accept an Application Form from a person 
if it has reason to believe that when that person was given access to the electronic 
Application Form, it was not provided together with the electronic Prospectus and 
any  relevant  supplementary  or  Prospectus  or  any  of  those  documents  were 
incomplete or altered.
7.10
Clearing House Electronic Sub-Register System (CHESS) and Issuer Sponsorship
The Company will not be issuing Share certificates.  The Company is a participant 
in CHESS, for those investors who have, or wish to have, a sponsoring stockbroker.  
Investors who do not wish to participate through CHESS will be issuer sponsored by 
the Company.  Because the sub-registers are electronic, ownership of securities 
can be transferred without having to rely upon paper documentation.
Electronic  registers  mean  that  the  Company  will  not  be  issuing  certificates  to 
investors.  Instead, investors will be provided with a statement (similar to a bank 
account statement) that sets out the number of Shares issued to them under this 
Prospectus.    The  notice  will  also  advise  holders  of  their  Holder  Identification 
Number or Security Holder Reference Number and explain, for future reference, 
the sale and purchase procedures under CHESS and issuer sponsorship.
Further  monthly  statements  will  be  provided  to  holders  if  there  have  been  any 
changes in their security holding in the Company during the preceding month.
7.11
Privacy Act
If  you  complete  an  application  for  Shares,  you  will  be  providing  personal 
information  to  the  Company.    The  Company  collects,  holds  and  will  use  that
24
information  to  assess  your  application,  service  your  needs  as  a  Shareholder, 
facilitate  distribution  payments  and  corporate  communications  to  you  as  a 
Shareholder and carry out administration.
The  information  may  also  be  used  from  time  to  time  and  disclosed  to  persons 
inspecting  the  register,  bidders  for  your  securities  in  the  context  of  takeovers, 
regulatory  bodies,  including the Australian  Taxation  Office,  authorised  securities 
brokers, print service providers, mail houses and the Company’s Share Registry.
You can access, correct and update the personal information that we hold about 
you.  Please contact the Company if you wish to do so at the relevant contact 
numbers set out in this Prospectus.
Collection,  maintenance  and  disclosure  of  certain  personal  information  is 
governed by legislation including the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) (as amended), the 
Corporations Act and certain rules such as the ASX Settlement Operating Rules.  
You  should  note  that  if  you  do  not  provide  the  information  required  on  the 
application for Shares, the Company may not be able to accept or process your 
application.
25
8.
DIRECTORS’ AUTHORISATION
This Prospectus is issued by the Company and its issue has been authorised by a 
resolution of the Directors.
In  accordance  with  section  720  of  the  Corporations  Act,  each  Director  has 
consented to the lodgement of this Prospectus with the ASIC.
_______________________________ 
Lewis Tay  
Chairman  
For and on behalf of 
DYNASTY RESOURCES LIMITED
26
9.
DEFINITIONS
$ means Australian dollars.
Applicant means an investor who applies for Shares pursuant to the Offer.
Application Form means an application form either attached to or accompanying 
this Prospectus.
ASIC means the Australian Securities and Investments Commission.
ASX means ASX Limited (ACN 008 624 691) or the financial market operated by it, as 
the context requires.
ASX Listing Rules means the listing rules of the ASX.
ASX Settlement Operating Rules means the settlement rules of the securities clearing 
house which operates CHESS.
Board means the board of Directors unless the context indicates otherwise.
Business  Day  means  Monday  to  Friday  inclusive,  except  New  Year’s  Day,  Good 
Friday,  Easter  Monday,  Christmas  Day,  Boxing  Day  and  any  other  day  that  ASX 
declares is not a business day.
Closing  Date  means  the  date  specified  in  the  timetable  in  Section  2.1  of  this 
Prospectus (unless extended or brought forward).
Company means Dynasty Resources Limited (ACN 110 385 709).
Constitution means the constitution of the Company as at the date of this Prospectus.
Corporations Act means the Corporations Act 2001 (Cth).
Directors means the directors of the Company as at the date of this Prospectus.
Offer means the offer of Shares referred to in the “Details of the Offer” Section of this 
Prospectus.
Official Quotation means official quotation on ASX.
Opening Date means the opening date of the Offer as specified in the timetable set 
out in Section 2.1 of this Prospectus (unless varied).
Prospectus means this prospectus.
Share means a fully paid ordinary share in the capital of the Company.
Shareholder means a shareholder of the Company.
Share Registry means Security Transfer Registrars Pty Limited.
WST means western standard time as observed in Perth, Western Australia.
27