
20-F 1 ptgef_20f.htm ANNUAL REPORT 20F
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549
FORM 20-F
[  ]
[X]
[  ]
[  ]
REGISTRATION STATEMENT PURSUANT TO SECTION 12(b) OR (g) OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
OR
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2015
OR
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
OR
SHELL COMPANY REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE
SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Date of event requiring this shell company report______________
For the transition period from ______________ to __________________
Commission file number: 0-30314
Portage Biotech Inc.
(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its charter)
Inapplicable
(Translation of Registrant’s name into English)
British Virgin Islands
(Jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
47 Avenue Road, Suite 200, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5R 2G3
(Address of principal executive offices)
Kam Shah, 416.929.1806,ks@portagebiotech.com, Fax: 416.929.6612
47 Avenue Road, Suite 200, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5R 2G3
(Name, telephone, e-mail and/or facsimile number and Address of Company Contact Person)
i
Securities registered or to be registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Not applicable
Name of each exchange on which registered
Not applicable
Securities registered or to be registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act.
Common shares without par value
(Title of Class)
Securities for which there is a reporting obligation pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Act:
Not applicable
(Title of Class)
Indicate the number of outstanding shares of each of the Issuer’s classes of capital or common stock as of
the close of the period covered by the annual report.
Common shares without par value - 206,775,791 as at March 31, 2015
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the
Securities Act  Yes [  ]   No [X]
If this report is an annual or transition report, indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file
reports pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  Yes [  ]   No [X]
Note - Checking the box above will not relieve any registrant required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or
15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 from their obligations under those Sections.
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or
15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that
the registrant was required to file such report) and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past 90 days.  Yes [X]   No [  ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web
site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of
Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to submit and post such files).  Yes [X]   No [  ]
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, or a non-
accelerated filer. See definition of “accelerated filer and large accelerated filer” in Rule 12b-2 of the
Exchange Act. (Check one):
Large accelerated filer [  ]
Accelerated filer [  ]
Non-accelerated filer [X]
ii
Indicate by check mark which basis of accounting the registrant has used to prepare the financial statements
included in this filing:
U.S. GAAP [  ]
International Financial Reporting Standards as
issued by the International Accounting Standards
Board [X]
Other [  ]
If “Other” has been checked in response to the previous question, indicate by check mark which financial
statement item the registrant has elected to follow  Item 17 [  ]   Item 18 [X]
If this is an annual report, indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in
Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes [  ]   No [X]
iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Forward-looking statements
Foreign Private Issuer Status and Reporting currency
 
Part I
Item 1.
Identity of Directors, Senior Management and Advisors
Page No.
1
2
2
Item 1.
Item 2.
Item 3.
Item 4.
Item 5.
Item 6.
Item 7.
Item 8.
Item 9.
Item 10.
Item 11.
Item 12.
 
Part II
 
Item 13.
Item 14.
Item 15.
Item 16.
 
 
Part III
 
Item 17.
Item 18.
Item 19.
Identity of Directors, Senior Management and Advisors
Offer Statistics and Expected Timetable
Key Information
Information on the Company
Operating and Financial Review and Prospects
Directors, Senior Management and Employees
Major Shareholders and Related Party Transactions
Financial Information
The Offer and Listing
Additional Information
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
Description of Securities Other than Equity Securities
 
 
 
Defaults, Dividend Arrearages and Delinquencies
Material Modifications to the Rights of Security Holders and Use of Proceeds
Controls and Procedures
Audit Committee, Code of Ethics, and Principal Accountant’s Fees and Services
 
 
 
 
Financial Statements
Financial Statements
Exhibits
2
2
2
12
23
29
34
36
36
38
52
53
53
53
54
55
56
56
57
iv
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This annual report includes “forward looking statements”. All statements, other than statements of historical
facts, included herein or incorporated by reference herein, including without limitation, statements regarding
our business strategy, plans and objectives of management for future operations and those statements
preceded by, followed by or that otherwise include the words “believe”, “expects”, “anticipates”, “intends”,
“estimates” or similar expressions or variations on such expressions are forward-looking statements. We can
give no assurances that such forward-looking statements will prove to be correct.
Each forward-looking statement reflects our current view of future events and is subject to risks, uncertainties
and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from any results expressed or implied by
our forward-looking statements.
Risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to:
·
our plans and ability to develop and commercialize product candidates and the timing of these development
programs;
·
clinical development of our product candidates, including the results of current and future clinical trials;
·
the benefits and risks of our product candidates as compared to others;
·
our maintenance and establishment of intellectual property rights in our product candidates;
·
our need for additional financing and our estimates regarding our capital requirements and future revenues
and profitability;
·
our estimates of the size of the potential markets for our product candidates;
·
our selection and licensing of product candidates;
These statements are based on assumptions and analyses made by us in light of our experience and our
perception of historical trends, current conditions and expected future developments based on the focus of
our business activities on Biotechnology , as well as other factors we believe are appropriate in particular
circumstances. However, whether actual results and developments will meet our expectations and
predictions depends on a number of risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual results to differ
materially from our expectations, including the risks set forth in "Item 3-Key Information-Risk Factors."
We do not currently have the marketing expertise needed to commercialize our products; we will be primarily
a pharmaceutical development business subject to all of the risks of a pharmaceutical development
business;
Consequently, all of the forward-looking statements made in this annual report are qualified by these
cautionary statements. We cannot assure you that the actual results or developments anticipated by us will
be realized or, even if substantially realized, that they will have the expected effect on us or our business or
operations.
Unless the context indicates otherwise the terms "Portage Biotech Inc." the "Company”, "Portage", “we”, “us”,
“our” are used interchangeably in this Annual Report and mean Portage Biotech Inc.. and its subsidiaries.
1
FOREIGN PRIVATE ISSUER STATUS AND REPORTING CURRENCY
Foreign Private Issuer Status:
Portage Biotech Inc., which is a  British Virgin Islands (BVI)company  as per the certificate of Continuance
issued by the Registrar of Corporate Affairs of the BVI on July 5, 2014. Approximately 57% of its common
stock was held by non-United States citizens and residents as of September 30, 2014 being its latest second
quarter end. Further, our business is administered principally outside the United States and majority of  our
assets are located outside the United States; As a result, we believe that we qualify as a "foreign private
issuer" for continuing to report regarding the registration of our common stock using this Form 20-F annual
report format.
Currency
The financial information presented in this Annual Report is expressed in US dollars ("US $") and the
financial data in this Annual Report is presented in accordance with the International Financial Reporting
Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (“IFRS”) and interpretations of the
International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee.
All dollar amounts set forth in this report are in US dollars, except where otherwise indicated.
PART I
ITEM 1 - IDENTITY OF DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND ADVISORS
Not required since this is an annual report.
ITEM 2 - OFFER STATISTICS AND EXPECTED TIMETABLE
Not required since this is an annual report
ITEM 3 - KEY INFORMATION
(A) SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
On June 4, 2013, the Company completed an acquisition with Portage Pharma Ltd, incorporated in the
British Virgin Islands on May 23, 2012, through exchange of shares. The transaction was treated as reverse
acquisition for accounting purposes.
As a result, the selected financial data, presented below, represents financial data for the fiscal years 2015
and 2014 and for the period from May 23, 2012 (date of inception) to March 31, 2013 relating to Portage
Pharma Ltd., prepared in accordance with IFRS issued by IASB.  Selected financial data for the earlier fiscal
years are not presented since they related to Bontan Corporation Inc., which was an accounting acquiree
under the reverse acquisition transaction.
2
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL INFORMATION IN THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (US $)
Operating data -
Year ended
Year ended
Period from
March 31,
March 31,
May 23, 2012 to
2015
2014
March 31, 2013
Revenue
Loss before non-controlling interests
Non-controlling interests
Net Loss attributable to shareholders
Net loss per share (1)
Working capital
Total assets
Capital stock
Warrants
Stock option reserve
Shareholders' equity
Weighted average number of
-
-
$(4,341,216) $(6,626,630)
(321,683)
(1,222,785)
(3,118,431)
(6,304,947)
($0.04)
$(0.02)
2,067,319
1,115,304
5,263,413
4,735,864
9,691,715
7,256,715
1,108,402
1,108,402
362,440
1,312,519
$2,659,772
$2,393,124
-
$(29,486)
-
(29,486)
($0.00)
474,009
486,401
503,495
-
-
$474,009
shares outstanding
193,442,457 161,977,171
81,759,076
1. The effect of potential share issuances pursuant to the exercise of options and warrants would be anti-
dilutive and, therefore, basic and diluted losses per share are the same.
The Company has not declared or paid any dividends in any of the financial periods.
Exchange Rates
In this Annual Report on Form 20-F, unless otherwise specified, all monetary amounts are expressed in US
dollars. One of the Company’s subsidiaries maintains its books in Canadian dollars. The exchange rates
used herein were obtained from Bank of Canada; however, they cannot be guaranteed.
On July 24, 2015, the exchange rate, based on the noon buying rates, for the conversion of Canadian dollars
into United States dollars (the “Noon Rate of Exchange”) was approximately US$1 = CDN$1.31.
The following table sets out the high and low exchange rates in Canadian dollar for one US dollar for each of
the last six months
2015
High for period
Low for period
June
1.24
1.23
May
$1.22
$1.21
April
$1.24
$1.23
March
$1.27
$1.26
February
January
$1.26
$1.24
$1.22
$1.21
The following table sets out the average exchange rates in Canadian dollar for one US dollar for the five
most recent financial years calculated by using the average of the Noon Rate of Exchange on the last day of
each month during the period.
Average for the year
Year Ended March 31,
2015
$1.14
2014
$1.05
2013
$1.00
2012
$0.99
2011
$1.02
3
B)  CAPITALIZATION AND INDEBTEDNESS
Not applicable
(C)  REASONS FOR THE OFFER AND USE OF PROCEEDS
Not applicable
(D)  RISK FACTORS
The following is a brief discussion of those distinctive or special characteristics of the Company’s operations
and industry that may have a material impact on, or constitute risk factors in respect of, the Company’s future
financial performance.
Risks Related to our Business
We have a history of operating losses and may never achieve profitability in the future.
We have not generated any business income since July 5, 2013 and have an accumulated deficit of
approximately $9.5 million as at March 31, 2015. While our management and the Board consist of persons
with significant experience in the biotechnology industry, we have no product sales and have no established
sales and distribution network.
We expect to be involved in research and development to identify and validate new drug targets that could
become marketed drugs for several years to come and will be requiring significant financial resources
without any income. We expect these expenses to result in continuing operating losses in the near future.
Our ability to generate future revenue or achieve profitable operations is largely dependent upon our ability
to attract and maintain the experienced management and know-how to develop new drug candidates and to
partner with major pharmaceutical companies to successfully commercialize the drug candidates. It takes
many years and significant financial resources to successfully develop pre-clinical or early clinical drug
candidate into a marketable drug and we cannot assure you that we will be able to successfully achieve
these objectives.
We will be primarily in a pharmaceutical development business and will be subject to all of the risks of
a pharmaceutical development business.
As a result, our business must be evaluated in light of the problems, delays, uncertainties and complications
encountered in connection with establishing a pharmaceutical development business.
There is a possibility that none of our drug candidates that are currently and/or may be under development in
future will be found to be safe and effective, that we will be unable to receive necessary regulatory approvals
in order to commercialize them, or that we will obtain regulatory approvals that are too narrow to be
commercially viable.
Any failure to successfully develop and obtain regulatory approval for products would have a material
adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
4
Clinical trials for our potential product candidates will be expensive and time consuming, and their
outcome uncertain.
Before we can obtain regulatory approval for the commercial sale of any product candidate or attract major
pharmaceutical company to collaborate with, we will be required to complete extensive clinical trials to
demonstrate its safety and efficacy. Clinical trials are very expensive, and are difficult to design and
implement. The clinical trial process is also time-consuming and can often be subject to unexpected delays.
The timing of the commencement, continuation and completion of clinical trials may be subject to significant
delays relating to various causes, including:
·
our inability to manufacture or obtain sufficient quantities of materials for use in clinical trials;
·
delays arising from our collaborative partnerships;
·
delays in obtaining regulatory approvals to commence a study, or government intervention to suspend or
terminate a study;
·
delays, suspension, or termination of the clinical trials due to the institutional review board or independent
ethics board responsible for overseeing the study to protect research subjects at a particular study site;
·
delays in identifying and reaching agreement on acceptable terms with prospective clinical trial sites;
·
slower than expected rates of patient recruitment and enrollment;
·
uncertain dosing issues;
·
inability or unwillingness of medical investigators to follow our clinical protocols;
·
variability in the number and types of subjects available for each study and resulting difficulties in identifying
and enrolling subjects who meet trial eligibility criteria;
·
scheduling conflicts with participating clinicians and clinical institutions;
·
difficulty in maintaining contact with subjects after treatment, which results in incomplete data;
·
unforeseen safety issues or side effects;
·
lack of efficacy during the clinical trials;
·
our reliance on clinical research organizations to conduct clinical trials, which may not conduct those trials
with good clinical or laboratory practices; or
·
other regulatory delays.
We rely on third parties to manufacture our preclinical and clinical drug supplies, and we intend to
rely on third parties to produce commercial supplies of any approved product candidate.
We have limited personnel with experience in manufacturing, and we do not own facilities for manufacturing
our products and product candidates for the potential pivotal clinical studies and/or commercial
manufacturing of our products and product candidates. We depend on our collaboration partners and other
third parties to manufacture and provide analytical services with respect to our most advanced product
candidates.
In addition, if our product candidates are approved, in order to produce the quantities necessary to meet
anticipated market demand, we and/or our collaboration partners will need to secure sufficient manufacturing
capacity with third-party manufacturers. If we and/or our collaboration partners are unable to produce our
product candidates in sufficient quantities to meet the requirements for the launch of the product or to meet
future demand, our revenues and gross margins could be adversely affected. To be successful, our product
candidates must be manufactured in commercial quantities in compliance with regulatory requirements and
at acceptable costs. We and/or our collaboration partners will regularly need to secure access to facilities to
manufacture some of our product candidates commercially.
5
All of this will require additional funds and inspection and approval by the Competent Authorities of the
Member States of the EEA, the FDA and other regulatory authorities. If we and/or our collaboration partners
are unable to establish and maintain a manufacturing capacity within our planned time and cost parameters,
the development and sales of our products and product candidates as well as our business, results of
operations and prospects, and the value of our shares could be adversely affected.
We and/or our collaboration partners may encounter problems with aspects of manufacturing our
collaboration products and product candidates, including the following:
·
production yields;
·
quality control and assurance;
·
shortages of qualified personnel;
·
compliance with FDA and EEA regulations;
·
production costs; and
·
development of advanced manufacturing techniques and process controls.
We evaluate our options for clinical study supplies and commercial production of our product candidates on
a regular basis, which may include use of third-party manufacturers, or entering into a manufacturing joint
venture relationship with a third party. We are aware of only a limited number of companies on a worldwide
basis who operate manufacturing facilities in which our product candidates can be manufactured under
cGMP regulations, a requirement for all pharmaceutical products. We cannot be certain that we or our
collaboration partners will be able to contract with any of these companies on acceptable terms, if at all, all of
which could harm our business, results of operations and prospects, and the value of our shares.
In addition, we or our collaboration partners, as well as any third-party manufacturer, will be required to
register such manufacturing facilities with the FDA (and have a U.S. agent for the facility, if outside the
United States), the Competent Authorities of the Member States of the EEA, and other regulatory authorities.
The facilities will be subject to inspections confirming compliance with the FDA, the Competent Authorities of
the Member States of the EEAs, or other regulatory authority cGMPs requirements. We do not control the
manufacturing process of our product candidates, and, other than with respect to our collaboration product
candidates, we are dependent on our contract manufacturing partners for compliance with cGMPs
regulations for manufacture of both active drug substances and finished drug products. If we or our
collaboration partners or any third-party manufacturer fails to maintain regulatory compliance, our business,
financial condition and results of operations may be harmed, and the FDA, the Competent Authorities of the
Member States of the EEA, or other regulatory authorities can impose regulatory sanctions that range from a
warning letter to withdrawal of approval to seeking product seizures, injunctions and, where appropriate,
criminal prosecution
The results of pre-clinical studies and initial clinical trials are not necessarily predictive of future
results, and our potential product candidates may not have favourable results in later trials or in the
commercial setting.
Pre-clinical tests and Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials are primarily designed to test safety, to study
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics and to understand the side effects of product candidates and
explore efficacy at various doses and schedules. Success in pre-clinical or animal studies and early clinical
trials does not ensure that later large-scale efficacy trials will be successful nor does it predict final results;
favourable results in early trials may not be repeated in later trials.
6
A number of companies in the life sciences industry have suffered significant setbacks in advanced clinical
trials, even after positive results in earlier trials. Clinical results are frequently susceptible to varying
interpretations that may delay, limit or prevent regulatory approvals. Negative or inconclusive results or
adverse medical events during a clinical trial could cause a clinical trial to be delayed, repeated or
terminated. In addition, failure to construct appropriate clinical trial protocols could result in the test or control
group experiencing a disproportionate number of adverse events and could cause a clinical trial to be
repeated or terminated.
There is typically an extremely high rate of attrition from the failure of product candidates proceeding through
clinical and post-approval trials.
Our success will be dependent upon our corporate collaborations with third parties in connection
with services we will need for the development, marketing and commercialization of our products.
The success of our business will be largely dependent on our ability to enter into corporate collaborations
regarding the development, clinical testing, regulatory approval and commercialization of our potential
product candidates. We may not be able to find new collaborative partners to support our future
development, marketing and commercialization of our products, which may require us to undertake research
and development and/or commercialization activities ourselves, and may result in a material adverse effect
on our business, financial condition, prospects and results of operations.
Even if we are able to find new collaborative partners, our success is highly dependent upon the
performance of these new corporate collaborators. The amount and timing of resources to be devoted to
activities by future corporate collaborators, if any, are not within our direct control and, as a result, we cannot
assure you that any future corporate collaborators will commit sufficient resources to our research and
development projects or the commercialization of our potential product candidates. Any future corporate
collaborators might not perform its obligations as expected and might pursue existing or other development-
stage products or alternative technologies in preference to those being developed in collaboration with us, or
may terminate particular development programs, or the agreement governing such development programs.
In addition, if any future collaborators fail to comply with applicable regulatory requirements, the FDA, the
European Medicines Agency (“EMA”), the Therapeutic Products Directorate (“TPD”) or other authorities
could take enforcement action that could jeopardize our ability to develop and commercialize our potential
product candidates. Despite our best efforts to limit them, disputes may arise with respect to ownership of
technology developed under any such corporate collaboration.
We will rely on proprietary technology, the protection of which can be unpredictable and costly.
Our success will depend in part upon our ability to obtain patent protection or patent licenses for our future
technology and products. Obtaining such patent protection or patent licenses can be costly and the outcome
of any application for patent protection and patent licenses can be unpredictable. In addition, any breach of
confidentiality by a third party by premature disclosure may preclude us from obtaining appropriate patent
protection, thereby affecting the development and commercial value of our technology and products.
7
Some of our future products may rely on licenses of proprietary technology owned by third parties
and we may not be able to maintain these licenses on favourable terms.
The manufacture and sale of some of the products we hope to develop may involve the use of processes,
products, or information, the rights to which are owned by third parties. Such licenses frequently provide for
limited periods of exclusivity that may be extended only with the consent of the licensor. If licenses or other
rights related to the use of such processes, products or information are crucial for marketing purposes, and
we are not able to obtain them on favourable terms, or at all, the commercial value of our products will be
significantly impaired. If we experience delays in developing our products and extensions are not granted on
any or all of such licenses, our ability to realize the benefits of our efforts may be limited.
We will have additional future capital needs and there are uncertainties as to our ability to raise
additional funding.
We believes that the proceeds from the current offering together with cash on hand may be adequate to
cover our operational and developmental costs for the next twelve months. However, We may require
substantial additional capital resources if our subsidiary, Biohaven goes into Phase three of the clinical
stage by the end of 2015 or early 2016 to develop potential product candidates, obtain regulatory approvals
and ultimately to commercialize such product candidates.
In addition, our future cash requirements may vary materially from those now expected. For example, our
future capital requirements may increase if:
·
we experience scientific progress sooner than expected in our future discovery, research and development
projects, if we expand the magnitude and scope of these activities, or if we modify our focus as a result of our
discoveries;
·
we experience setbacks in our progress with pre-clinical studies and clinical trials are delayed;
·
we experience delays or unexpected increased costs in connection with obtaining regulatory approvals;
·
we are required to perform additional pre-clinical studies and clinical trials;
·
we experience unexpected or increased costs relating to preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining,
defending and enforcing patent claims; or
·
we elect to develop, acquire or license new technologies and products.
If sufficient capital is not available, we may be required to delay, reduce the scope of, eliminate or divest of
one or more of our research or development projects, any of which could have a material adverse effect on
our business, financial condition, prospects or results of operations.
We will be subject to risks associated with doing business globally.
As a pharmaceutical company our operations are likely to expand in the European Union and worldwide, we
will be subject to political, economic, operational, legal, regulatory and other risks that are inherent in
conducting business globally. These risks include foreign exchange fluctuations, exchange controls, capital
controls, new laws or regulations or changes in the interpretation or enforcement of existing laws or
regulations, political instability, macroeconomic changes, including recessions and inflationary or
deflationary pressures, increases in prevailing interest rates by central banks or financial services
companies, economic uncertainty, which may reduce the demand for our potential products or reduce the
prices that our potential customers will be willing to pay for our products, import or export restrictions, tariff
increases, price controls, nationalization and expropriation, changes in taxation, diminished or insufficient
8
protection of intellectual property, lack of access to impartial court systems, violations of law, including the
U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and the U.K. Bribery Act, disruption or destruction of operations or
changes to the Company’s business position, regardless of cause, including war, terrorism, riot, civil
insurrection, social unrest, strikes and natural or man-made disasters, including famine, flood, fire,
earthquake, storm or disease. The impact of any of these developments, either individually or cumulatively,
could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We may face exposure to adverse movements in foreign currency exchange rates while completing
international clinical trials and when our products will be commercialized.
We intend to generate revenue and expenses internationally that are likely to be primarily denominated in
U.S., Euros and other foreign currencies. Our intended international business will be subject to risks typical
of an international business including, but not limited to, differing tax structures, a myriad of regulations and
restrictions, and general foreign exchange rate volatility. A decrease in the value of such foreign currencies
relative to the US dollar could result in losses in revenues from currency exchange rate fluctuations.
Conversely, an increase in the value of such foreign currencies relative to the US dollar could negatively
impact our operating expenses. To date, we have not hedged against risks associated with foreign exchange
rate exposure. We cannot be sure that any hedging techniques we may implement in the future will be
successful or that our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows will not be materially
adversely affected by exchange rate fluctuations.
The loss of key personnel could have an adverse effect on our business
We are highly dependent upon the efforts of our senior management. The loss of the services of one or more
members of senior management and directors could have a material adverse effect on us.as a small
company with a streamlined management structure, the departure of any key person could have a significant
impact and would be potentially disruptive to our business until such time as a suitable replacement is hired.
Risks Related to Ownership of our shares
There is currently a limited trading market for our Common Shares.
There currently is a limited public market for our Common Shares. Further, although our Common Shares are
currently traded on the OTC marketplace (PTGEF) and are also listed and traded on the Canadian Securities
 Exchange (PBT.U).  Trading of our Common Shares is currently extremely sporadic. As a result, an investor
may find it difficult to sell, or to obtain accurate quotations of the price of our Common Shares. There can be
no assurance that a more active trading market for our Common Shares will develop. Accordingly, investors
must assume they may have to bear the economic risk of an investment in our Common Shares for an
indefinite period of time.
Risks related to penny stocks.
Our Common Shares are subject to regulations prescribed by the SEC relating to “penny stock.” These
regulations impose additional sales practice requirements on broker-dealers who sell such securities to
persons other than established customers and accredited investors (as defined in Rule 501 of the U.S.
Securities Act). These regulations could adversely impact market demand for our shares and adversely
impact our trading volume and price.
9
The issuance of Common Shares upon the exercise of our outstanding warrants and options will
dilute the ownership interest of existing shareholders and increase the number of shares eligible for
future resale.
The exercise of some or all of our outstanding warrants and options could significantly dilute the ownership
interests of our existing shareholders. As of March 31, 2015, we had outstanding warrants to purchase an
aggregate of approximately 88 million Common Shares and outstanding options to purchase an aggregate of
approximately 10.3 million Common Shares. All warrants have expired unexercised as of the date of this
report. To the extent the options are exercised, additional Common Shares will be issued and that issuance
will increase the number of shares eligible for resale in the public market. The sale of a significant number of
shares by our shareholders, or the perception that such sales could occur, could have a depressive effect on
the market price of our common shares.
Sales of a substantial number of our ordinary shares in the public market could cause the price of to
fall.
If our existing shareholders sell, or indicate an intention to sell, substantial amounts of our ordinary shares in
the public market after the lock-up and other legal restrictions on resale lapse, the trading price of our shares
could decline. Based upon the number of shares outstanding as of March 31, 2015, we have outstanding a
total of approximately 207 million ordinary shares. Of these shares, approximately 113 million shares are
either under escrow or are otherwise restricted and subject to rule 144 exemption.
Our principal shareholders and senior management own a significant percentage of our shares and
are able to exert significant control over matters subject to shareholder approval.
As of March 31, 2015, our senior management, board members, holders of 5% or more of our share capital
and their respective affiliates beneficially own approximately 51% of our outstanding voting securities. As a
result, these security holders have the ability either alone or voting together as a group to determine and/or
significantly influence the outcome of matters submitted to our shareholders for approval, including the
election and removal of board members, payment of dividends, amendments to our articles of association,
including changes to our share capital or any mergers, demergers, liquidations and similar transactions. This
may prevent or discourage unsolicited acquisition proposals or offers for our ordinary shares that our
shareholders may feel are in their best interest as a shareholder In addition, this group of shareholders may
have the ability to control our management and affairs. Such control and concentration of ownership may
affect the market price of our shares and may discourage certain types of transactions, including those
involving actual or potential change of control of us (whether through merger, consolidation, take-over or
other business combination), which might otherwise have a positive effect on the market price of the shares.
Your investment return may be reduced if we lose our foreign private issuer status.
We are a “foreign private issuer,” as such term is defined in Rule 405 under the U.S. Securities Act, and,
therefore, we are not required to file quarterly reports on Form 10-Q or current reports on Form 8-K with the
SEC. In addition, the proxy rules and Section 16 reporting and short-swing profit recapture rules are not
applicable to us. If we lose our status as a foreign private issuer by our election or otherwise, we will be
subject to additional reporting obligations under the Exchange Act which would increase our SEC
compliance costs.
10
We may be treated as a passive foreign investment company for U.S. tax purposes, which could
subject United States investors to significant adverse tax consequences.
A foreign corporation will be treated as a passive foreign investment company, or PFIC, for U.S. federal
income taxation purposes, if in any taxable year either: (a) 75% or more of its gross income consists of
passive income; or (b) 50% or more of the value of the company’s assets is attributable to assets that
produce, or are held for the production of, passive income. Based on our current income and assets and our
anticipated future operations, we believe that we currently are not a PFIC.U.S. Stockholders of a PFIC are
subject to a disadvantageous U.S. income tax regime with respect to the income derived by the PFIC, the
distributions they receive from the PFIC, and the gain, if any, they derive from the sale or other disposition of
their shares in the PFIC. Because PFIC status is a fact-intensive determination made on an annual basis, no
assurance can be given that we are not or will not become classified as a PFIC. The PFIC rules are
extremely complex. A U.S. person is encouraged to consult his or her U.S. tax advisor before making an
investment in our shares.
U.S. shareholders may not be able to enforce civil liabilities against us.
We are a corporation organized under the laws of the British Virgin Islands. Most of our directors and
executive officers are non-residents of the United States. Because a substantial portion of their assets and
currently all of our assets are located outside the United States, it may be difficult for investors to effect
service of process within the United States upon us or those persons.
Our corporate affairs will be governed by our Memorandum and Articles of Association, the BVI Business
Companies Act, and the common law of the British Virgin Islands. The rights of shareholders to take action
against the directors, actions by minority shareholders and the fiduciary responsibilities of our directors to us
under British Virgin Islands law are to a large extent governed by the common law of the British Virgin
Islands. The common law of the British Virgin Islands is derived in part from comparatively limited judicial
precedent in the British Virgin Islands, as well as from English common law, the decisions of whose courts
are considered persuasive authority but are not binding on a court in the British Virgin Islands. The rights of
our shareholders and the fiduciary responsibilities of our directors under British Virgin Islands law are not as
clearly established as they would be under statutes or judicial precedent in some jurisdictions in the United
States. In particular, the British Virgin Islands has a less developed body of securities laws as compared to
the United States, and some states, such as Delaware, have more fully developed and judicially interpreted
bodies of corporate law. In addition, British Virgin Islands companies may not have standing to initiate a
shareholder derivative action in a federal court of the United States.
The British Virgin Islands courts are also unlikely:
·
to recognize or enforce against us judgments of U.S. courts based on certain civil liability provisions of U.S.
securities laws; and
·
to impose liabilities against us, in original actions brought in the British Virgin Islands, based on certain civil
liability provisions of U.S. securities laws that are penal in nature.
There is no statutory recognition in the British Virgin Islands of judgments obtained in the United States. We
have been advised by Forbes Hare, our counsel as to British Virgin Islands law, that (i) they are unaware of
any proceedings that have been brought in the British Virgin Islands to enforce judgments of the U.S. courts
or to impose liabilities based on the civil liability provisions of the U.S. federal or state securities laws;
11
(ii) a final and conclusive judgment in the federal or state courts of the United States under which a sum of
money is payable, other than a sum payable in respect of taxes, fines, penalties or similar charges, may be
subject to enforcement proceedings as a debt in the courts of the British Virgin Islands under the common
law doctrine of obligation; and (iii) because it is uncertain whether a British Virgin Islands court would
determine that a judgment of a U.S. court based on the civil liability provisions of the U.S. federal or state
securities laws is in the nature of a penalty, it is uncertain whether such a liability judgment would be
enforceable in the British Virgin Islands.
ITEM 4 - INFORMATION ON THE COMPANY
(A)  HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE COMPANY
The Company was originally incorporated in Ontario in 1973. It was inactive until 1985. Between 1986 and
2009 , it was engaged in variety of businesses including development of a new technology for the marine
propulsion business, distribution and manufacture of a snack food, emerging technology-based businesses
and natural resource involving diamond mining and oil & gas exploration. In 2010, the company acquired an
indirect interest in two drilling licenses in Israel, which was disposed of for US$ 5 million under a settlement
agreement on June 29, 2012 with our minority partner on this project. During the period, the Company went
through several name changes ending with Bontan Corporation Inc. ( Bontan).
In December 2012, the Company decided to change the focus of its business activities from oil and gas to
biotechnology mainly due to the increasing difficulty in getting access to viable oil & gas projects and also
due to the potentially more profitable business opportunities which existed in the biotechnology sector. On
March 21, 2013, the Company signed a letter of intent with Portage Pharma Ltd, a biotech private limited
company formed under the laws of the British Virgin Islands to acquire Portage Pharma Ltd through
exchange of shares. The transaction was completed on June 4, 2013 and accounted for as a reverse
acquisition.
On July 5, 2013, the Company changed its name to Portage Biotech Inc. and moved its jurisdiction to the
British Virgin Islands ( BVI)  under a certificate of Continuance issued by the Registrar of Corporate Affairs of
BVI.
The Company now continues as a BVI incorporated company with its registered office located at FH
Chambers, P.O. Box 4649, Road Town, Tortola, BVI. Its Toronto agent is located at 47 Avenue Road, Suite
20200, Toronto, Ontario, M5R 2G3, Canada.
The Company continues to be a reporting issuer with Ontario Securities Commission and US Securities and
Exchange Commission and its shares trade on the Quotation Board of the OTC Markets under the trading
symbol “PTGEF,” effective August 23, 2013. Prior to this date, it was trading as Bontan Corporation Inc.
under the trading symbol “BNTNF”.  Effective October 28, 2013, the Company’s shares are also listed for
trading in US currency on the Canadian Securities Exchange (formerly, Canadian National Stock Exchange)
under the symbol “PBT.U”.
(B)  BUSINESS OVERVIEW
Portage develops pharmaceutical & biotech products through to clinical “proof of concept” focussing on
unmet clinical needs. Following proof of concept, Portage will look to sell or license the products to large
pharmaceutical companies for further development through to commercialization.
12
Portage seeks products & co-development partners in cancer, infectious disease, neurology and psychiatry
with novel targeted therapies, or reformulations that can be patented.
Portage will work with a wide range of partners, in all phases of development. The collaboration may include
direct funding or investing human capital/sweat equity from our extensive pool of talented scientists and
physicians to value-add by mitigating risks, clinical trial design and regulatory expertise.
Our research and development work is primarily carried out through two subsidiaries:
Portage pharmaceuticals Ltd ( PPL)
On June 4, 2013, following the acquisition of Portage Pharma Ltd, the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary,
Portage Acquisition Inc. and Portage Pharma Ltd amalgamated. The amalgamated company was named
PPL, which has been incorporated in the BVI.
PPL’s focus is in discovering and developing innovative cell permeable peptide (CPP) therapies to
normalize gene expression, restore function and improve medical outcomes. Its core technology involves
delivering biologically active “cargo” to intracellular and intranuclear targets to normalize cell and tissue
function, improve the immunogenicity of vaccines and enable better treatment of intracellular pathogens.
The CPP platform is protected by two suits of intellectual property:
a.
an exclusive license for all patents on Antennapedia-based cell permeable peptides for non-oncology use
and
b.
international patents for proprietary human-derived cell penetrating peptide structures without any
therapeutic restrictions. Patent is protected until 2034. In July 2014, PPL successfully validated this new
proprietary cell permeable peptide platform technology derived from human genes. This proprietary platform
technology has been shown to efficiently deliver an active pharmacological agent or cargo into a cell without
disrupting the cell membrane.  In a collaboration with the Pirbright Institute (UK), a conjugate utilizing this
proprietary cell permeable peptide and a CD8 T-cell antigenic epitope derived from mycobacterium
tuberculosis was demonstrated to provoke a specific CD8 T-cell immune response in Balb/c mice
suggesting possible application of this technology for vaccines.
Using the same anti-inflammatory cargo, PPL’s proprietary platform was shown to be superior to other
sequences by demonstrating greater in vitro activity, greater in vivo pharmacological activity in mice and
advantageous physical-chemical properties for ease of formulation and delivery.
PPL’s proprietary CPP technology can expand the target space for biological drugs to include intracellular
targets and PPL seeks collaborations to create CPP conjugates to explore a wide range of therapeutic
opportunities utilizing biological drug cargos requiring better access to these targets.
The lead drug candidate for PPL is PPL-003, which combines PPL’s proprietary human CPP platform with
the NBD peptide, a highly studied anti-inflammatory peptide. PPL-003 has been further studied through
sponsored research and academic collaborations with Yale University and the National Institutes of Health.
  PPL-003 penetrates cell membranes and inhibits NFkB activation and cytokine production in in vitro assays
and cytokine responses to endotoxin in vivo in systemic and inhaled inflammation models in mice.
13
Further, in another academic collaboration, blood brain barrier (BBB) integrity studies were carried out in
parallel with PPL-003 dosing in a brain inflammation model. The studies indicated that PPL-003 penetrates
the BBB and is active in brain. PPL-003 has been found to cross the intact BBB and reduce inflammatory
cytokines in the brain, indicating that PPL’s proprietary CPP could deliver biological drugs for CNS disease
indications.
In addition, in mouse and rabbit uveitis models, PPL-003 penetrates eye tissues after topical administration
and reduces inflammation in the eye.  PPL-003 was found to be safe after short-term topical eye application
in rabbits and is being studied in other inflammatory eye disease models.  PPL is planning to advance PPL-
003 into human testing for inflammatory eye disease indications.
Biohaven Pharmaceutical Holding Company Limited (Biohaven)
On January 6, 2014, the Company acquired approximately 54% equity in Biohaven, a private corporation
incorporated on September 25, 2013 under the laws of the British Virgin Islands for $3.5 million. Founder
shareholders include originators at Yale University who discovered the therapeutic potential of glutamate
modulation in anxiety and depression and have track record of successful registration trials.
Biohaven is engaged in the identification and development of novel glutamatergic agents for treatment -
resistant neuropsychiatric disorders. Biohaven’s drug development platform is based on modulating
glutamate for multiple therapeutic indications and represents the 1st new class of antidepressant in 30 years.
During the fiscal year 2015, Biohaven achieved the following:
·
Exclusive licenses from Yale University and Harvard University
·
Filed divisional patents
·
Filed prodrug IP
·
Signed exclusive license with Catalent and developed formulation prototypes
·
Developed backup formulation strategy
·
Completed pre-IND FDA meeting interaction
·
Contracted with InVentiv Health for Phase 1
·
Phase 1 study design developed for start in 3rd quarter of 2015 and Phase 3 start planned for early 2016.
The first drug candidate - BVH 0223 - being developed as a first-in class, novel oral glutamatergic agent for
anxiety and depression with additional potential indications. A second unique drug candidate also targets
the glutamatergic system with a well-established safety profile. Biohaven will begin optimization of its
formulation in 2016.
Overall clinical development strategy:
·
File IND for BVH-0223 in the third quarter of 2015. Initial pre-IND interaction with FDA suggests no barriers
to IND filing. Biohaven will implement 505(b)(2) regulatory pathway which will significantly reduce
development costs and speed up new drug approval process by several years ( see commentary later in this
report on nature and requirements of Section 505(b) (2) filings).IND was filed on July 22, 2015..
·
Phase 1 study will commence 30 days after filing of IND and will combine single and multiple doses to
confirm acceptable pharmacokinetics and tolerability.
·
Phase 3 efficacy trial scheduled in early 2016, depending upon the results and success of Phase 1 trial.
14
Biohaven has in-house team with industry-wide reputation in the successful conduct of affective disorders
randomized clinical trials
We have developed a comprehensive website - www.portagebiotech.com   which provide information on our
people, activities and other corporate details.
Laws and Regulations Regarding Patent Terms
The term of individual patents depends upon the legal term of the patents in the countries in which they are
obtained. In most countries in which we file, the patent term is 20 years from the earliest date of filing a non-
provisional patent application. In the United States, a patent term may be shortened if a patent is terminally
disclaimed over another patent or as a result of delays in patent prosecution by the patentee. A patent’s term
may be lengthened by a patent term adjustment, which compensates a patentee for administrative delays by
the USPTO in granting a patent. The patent term of a European patent is 20 years from its filing date, which,
unlike in the United States, is not subject to patent term adjustments.
The term of a patent that covers an FDA-approved drug or biologic may also be eligible for patent term
extension, which permits patent term restoration as compensation for the patent term lost during the FDA
regulatory review process. The Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984, or the
Hatch-Waxman Act, permits a patent term extension of up to five years beyond the expiration of the patent.
The length of the patent term extension is related to the length of time the drug or biologic is under regulatory
review. Patent extension cannot extend the remaining term of a patent beyond a total of 14 years from the
date of product approval and only one patent applicable to an approved drug may be extended. Similar
provisions are available in Europe and other jurisdictions to extend the term of a patent that covers an
approved drug. In the future, if and when our products receive FDA approval, we expect to apply for patent
term extensions on patents covering those products. We anticipate that some of our issued patents may be
eligible for patent term extensions.
Manufacturing
As we do not maintain the capability to manufacture finished drug products, we utilize contract manufacturers
to manufacture our proprietary drug candidates. We source starting materials for our manufacturing activities
from one or more suppliers. For the starting materials necessary for our proprietary drug candidate
development, we have agreements for the supply of such drug components with drug manufacturers or
suppliers that we believe have sufficient capacity to meet our demands. However, from time to time, we
source critical raw materials and services from one or a limited number of suppliers and there is a risk that if
such supply or services were interrupted, it would materially harm our business. In addition, we typically
order raw materials and services on a purchase order basis and do not enter into long-term dedicated
capacity or minimum supply arrangements. We utilize the services of contract manufacturers to manufacture
APIs required for later phases of clinical development and eventual commercialization for us under all
applicable laws and regulations.
We have analytical and process development capabilities in our own facility. We generally perform drug
candidate development, analytical and process development for our proprietary drug candidates internally,
and manufacture the drugs necessary to conduct the non-GLP preclinical studies of our investigational
product candidates. We occasionally outsource the production of research and development material.
Occasionally our collaboration partners may conduct production of research and development material for
products in their respective field.
15
We do not have, and we do not currently plan to, acquire or develop the facilities or capabilities to
manufacture bulk drug substance or filled drug product for use in human clinical trials. We rely on third-party
manufacturers to produce the bulk drug substances required for our clinical trials and expect to continue to
rely on third parties to manufacture and test clinical trial drug supplies for the foreseeable future.
Our contract suppliers manufacture drug substance and product for clinical trial use in compliance with
cGMP and applicable local regulations. cGMP regulations include requirements relating to organization of
personnel; buildings and facilities; equipment; control of components and drug product containers and
closures; production and process controls; packaging and labeling controls; holding and distribution;
laboratory controls; records and reports; and returned or salvaged products. The manufacturing facilities for
our products must be in compliance with cGMP requirements, and for device and device components, the
Quality System Regulation, or QSR, requirements, before any product is approved. We ensure cGMP
compliance of our suppliers through regular quality inspections performed by our Quality Assurance group.
Our third-party manufacturers may also be subject to periodic inspections of facilities by the FDA, the
Competent Authorities of the Member States of the European Economic Area (EEA, comprising the
28 Member States of the European Union plus Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein), and other authorities,
including reviews of procedures and operations used in the testing and manufacture of our products to
assess our compliance with applicable regulations. Failure to comply with statutory and regulatory
requirements subjects a manufacturer to possible legal or regulatory action, including warning letters, the
seizure or recall of products, injunctions, consent decrees placing significant restrictions on or suspending
manufacturing operations and civil and criminal penalties. These actions could have a material impact on the
availability of our products. In addition, contract manufacturers often encounter difficulties involving
production yields, quality control and quality assurance, as well as shortages of qualified personnel.
We also contract with additional third parties for the filling, labeling, packaging, testing, storage and
distribution of our investigational drug products. We employ personnel with the significant scientific,
technical, production, quality and project management experience required to oversee our network of third-
party suppliers and to manage manufacturing, quality data and information for regulatory compliance
purposes.
Government Regulation and Product Approval
Government authorities in the United States, at the federal, state and local level, and in other countries
extensively regulate, among other things, the research, development, testing, manufacture, including any
manufacturing changes, safety surveillance, efficacy, quality control, packaging, storage, recordkeeping,
labeling, advertising, promotion, distribution, marketing, sale, import, export and the reporting of safety and
other post-market information of pharmaceutical and medical device products such as those we are
developing. Our product candidates must be approved by the FDA through the NDA process before they
may be legally promoted in the United States and by the EMA, through the marketing authorization
application, or MAA, process before they may be legally marketed in Europe. Our product candidates will be
subject to similar requirements in other countries prior to marketing in those countries. The processes for
obtaining regulatory approvals in the United States, the EEA and in foreign countries, along with subsequent
compliance with appropriate federal, state, local and foreign statutes and regulations, require the expenditure
of substantial time and resources.
16
U.S. Government Regulation
In the United States, we are subject to extensive regulation by the FDA, which regulates drugs under the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, or the FDCA, and its implementing regulations, and other federal,
state, and local regulatory authorities. The FDCA and its implementing regulations set forth, among other
things, requirements for the research, testing, development, manufacture, quality control, safety,
effectiveness, approval, labeling, storage, record keeping, reporting, distribution, import, export, advertising
and promotion of our products. The process of obtaining regulatory approvals and the subsequent
compliance with appropriate federal, state, local and foreign statutes and regulations requires the
expenditure of substantial time and financial resources. Failure to comply with the applicable U.S.
requirements at any time during the product development process, approval process or after approval, may
subject an applicant to a variety of administrative or judicial sanctions, such as the FDA’s refusal to approve
pending NDAs, withdrawal of an approval, imposition of a clinical hold, issuance of warning letters, product
recalls, product seizures, total or partial suspension of production or distribution, injunctions, fines, refusals of
government contracts, restitution, disgorgement or civil or criminal penalties.
The process required by the FDA before a drug may be marketed in the United States generally involves the
following:
·
completion of preclinical laboratory tests, animal studies and formulation studies in compliance with the
FDA’s Good Laboratory Practice regulations;
·
submission to the FDA of an IND which must become effective before human clinical trials may begin;
·
approval by an independent institutional review board, or IRB, at each clinical site before each trial may be
initiated;
·
performance of adequate and well-controlled human clinical trials in accordance with good clinical practice,
or GCP, requirements to establish the safety and efficacy of the proposed drug product for each indication;
·
submission to the FDA of an NDA;
·
satisfactory completion of an FDA advisory committee review, if applicable;
·
satisfactory completion of an FDA inspection of the manufacturing facility or facilities at which the product is
produced to assess compliance with current good manufacturing practice, or cGMP, requirements and to
assure that the facilities, methods and controls are adequate to preserve the drug’s identity, strength, quality
and purity; and
·
FDA review and approval of the NDA.
Preclinical Studies
Preclinical studies include laboratory evaluation of product chemistry, toxicity and formulation, as well as
animal studies to assess potential safety and efficacy. An IND is a request for authorization from the FDA to
administer an investigational drug product to humans. An IND sponsor must submit the results of the
preclinical tests, together with manufacturing information, analytical data and any available clinical data or
literature, among other things, to the FDA as part of an IND. Some preclinical testing may continue even after
the IND is submitted. An IND automatically becomes effective and a clinical trial proposed in the IND may
begin 30 days after the FDA receives the IND, unless during this 30-day waiting period, the FDA raises
concerns or questions related to one or more proposed clinical trials and places the clinical trial on a clinical
hold. In such a case, the IND sponsor and the FDA must resolve any outstanding concerns before the
clinical trial can begin. As a result, submission of an IND may not result in the FDA allowing clinical trials to
commence.
17
Clinical Trials
Clinical trials involve the administration of the investigational new drug to human subjects under the
supervision of qualified investigators in accordance with GCP requirements, which include the requirement
that all research subjects provide their informed consent in writing for their participation in any clinical trial.
Clinical trials are conducted under protocols detailing, among other things, the objectives of the trial, the
parameters to be used in monitoring safety, and the effectiveness criteria to be evaluated. A protocol for each
clinical trial and any subsequent protocol amendments must be submitted to the FDA as part of the IND. In
addition, an IRB at each institution participating in the clinical trial must review and approve the plan for any
clinical trial before it commences at that institution. Information about certain clinical trials must be submitted
within specific timeframes to the National Institutes of Health, or NIH, for public dissemination on their
www.clinicaltrials.gov website.
Human clinical trials are typically conducted in three or four sequential phases, which may overlap or be
combined:
·
Phase 1: The drug is initially introduced into healthy human subjects or patients with the target disease or
condition and tested for safety, dosage tolerance, absorption, metabolism, distribution, excretion and, if
possible, to gain an early indication of its effectiveness.
·
Phase 2: The drug is administered to a limited patient population to identify possible adverse effects and
safety risks, to preliminarily evaluate the efficacy of the product for specific targeted diseases and to
determine dosage tolerance and optimal dosage.
·
Phase 3: The drug is administered to an expanded patient population, generally at geographically dispersed
clinical trial sites, in well-controlled clinical trials to generate enough data to statistically evaluate the efficacy
and safety of the product for approval, to establish the overall risk-benefit profile of the product, and to
provide adequate information for the labeling of the product.
·
Phase 4: In some cases, the FDA may condition approval of an NDA for a product candidate on the
sponsor’s agreement to conduct additional clinical trials after NDA approval. In other cases, a sponsor may
voluntarily conduct additional clinical trials post approval to gain more information about the drug. Such post
approval trials are typically referred to as Phase 4 clinical trials.
Progress reports detailing the results of the clinical trials must be submitted at least annually to the FDA and
more frequently if serious adverse events occur. Phase 1, Phase 2 and Phase 3 clinical trials may not be
completed successfully within any specified period, or at all. Furthermore, the FDA or the sponsor may
suspend or terminate a clinical trial at any time on various grounds, including a finding that the research
subjects are being exposed to an unacceptable health risk. Similarly, an IRB can suspend or terminate
approval of a clinical trial at its institution if the clinical trial is not being conducted in accordance with the
IRB’s requirements or if the drug has been associated with unexpected serious harm to patients.
Concurrent with clinical studies, companies usually complete additional animal studies and must also
develop additional information about the chemistry and physical characteristics of the product and finalize a
process for manufacturing the product in commercial quantities in accordance with cGMP requirements. The
manufacturing process must be capable of consistently producing quality batches of the product candidate
and, among other things, the manufacturer must develop methods for testing the identity, strength, quality
and purity of the final product. Additionally, appropriate packaging must be selected and tested and stability
studies must be conducted to demonstrate that the product candidate does not undergo unacceptable
deterioration over its shelf life.
18
Hatch-Waxman Amendments and Exclusivity
As an alternative path to FDA approval for modifications to formulations or uses of products previously
approved by the FDA, an applicant may submit an NDA under Section 505(b)(2) of the FDCA. Section
505(b)(2) was enacted as part of the Hatch-Waxman Amendments and permits the filing of an NDA where at
least some of the information required for approval comes from studies not conducted by, or for, the
applicant. If the 505(b)(2) applicant can establish that reliance on FDA’s previous findings of safety and
effectiveness is scientifically appropriate, it may eliminate the need to conduct certain preclinical or clinical
studies of the new product. The FDA may also require companies to perform additional studies or
measurements, including clinical trials, to support the change from the approved branded reference drug.
The FDA may then approve the new product candidate for all, or some, of the label indications for which the
branded reference drug has been approved, as well as for any new indication sought by the 505(b)(2)
applicant.
In seeking approval for a drug through an NDA, including a 505(b)(2) NDA, applicants are required to list
with the FDA certain patents whose claims cover the applicant’s product. Upon approval of an NDA, each of
the patents listed in the application for the drug is then published in the Orange Book. Any applicant who
files an abbreviated new drug application, or ANDA, seeking approval of a generic equivalent version of a
drug listed in the Orange Book or a 505(b)(2) NDA referencing a drug listed in the Orange Book must certify
to the FDA that (1) no patent information on the drug product that is the subject of the application has been
submitted to the FDA; (2) such patent has expired; (3) the date on which such patent expires; or (4) such
patent is invalid or will not be infringed upon by the manufacture, use or sale of the drug product for which the
application is submitted. This last certification is known as a paragraph IV certification. A notice of the
paragraph IV certification must be provided to each owner of the patent that is the subject of the certification
and to the holder of the approved NDA to which the ANDA or 505(b)(2) application refers. The applicant may
also elect to submit a “section viii” statement certifying that its proposed label does not contain (or carves out)
any language regarding the patented method-of-use rather than certify to a listed method-of-use patent.
If the reference NDA holder and patent owners assert a patent challenge directed to one of the Orange Book
listed patents within 45 days of the receipt of the paragraph IV certification notice, the FDA is prohibited from
approving the application until the earlier of 30 months from the receipt of the paragraph IV certification
expiration of the patent, settlement of the lawsuit or a decision in the infringement case that is favorable to the
applicant. The ANDA or 505(b)(2) application also will not be approved until any applicable non-patent
exclusivity listed in the Orange Book for the branded reference drug has expired. Specifically, the holder of
the NDA for the listed drug may be entitled to a period of non-patent exclusivity, during which the FDA
cannot approve an ANDA or 505(b)(2) application that relies on the listed drug. For example, a
pharmaceutical manufacturer may obtain five years of non-patent exclusivity upon NDA approval of a new
chemical entity, or NCE, which is a drug that contains an active moiety that has not been approved by FDA
in any other NDA. An “active moiety” is defined as the molecule or ion responsible for the drug substance’s
physiological or pharmacologic action. During the five-year exclusivity period, the FDA cannot accept for
filing any ANDA seeking approval of a generic version of that drug or any 505(b)(2) NDA for the same active
moiety and that relies on the FDA’s findings regarding that drug, except that FDA may accept an application
for filing after four years if the follow-on applicant makes a paragraph IV certification.
A drug, including one approved under Section 505(b)(2), may obtain a three-year period of exclusivity for a
particular condition of approval, or change to a marketed product, such as a new formulation for a previously
approved product, if one or more new clinical studies (other than bioavailability or bioequivalence studies)
was essential to the approval of the application and was conducted/sponsored by the applicant. Should this
occur, the FDA would be precluded from approving any ANDA or 505(b)(2) application for the protected
modification until after that three-year exclusivity period has run. However, unlike NCE exclusivity, the FDA
can accept an application and begin the review process during the exclusivity period.
19
Foreign Regulation
In order to market any product outside of the United States, we would need to comply with numerous and
varying regulatory requirements of other countries regarding safety and efficacy and governing, among other
things, clinical trials, marketing authorization, commercial sales and distribution of our products. For
example, in the European Union, we must obtain authorization of a clinical trial application, or CTA, in each
member state in which we intend to conduct a clinical trial. Even if we obtain FDA approval for a product, we
would need to obtain the necessary approvals by the comparable regulatory authorities of foreign countries
before we can commence clinical trials or marketing of the product in those countries.
The approval process varies from country to country and can involve additional product testing and
additional administrative review periods. The time required to obtain approval in other countries might differ
from and be longer than that required to obtain FDA approval. Regulatory approval in one country does not
ensure regulatory approval in another, but a failure or delay in obtaining regulatory approval in one country
may negatively impact the regulatory process in others.
(C) ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
Following diagram reflects our current organization structure:
Our drug development work is carried out through our subsidiaries. We currently have two operating
subsidiaries - PPL , a wholly owned subsidiary incorporated in the British Virgin Islands and Biohaven, a
54% owned subsidiary incorporated in the British Virgin Islands.
20
We have four members on the Board of Directors - Dr. Declan Doogan, Dr. Gregory Bailey ,Mr. James Mellon
and Mr. Kam Shah. These four directors were re-appointed in the shareholders annual and special meeting
of March 16, 2015. Dr. Bailey is our chairman, Dr. Doogan is a chief executive officer and Mr. Shah is Chief
Financial Officer and corporate secretary.
PPL management consisted of Dr. Bruce Littman as CEO, Dr. Frank Marcoux as Chief Scientific Officer
(CSO) and Mr. Kam Shah as CFO. The PPL management reports to the PPL Board of directors comprising
Dr. Doogan as Chairman, Dr. Bailey, Mr. Shah, Dr. Littman and Dr. Marcoux. PPL also created a scientific
advisory board (SAB) consisting of Drs. Sankar Ghosh, Michael Caplan and Burt Adelman. In addition, PPL
has seven consultants comprising scientists and researchers.
Biohaven management comprising Declan Doogan as Executive Chairman  and Dr. Robert Burman as
CMO. Its board of directors comprise Dr. Doogan as Chairman, Dr. Bailey , Mr. Shah, Dr. Vlad Coric and Mr.
Childs. Mr. Mellon and Dr. Berman are alternative directors. The SAB comprise Dr. John Krystal and Dr.
Gerard Sanacora and Dr. Maurizio Fava.
Our third wholly owned subsidiary, Portage Services Ltd., is a Canadian subsidiary which provides
regulatory and corporate services to the Company.
A brief biodata of the key  people in our organization is provided below:
Declan Doogan M.D. - Director and CEO
·
co-founder and Chairman of Portage Pharma Ltd.,
·
Previously the CEO and Head of R&D at Amarin Inc. (AMRN:NASDAQ)
·
former Head of Worldwide Drug Development at Pfizer Inc.
·
held Visiting Professorships at Harvard School of Public Health, Glasgow University Medical School and
Kitasato University (Tokyo)
·
sits on the boards of Pulmonary Vascular Research Institute UK, Sosei (Japan Biotech), and Celleron and
IOx (UK oncology biotech). He is an advisor to the Wellcome Trust in the UK
Kam Shah CA, CPA (CANADA), CPA (US), CGMA (US) -CFO and Director
·
Senior financial executive with over 25 years of corporate finance,
·
Was senior manager with two of the largest accounting firms, Ernst & Young and Price Waterhouse Coopers
·
Worked in industry under various  roles from an office manager to CEO, CFO of public companies.
Gregory Bailey M.D. - Chairman
·
Former director and financier of Medivation Inc. (MDVN: NASDAQ).
·
Co-founder, of Ascent Healthcare Solutions: VirnetX Inc internet security (VHC: AMEX) and Duramedic Inc.
a medical products company.
·
Has Medical Doctorate from the University of Western Ontario.
Jim Mellon - Director
·
Director of multiple public companies: In the biopharma sector Miraculins, Plethora Solutions, and the
Summit Corporation.
·
Chairman of AIM listed Port Erin Biopharma Investments, a fund specializing in biopharma investments
·
The author of the best-selling book “Cracking the Code.
·
Other listed company directorships include chairman of Manx Financial Group and Speymill, co-chairman of
both Regent Pacific Group and West African Mining Corporation, and a board member of Brazilian Gold
Corporation, Charlemagne Capital and Condor Resources.
21
Bruce H. Littman, MD - CEO
·
Former Pfizer VP Global Translational Medicine
·
Over 30 years pharmaceutical company and academic research experience
Frank W. Marcoux, Ph.D. - CSO
·
Former Pfizer VP Quantitative and Innovative Medicine WW Development and former VP Biology Discipline
WW Discovery
·
Over 25 years pharmaceutical company and academic research
Vlad Coric - MD - Director
·
Has over 14 years of clinical trial experience as the Chief of Inpatient Services at the Yale Clinical
Neuroscience Research Unit.
·
An Associate Clinical Professor of Psychiatry at the Yale
·
A co-inventor of Yale intellectual property related to the use of glutamate modulating agents
·
Earned his medical degree at Wake Forest University School of Medicine, and received his BS from
University of Connecticut in Physiology and Neurobiology.
·
Has over 45 peer-reviewed journal and book publications.
Robert Berman - MD - CMO
·
Almost 30 years of neuroscience research
·
13 years of clinical development experience (Pfizer and Bristol-Myers Squibb)
·
Professor of Psychiatry (Adjunct), Yale School of Medicine
·
Over 60 peer-reviewed publications -  including first clinical trial with ketamine in patients with depression
and leading  the registrational program to obtain the first indication for a neuroleptic in the adjunctive
treatment of major depressive disorder
·
BA, Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University
·
M.D., Mount Sinai School of Medicine
John Krystal, M.D.
·
Chairman of Psychiatry and Professor, Yale School of Medicine.
·
Expert in the areas of psychopharmacology, glutamatergic neurotransmission, alcoholism, schizophrenia,
and post-traumatic stress disorders.
Gerard Sanacora, M.D., Ph.D.
·
Professor of Psychiatry and Director of the Yale Depression Research Clinic
·
Expert in elucidating the pathophysiological mechanisms associated with mood and other neuropsychiatric
disorders.
Maurizio Fava M.D.
·
Director, MGH Clinical Research Program (CRP), Executive Vice Chair for the MGH Department of
Psychiatry, Executive Director, MGH Clinical Trials Network and Institute, Director, and Slater Family
Professor of Psychiatry at Harvard Medical School
·
Expert in affective disorders and clinical trial design - with over 600 original articles
(D)  PROPERTY PLANTS AND EQUIPMENT
Our subsidiary, Portage Services Ltd., currently leases office space at 47 Avenue Road, Suite 200, and
Toronto, Ontario, Canada for approximately $2,300 per month. The leased area is approximately 950 square
feet. Our current lease agreement is a month to month arrangement.
22
ITEM 4A - UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
None.
ITEM 5 - OPERATING AND FINANCIAL REVIEW AND PROSPECTS
(A)  OPERATING RESULTS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Audited Financial Statements of the
Company and notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report.
Results of operations
Expenses
 
Non-controlling interests
Net loss attributable to owners
Deficit at end of year
Overview
Year ended
March 31, 2015
(4,341)
(4,341)
(1,223)
(3,118)
(9,453)
Year ended
March
31,2014
in 000 US $ 
(6,627)
(6,627)
(322)
(6,305)
(6,334)
May 23, 2012 to
March 31, 2013
(29)
(29)
-
(29)
(29)
We are a pre-clinical stage biotechnology company. We commenced our operations in June 2013 after
acquiring Bontan Corporation Inc. through a reverse acquisition. We devoted substantially all our efforts in
identifying and developing our product candidates including acquisition of exclusive licenses and several
preclinical studies for PPL-003, our lead product candidate in PPL and BVH-0223, our lead product
candidate in Biohaven. Details of these efforts are explained above under item 4 (B) - business overview.
We do not have any approved products and have never generated any revenue from product sales. We have
funded our operations from the cash available on acquisition in June 2013 and further cash of approximately
$ 2.3 million raised during the fiscal 2015 through a private placement and debt conversion, issuing
approximately 24.5 million restricted common shares.
We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially in the future as we:
·
pursue our ongoing planned pre-clinical and clinical development at PPL and BIohaven, seek further new
investment opportunities to expand our pipeline
·
hire additional personnel, particularly in our research and development, clinical supply and quality control
groups;
·
Add operational, financial and management information systems and related finance and compliance
personnel and
·
Operate as a public company
In June 2015, we successfully completed another private placement and raised approximately $ 5.2 million
to support our development activities and certain targeted new investments.
We are also seeking partners to support IND filing initiatives at PPL.
23
Expenses
The overall analysis of the expenses is as follows: ( in 000’$)
May 23, 2012
Year ended
Year ended
to
March 31, 2015
March 31, 2014
March 31, 2013
Acquisition related costs
Consulting fees
Research & development
Professional fees
Other costs
-
1,073
2,929
224
115
4,341
3,839
1,162
$     1,136
336
154
$     6,627
-
-
$       27
-
2
$       29
Acquisition related costs
There were no new acquisitions in fiscal years 2015 and 2013
Acquisition related costs in fiscal 2014  included  approximately $ 3.8 million paid to a company  as
compensation for financial advisory services rendered in connection the acquisition of Portage Pharma Ltd.,.
This consisted of issuance of approximately 9.8 million common shares of the Company on June 4, 2013
valued at $0.39 being the quoted market price of the common shares on the date of their issuance.
Approximately $ 13,000 fee was paid in cash to various independent consultant for due diligence on
Biohaven, The cost was expensed as per IFRS 3.
Consulting fees
Fees include cash fee, shares and options issued to key management, directors and others as detailed in
Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2015.
During the fiscal year 2015, CFO took in cash fee while chairman accepted shares and CEO accepted
options in lieu of their fees.  In addition, directors and other consultants were granted options. Further,
Biohaven granted options to their management and board members to acquire equity interest in their capital,
value of which based on Black-Scholes model was expensed to consulting fee. Note 7 to the consolidated
financials for fiscal 2015 provide details of these options and their valuation.
During the fiscal year 2014, CFO was paid cash fee of $102,458. He along with the CEO and the chairman
who provided business development and investor relations services were issued 4 million common shares
valued at $691,000 based on the quoted market price of the shares on the dates of their issuance. Four
directors of the Company were also issued 2.9 million options, valid for five years and are convertible into
equal number of common shares at a conversion price of $0.20 and are to be vested in equal monthly
instalments over the year ending December 31, 2014. These options were valued at approximately $232,000
based on a Black-Scholes option pricing model.
24
Research & development
These costs comprised the following:
May 23, 2012
Year ended
Year ended
to
License fee
Patent registration  
Consulting fee
Fee paid by Biohaven under
service contract
Other outside services - lab
testing, peptide production etc.
March 31, 2015
-
37
466
2,000
March 31, 2014
in 000 US$ 
26
29
365
500
426
$     2,929
215
$     1,135
March 31, 2013
-
-
$       27
-
-
$       27
Fiscal year 2015:
Consulting fee includes cash fee of $ 328,921 to CEO, CSO and various other consultants and value of
options granted to CEO and CSO to acquire up to 7% equity interest in PPL valued at $ 136,632. Further
details of these options and their valuation are given in note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for the
fiscal 2015.
Biohaven has signed a Master Service Agreement on January 31, 2014, as subsequently amended in April
2014, with Biohaven Pharmaceuticals Inc., a private Delaware incorporated research and development
company (“BPI”). BPI is owned by non-controlling shareholders of Biohaven and is engaged by Biohaven to
conduct, on behalf of Biohaven, research and development services relating to identification and
development of clinical stage neuroscience compounds targeting the glutamatergic system. Under the
agreement, Biohaven was charged $500,000 each quarter by BPI.
Other outside services costs were incurred by PPL and relates to its pre-clinical work as discussed below.
Key development work carried out at PPL included:
·
Entering into a collaborative research agreement with Yale University to study the biological activity and cell
penetrating properties of peptides developed by PPL. These studies will compare the ability of these
peptides to cross cell membranes and deliver biologically active cargo to an intracellular target.
·
successfully validated a new proprietary cell permeable peptide platform technology derived from human
genes. This proprietary platform technology has been shown to efficiently deliver an active pharmacological
agent or cargo into a cell without disrupting the cell membrane. Along with demonstrating that the delivery
system is capable of carrying biologically active cargo to intracellular sites of action, the platform has
favorable pharmaceutical properties simplifying formulation development for systemic and locally
administered conjugates which will allow more rapid development of drug products.   PPL has converted its
previously filed provisional patent application for this delivery system to an international patent application
that includes a variety of structures utilizing cargos that address important areas of medical need.
25
·
PPL further validated its platform cell penetrating peptide technology for safely delivering a potent anti-
inflammatory cargo into eye tissues.  Its lead compound PPL-003 showed success in two studies in rabbits.
In the first study, topical eye administration of PPL-003 at the highest feasible dose was well tolerated with
no abnormal clinical or pathological findings.   In the second study PPL-003 demonstrated efficacy in an
experimental uveitis model by significantly suppressing the cellular inflammatory response in the anterior
chamber and reducing the protein content of the anterior chamber aqueous humor..  These results in rabbits
clearly demonstrated at least a ten-fold safety margin and confirmed the topical anti-inflammatory activity of
PPL-003 previously demonstrated in a mouse uveitis model.  PPL is continuing its uveitis program working
toward an IND submission in 2016.
·
Completion of a collaborative research study that showed one of its proprietary human-derived CPP
sequences and a cargo (PPL-003) reduces inflammation in brain tissue through inhibition of NFB signaling
even if administered when the BBB is closed.  The permeability of the blood brain barrier (BBB) in mice was
studied and was transiently disrupted after endotoxin (LPS) challenge. The BBB then closed while cytokines
were still elevated in brain tissue.  Administration of PPL-003 at this time significantly reduced brain cytokine
levels. This finding suggests that PPL’s proprietary platform can be used to develop CPP-based therapeutics
for CNS indications including neurologic, neurodegenerative, psychiatric and neuro-oncologic diseases.
Key development work carried out at Biohaven included:
·
Securing exclusive licenses from Yale and Harvard universities
·
Development of a new formulation and its back up strategy
·
Pre-IND FDA meeting interaction and preparation and filing  of IND application
·
Phase 1 study preparations including developing study design
Fiscal year 2014:
(a)
Company’s subsidiary PPL paid the license fee to a non-related entity in respect of ANTP license under
License Agreement dated January 25, 2013.
(b)
Biohaven has signed a Master Service Agreement on January 31, 2014, as subsequently amended in April
2014, with Biohaven Pharmaceuticals Inc., a private Delaware incorporated research and development
company (“BPI”). BPI is owned by non-controlling shareholders of Biohaven and is engaged by Biohaven to
conduct, on behalf of Biohaven, research and development services relating to identification and
development of clinical stage neuroscience compounds targeting the glutamatergic system.
(c)
Consulting fee includes fees totaling to approximately $306,000 paid to the CEO and CSO of PPL . Fee
includes value of the vested options of approximately $57,000 and balance in cash.
Fiscal year 2013:
Costs primarily included consulting fees paid in cash to CEO and CSO of PPL.
Professional fees
Professional fees for fiscal 2015 consisted of accrual for audit and related services fee of approximately
67,000 and legal fees of approximately $157,000, of which $137,000 of legal fees were incurred at Biohaven
and balance was towards corporate and regulatory matters.
26
Professional fees in fiscal 2014  consisted of Audit and related fee of approximately $47,000 and legal fee of
approximately $289,000. There were no legal fees during the period from May 23, 2012 to March 31, 2013.
Legal fee includes approximately $181,000 relating to legal work charged to Biohaven.
A relatively high legal fee for the year ended March 31, 2014 was largely due to costs of incorporations in the
British Virgin Islands, jurisdictional changes, and initiations of various documents relating to acquisitions and
service contracts, which had to go through several amendments and extensive negotiations and general
regulatory services.
(B)  Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
As at March 31, 2015, the Company had a net working capital of approximately $ 1.1 million compared to a
working capital of approximately $2.1 million as at March 31, 2014. Decrease was due to full year’s
operating expenses at PPL and Biohaven which were partly offset by additional capital of $ 2.3 million raised
during the fiscal year through private placement and debt conversion.
As at March 31, 2014, the Company had a net working capital of approximately $2.1 million compared to a
working capital of approximately $470,000 as at March 31, 2013. The increase in working capital is largely
due to cash of approximately $ 3 million received on acquisition accounted for as reverse acquisition.
Operating cash flow
During the fiscal year 2015, operating activities required a net cash outflow of approximately $ 2.6 million
(2014:  $1.9 million), which primarily included research and development costs of approximately $2.2 million
( 2014: $ 1.1 million)  incurred by its operating subsidiaries - PPL and Biohaven. The balance comprised
mainly legal costs and consulting.
During the fiscal period May 23, 2012 to March 31, 2013, operating activities required a net cash outflow of
approximately $17,000 mainly due to consulting fee.
Operating costs were met from cash on hand and additional cash of approximately $ 2.3 million raised
through private placement and debt conversion as explained elsewhere in this report.
Operating costs in fiscal 2014 were met from the cash received on acquisition.
The Company is in pre-clinical stage and is required to support  further research and development  at its
subsidiaries  The Company has not yet determined whether costs incurred and to be incurred are
economically recoverable. The Company's continuing operations are dependent upon any one of:
1.
the existence of economically recoverable medical solutions;
2.
the ability of the Company to obtain the necessary financing to complete the research; or
3.
future profitable production from, or proceeds from the disposition of intellectual property.
27
Although there are no assurances that management's plan will be realized, management believes the
Company will be able to secure the necessary financing to continue operations into the future. In June 2015,
the Company completed a private placement and raised approximately $ 5.2 million
However, the consolidated financial statements for the years ended March 31, 2015 and 2014 include a
going concern note which reflects need for further financing to continue our planned research and
development work and operating needs of all our subsidiaries.
Investing cash flows
There were no investing activities in the reporting periods.
Financing cash flows
During the fiscal year 2015, the Company raised $ 300,000 through issuance of convertible promissory notes
in July 2014. All the notes were converted in September 2014 into common shares as more fully explained in
note 6(i) to the consolidated financial statements. In October 2014, the Company raised additional $ 2 million
through a non-brokered private placement offerings of 20 million common shares as more fully explained in
note 6(ii) ) to the consolidated financial statements.
During the year ended March 31, 2014, the Company had a net cash inflow of approximately $3.8 million
from its financing activities.  Approximately $ 3 million was received as a result of acquisition as more fully
explained under Overview section of this report. The Company also realized approximately $ 295,000 from
the PPL shareholders towards their capital commitment made in prior period and $ 474,000 were received
from exercise of options and warrants by the Company’s shareholders.
The net cash inflow during the period from May 23, 2012 to March 31, 2013 was approximately $ 208,000
representing capital contribution by the PPL shareholders.
(C)  RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT, PATENTS AND LICENSES
From May 23, 2012 to date , the Company through its operating subsidiaries is engaged in pre-clinical
studies as detailed under Item 4 (B) business overview of this report. Research and development expenses
analysis and details are provided under Item 5 (A) of this report. All research and development expenses are
expensed as they are incurred.
PPL’s CPP platform is protected by two suits of intellectual property - (a) an exclusive license for all patents
on Antennapedia -based cell permeable peptides for non-oncology use. And (b) international patents for
proprietary human-derived cell penetrating peptide structures
Biohaven holds patents licensed from Yale and Harvard Universities and exclusive formulation license from
Catalent Inc. and has also filed various divisional patents for additional claims which are currently pending.
D)  TREND INFORMATION
There are no other trends, commitments, events or uncertainties presently known to management that are
reasonably expected to have a material effect on the Company’s business, financial condition or results of
operation other than as disclosed elsewhere in this report (Refer to the heading entitled “Risk Factors”).
28
(E)  OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
At March 31, 2015, and 2014, the Company did not have any off balance sheet arrangements, including any
relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnership to enhance perceived liquidity.
(F)  CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
None.
(G)  SAFE HARBOUR
Not applicable.
ITEM 6 - DIRECTORS, SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND EMPLOYEES
(A)  DIRECTORS AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT
The following sets forth the names and province or state and country of residence of our directors and
executive officers, the offices held by them in the Corporation, their current principal occupations, all as of
July 28, 2015, the date of this report, their principal occupations during the last five years and the month and
year in which they became directors or officers. The term of each director expires on the date of our next
annual meeting.
Name, Province/State and Country of
Residence and Present Position with Portage
(1)
 
Dr. Gregory Bailey (2)
Date became
Director/OfficerPrincipal Occupation Last five years
 
June 4, 2013
See brief biography below
London, UK
Chairman of the Board of Director
Dr. Declan Doogan
Stonington, CT, USA
June 4, 2013
See brief biography below
Chief Executive Officer and Director
 
Mr. Jim Mellon (2) (3)
June 4, 2013
See brief biography below
Isle of Man
Director
 
Mr. Kam Shah (2)
Ontario, Canada
Director and Chief Financial Officer
(1)
January 3, 1999 May 17, 2004 - June 4, 2013 - Chief
Executive Officer of Bontan,
March 9, 2010 till July 15, 2015 -director
and CFO of ZD Ventures Corporation
Neither age nor date of birth of directors or executive officers is required to be reported in our home country
nor otherwise publicly disclosed.
(2)
Member of the Audit and Compensation Committee. Mr. Jim Mellon is the Chair of this Committee.
(3)
Independent directors
29
The following are short biographies of our directors and executive officers:
Gregory Bailey M.D. is a co-founder and Chief Business Officer of Portage Pharma Ltd. Co-founder of
Ascent Healthcare Solutions, the #1 re-processor of used surgical equipment; VirnetX Inc. (VHC: AMEX),
internet security; and Duramedic Inc., a medical products company. He is a former financier of Medivation
Inc. (MDVN: NASDAQ) and was a director from 2005 to 2012.
Declan Doogan M.D. is the co-founder and Chairman of Portage Pharma Ltd., Previously the CEO and
Head of R&D at Amarin Inc. (AMRN:NASDAQ) and the former Head of Worldwide Drug Development at
Pfizer Inc. He has held Visiting Professorships at Harvard School of Public Health, Glasgow University
Medical School and Kitasato University (Tokyo) and sits on the boards of Pulmonary Vascular Research
Institute UK, Sosei (Japan Biotech), Trojantec (UK, oncology) and Spinifex (Melbourne). He continues to
provide medical advice to Amarin Inc.
Jim Mellon: co-founder of Portage Pharma Ltd. Jim holds directorships in a number of publicly quoted
companies, many of which are in the biopharma sector including Miraculins, Plethora Solutions, and the
Summit Corporation. He is also chairman of AIM listed Port Erin Biopharma Investments, a fund specialising
in biopharma investments and is the author of the best-selling book “Cracking the Code” which charts the
developments within the biotech industry. Jim’s other listed company directorships include chairman of Manx
Financial Group and Speymill, co-chairman of both Regent Pacific Group and
West African Mining Corporation, and a board member of Brazilian Gold Corporation, Charlemagne Capital
and Condor Resources.
Kam Shah worked with PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP and Ernst & Young. He is a US Certified Public
Accountant and a Canadian Chartered Accountant.  He has over fifteen years of international experience in
corporate financial analysis, mergers & acquisitions.
Family Relationships
There are no family relationships between the directors and executive officers.
Other Relationships
There are no arrangements or understandings between any major shareholder, customer, supplier or others,
pursuant to which any of the above-named persons were selected as directors or members of senior
management except that as per the terms of the Share Exchange Agreement with Portage Pharma Ltd  dated
 May 21, 2013. Board of Director of Portage will nominate Mr. Kam Shah as director for at least three years
and Mr. Shah will be employed as CFO for the term of two years and in a mutually acceptable capacity for
the third year.
(B)  COMPENSATION
The compensation payable to directors and officers of the Company and its subsidiary is summarized below:
1.  General
The Company does not compensate directors for acting solely as directors. Except as described below, the
Company does not have any arrangements pursuant to which directors are remunerated by the Company or
its subsidiary for their services in their capacity as directors, other than options to purchase shares of the
Company which may be granted to the Company’s directors from time to time and the reimbursement of
direct expenses.
30
The Company does not have any pension plans.
2.  Statement of Executive Compensation
The following table and accompanying notes set forth all compensation paid by the Company to its directors,
senior management and key consultants for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2015 2014 and 2013. Since
the acquisition of Portage Pharma Ltd has been accounted as reverse acquisition, details for the fiscal period
2013  related to Portage pharma Ltd which was incorporated on May 23, 2012.
ANNUAL COMPENSATION LONG-TERM COMPENSATION 
Payouts
Awards
Securities
under
options/SA
Other
annual
compensa-
Rs
Granted
Shares or
units
subject to
resale
restrictions
LTIP (2)
All other
compensa-
Total
compensa-
tion
($)
-
 
 
-
150,391
405,743
-
210,078
321,329
177,968
405,743
-
Name and
principal position YearFee (3) Bonus
 
Declan Doogan
CEO
2015
($)
 
-
($)
tion(6)
($)
CEO
CEO
 
Kam Shah
CFO
CFO
 
Gregory Bailey
Chairman/Business
development
2014
2013
 
 
2015
-
-
180,000
2014
 
 
2015
253,458
 
 
120,000
2014
Chairman/Business
development
Chairman/business 2013
-
-
(1) & (4)
$
(4)
($)
150,391
135,743
 -
30,078
67,871
57,968
135,743
270,000
-
-
payouts
($)
 
-
tion (5)
($)
270,000
-
-
2015
2014
23,188
54,297
23,188
54,297
development
 
James Mellon
Independent
director
Independent
director
Notes:
1.
“SAR” means stock appreciation rights. The Company never issued any SARs
2.
“LTIP” means long term incentive plan.
3.
Fee for fiscal 2015 includes 1.5 million shares to Dr. Bailey valued at $ 120,000 and for fiscal 2014  includes
issuance of 1 million shares to Mr. Shah valued at $151,000.
4.
Consists of 1.5 million restricted shares each to Dr. Doogan and Dr. Bailey valued at $270,000 each for
services rendered. Restrictive legend can only be removed by either filing a registration statement or seeking
exemption under Rule 144 of the Securities Act.
5.
For fiscal 2015, total of 4.4 million options were issued to four directors- 1 million to Dr. Bailey, 2.5 million to
Dr. Doogan, 500,000 to Mr. Shah and 400,000 to Mr. Mellon. These options are valid for five years and
convertible into equal number of shares, exercisable at $0.10 per share and vesting in equal monthly
instalments over two years. The options were registered with US Securities and Exchange commission on
March 17, 2015.   For fiscal 2014, total of 2.9 million options were issued to the directors. One million each to
Dr. Doogan and Dr. Bailey, 500,000 to Mr. Shah and 400,000 to Mr. Mellon. . These options are valid for five
years and are convertible into equal number of common shares of the Company at an exercise price of $0.20
per common share. The Options were registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission on
December 19, 2013 and will vest in equal instalment over the twelve months ending December 31, 2014.
31
Long Term Incentive Plan (LTIP) Awards
The Company does not have a LTIP, pursuant to which cash or non-cash compensation intended to serve as
an incentive for performance (whereby performance is measured by reference to financial performance or the
price of the Company’s securities) was paid or distributed to the Named Executive Officers during the most
recently completed financial year.
Defined Benefit or Actuarial Plan Disclosure
There is no pension plan or retirement benefit plan that has been instituted by the Company and none are
proposed at this time.
Indebtedness of Directors, Executive Officers and Senior Officers
None.
Directors’ and Officers’ Liability Insurance
The Company has purchased, at its expense, directors and officers liability insurance policy to provide
insurance against possible liabilities incurred by them in their capacity as directors and officers of the
Company.
(C)  BOARD PRACTICES
Directors may be appointed at any time in accordance with the by-laws of the Company and then re-elected
annually by the shareholders of the Company. Directors receive no compensation for serving as such, other
than stock option and reimbursement of direct expenses. Officers are elected annually by the Board of
Directors of the Company and serve at the discretion of the Board of Directors.
The Company has not set aside or accrued any amount for retirement or similar benefits to the directors.
Mandate of the Board
The Board has adopted a mandate, in which it has explicitly assumed responsibility for the stewardship of
Portage. In carrying out its mandate the Board holds at least one meeting every month. The frequency of
meetings, as well as the nature of the matters dealt with, will vary from year to year depending on the state of
our business and the opportunities or risks, which we face from time to time. The Board held a total of 10
meetings (2014: 12 meetings) , mostly by way of conference calls, during our financial year ended March 31,
2015. Apart from these meetings, directors also held technical meetings with management of subsidiaries on
a monthly basis To assist in the discharge of its responsibilities, the Board has designated one standing
committee: an Audit and Compensation Committee effective June 27, 2013.as more particularly discussed
below.
Audit and Compensation Committee (“ACC”)
The members of the ACC consist of Jim Mellon, Greg Bailey and Kam Shah. Jim Mellon and Greg Bailey are
the independent directors and Kam Shah is an executive director. Jim Mellon is the chairman of the
Committee. The ACC was approved in the board meeting on June 27, 2013.
Two new Charters were adopted on June 27, 2013 - Charter of the ACC relating to compensation matters
and Charter of the ACC relating to Audit matters. These Charters are included in the Exhibits to this report.
32
The ACC relating to audit matters  is charged with overseeing the Company's accounting and financial
reporting policies, practices and internal controls. The committee reviews significant financial and
accounting issues and the services performed by and the reports of our independent auditors and makes
recommendations to our Board of Directors with respect to these and related matters.
Audit Committee charter assists the Board in fulfilling its responsibilities for our accounting and financial
reporting practices by:
·
reviewing the quarterly and annual consolidated financial statements and management discussion and
analyses;
·
meeting at least annually with our external auditor;
·
reviewing the adequacy of the system of internal controls in consultation with the chief executive and
financial officer;
·
reviewing any relevant accounting and financial matters including reviewing our public disclosure of
information extracted or derived from our financial statements;
·
establishing procedures for the receipt, retention and treatment of complaints received by us regarding
accounting, internal controls or auditing matters and the confidential, anonymous submission by employees
of concerns regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters;
·
pre-approving all non-audit services and recommending the appointment of external auditors; and
·
reviewing and approving our hiring policies regarding personnel of our present and former external auditor
·
Reviewing and approving all employee and consultants contracts, bonuses and other compensation matters
ACC Charter relating to compensation matters will monitor incentive and equity based compensation plans
for the executives based on their periodic performance evaluation.
Corporate Governance Committee
The Company does not have a separate corporate governance committee. The management in conjunction
with the ACC has developed and updated corporate governance practices and policies, code of ethics and
corporate disclosure policy which form part of our internal control over financial reporting manual. The goal is
to provide a mechanism that can assist in our operations, including but not limited to, the monitoring of the
implementation of policies, strategies and programs and the development, continuing assessment and
execution of the Company’s strategic plan.
(D)  EMPLOYEES
The Company presently has no  employee. It uses the services of consultants from time to time.
(E)  SHARE OWNERSHIP
The Company usually creates a Stock Option Plan.
As at July 24, 2015, the date of this report, the Company had one active Consultants Stock Compensation
Plan and two active Stock Option Plans.  Details of these Plans and movements therein during the fiscal
2015 are given in Notes 6(iv) and 7(b) respectively to the consolidated financial statements for the fiscal
2015.  As of the date of this report, there were 2,561,667 common shares registered under the Consultants
Stock Compensation Plan and not yet allotted. On March 17, 2015, the Company registered with US
Securities and Exchange Commission, 15,717,579 options under 2013 Option Plan, of which 5.5 million
options were issued on March 17, 2015. As at July 24, 2015, the Company had 10,260,000 outstanding
options under the Stock Option Plans. In addition, our subsidiaries also had options plans for acquiring
equity in subsidiaries for their directors and management.
33
The objective of these stock plans is to provide for and encourage ownership of our common shares by our
directors, officers, consultants and employees and those of any subsidiary companies so that such persons
may increase their stake in our company and benefit from increases in the value of the common shares. The
Plans are designed to be competitive with the benefit programs of other companies in the Biotechnology
sector. It is the view of management that the plans are a significant incentive for the directors, officers,
consultants and employees to continue and to increase their efforts in promoting our operations to the mutual
benefit of both our company and such individuals and also allows us to avail of the services of experienced
persons with minimum cash outlay.
The following table sets forth the share ownership of our executive officers and directors as at July 24, 2015:
Common Shares
Options and Warrants Exercisable
Beneficially Owned
for Common Shares
Name
Number
2,309,131 
Kam Shah
  
 
  
 
 
  
Declan Doogan   27,711,068 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  43,792,021 
Greg Bailey
 
  
  
  
 
  
  40,792,021 
James Mellon
1%
Percentage *   Number  
200,000O
500,000O
500,000O
   
11%  2,500,000O
  1,000,000O
   
  
18%  1,000,000O
  1,000,000O
   
  
400,000O
17% 
 
400,000O
Exercise price - in US$   Expiry date(s)
18-Aug-15
12-Dec-18
17-March-20
0.35 
0.20 
0.10 
  
010 
0.20 
  
0.10 
0.20 
  
0.10 
0.20
17-March-20
12-Dec-18
17-March-20
12-Dec-18
17-March-20
12-Dec-18
* Based on 245,438,894 issued and outstanding common shares at July 24, 2015
O = Options
All shares and options held by the above persons carry same rights as the other holders of the Common
shares of the Company.
ITEM 7 - MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
(A)  MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS
The Company's securities are recorded on the books of its transfer agent in registered form. The majority of
such shares are, however, registered in the name of intermediaries such as brokerage houses and clearing-
houses on behalf of their respective clients. The Company does not have knowledge of all the beneficial
owners thereof.
34
As at July 24, 2015, Intermediaries like CDS & Co, Toronto, Canada and Cede & Co of New York, USA held
approximately 34% of the issued and outstanding common shares of the company on behalf of several
beneficial shareholders whose individual holdings details were not available.
At July 24, 2015, the Company had 245,438,894 shares of common stock outstanding, which, as per the
details provided by the Transfer Agents, were held by 154 record holders excluding the beneficial
shareholders held through the intermediaries.
The following table sets forth persons known by us to be beneficial owners of more than 5% of our common
shares as of July 24, 2015. Beneficial ownership of shares is determined under rules of the SEC and
generally includes any shares over which a person exercises sole or shared voting or investment power.
Shares subject to options and warrants that are currently exercisable or exercisable within 60 days of the
date of this prospectus are deemed to be outstanding and beneficially owned by the person holding the
option and warrant.  These shares, however, are not deemed outstanding for the purpose of computing the
percentage ownership of any other person.
Name of Beneficial Owner
Declan Doogan
Greg Bailey
James Mellon
No. of Shares
29,127,736 (1)
44,958,689 (2)
41,258,689 (3)
Percentage of Shares
12%
18%
17%
(1)
Includes 1,416,668 shares issuable upon exercise of vested options
(2)
Includes 1,166,668 shares issuable upon exercise of vested options
(3)
Includes 466,668 shares issuable upon exercise of vested options.
The Company is a publicly owned BVI corporation, the shares of which are owned by Canadian residents,
US residents, and residents of other countries. The Company is not owned or controlled directly or indirectly
by another corporation or any foreign government. There are no arrangements, known to the Company, the
operation of which may at a subsequent date result in a change of control of the Company.
Insider Reports under Canadian Securities Legislation
Since the Company is  a reporting issuer under the Securities Acts of each of the province of Ontario in
Canada, certain "insiders" of the Company (including its directors, certain executive officers, and persons
who directly or indirectly beneficially own, control or direct more than 10% of its common shares) are
generally required to file insider reports of changes in their ownership of the Company's common shares five
days following the trade under National Instrument 55-104 - Insider Reporting Requirements and
Exemptions, as adopted by the Canadian Securities Administrators. Insider reports must be filed
electronically five days following the date of the trade at www.sedi.ca. The public is able to access these
reports at www.sedi.ca.
The U.S. rules governing the ownership threshold above which shareholder ownership must be disclosed
are more stringent than those discussed above. Section 13 of the Exchange Act imposes reporting
requirements on persons who acquire beneficial ownership (as such term is defined in the Rule 13d-3 under
the Exchange Act) of more than 5 per cent of a class of an equity security registered under Section 12 of the
Exchange Act. In general, such persons must file, within 10 days after such acquisition, a report of beneficial
ownership with the Securities and Exchange Commission containing the information prescribed by the
regulations under Section 13 of the Exchange Act. This information is also required to be sent to the issuer of
the securities and to each exchange where the securities are traded.
35
(B) RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Transactions with related parties are incurred in the normal course of business and are measured at the
exchange amount, which is the amount of consideration established and agreed to between the related
parties. Related party transactions and balances have been listed below, unless they have been disclosed
elsewhere in the consolidated financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2015.
(i)
Business expenses of $6,145 (2014:  $12,786, May 23, 2012 to March 31, 2013: $nil) were reimbursed to
directors of the Company.5
(ii)
Consulting fees include cash fee paid to key management for services of $ 180,000 (2014: $102,458, May
23, 2012 to March 31, 2013 : $nil) .
(C) INTERESTS OF EXPERTS AND COUNSEL
Not applicable.
ITEM 8 - FINANCIAL INFORMATION
(A)  CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS AND OTHER FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Financial Statements
Information regarding our financial statements is contained under Item18 of this Annual Report.
Legal Proceedings
The Company has no pending legal claims as of today.
Dividend Policy
Since its incorporation, the Company has not declared or paid, and has no present intention to declare or to
pay in the foreseeable future, any cash dividends with respect to its Common Shares. Earnings will be
retained to finance further growth and development of the business of the Company. However, if the Board of
Directors declares dividends; all Common Shares will participate equally in the dividends, and, in the event
of liquidation, in the net assets, of the Company.
(B)  SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
Subsequent events have been evaluated through July 24, 2015, the date of this report. Major event detailed
in note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2015 was raising of
approximately $ 5.2 million through a private placement.
ITEM 9 - THE OFFER AND LISTING
(A)  OFFER AND LISTING DETAILS
The following tables set forth the reported high and low sale prices for our common shares as quoted on
OTC Markets and on Canadian Securities Exchange (CSE) , where the Company’s shares got listed and
began trading effective October 28, 2013.
36
The following table outlines the annual high and low market prices for the five most recent fiscal years:
Fiscal year ended March 31,
 
 
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
High
Low
OTC
CSE
OTC
CSE
In US$
0.24
0.22
n/a
n/a
n/a
0.07
0.06
0.01
0.02
0.07
0.18
0.42
0.16
0.18
0.40
0.08
0.13
n/a
n/a
n/a
The following table outlines the high and low market prices for each fiscal financial quarter for the two most
recent fiscal periods and any subsequent period:
Fiscal quarter ended
 
 
June 30, 2015
March 31, 2015
December 31, 2014
September 30, 2014
June 30, 2014
High
Low
OTC
CSE
OTC
CSE
0.31
0.14
0.15
0.18
0.12
In US$
0.32
0.14
0.14
0.24
0.13
0.08
0.07
0.01
0.08
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.09
June 30, 2014
March 31, 2014
December 31, 2013
September 30, 2013
June 30, 2013
0.12
0.23
0.30
0.38
0.42
0.13
0.22
n/a
n/a
n/a
0.09
0.08
0.16
0.22
0.15
0.09
0.13
n/a
n/a
n/a
The following table outlines the high and low market prices for each of the most recent six months:
Month
 
 
June 2015
May 2015
April 2015
March 2015
February 2015
January 2015
High
Low
OTC
CSE
OTC
CSE
0.31
0.13
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.14
In US$
0.32
0.13
0.12
0.10
0.10
0.14
0.13
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.09
0.13
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.10
0.09
(B)  PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Not applicable.
(C)  MARKETS
The Company’s common shares currently trade in two places
On OTC Quotation Board under the trading symbol “PTGEF”. The shares have been traded on OTCQB
since 2000.
37
Effective October 28, 2013, the Company’s shares are also listed for trading in US currency on the Canadian
Securities Exchange (formerly, Canadian National Stock Exchange) under the symbol “PBT.U”.
(D)  SELLING SHAREHOLDERS
Not applicable.
(E)  DILUTION
Not applicable.
(F)  EXPENSES OF THE ISSUE
Not applicable.
ITEM 10 - ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
(A)  SHARE CAPITAL
This Form 20F is being filed as an Annual Report under the Exchange Act and, as such, there is no
requirement to provide any information under this section.
(B)  MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
General
Effective July 5, 2013, The Company moved its jurisdiction from Ontario to British Virgin Islands.  our affairs
are therefore governed by the provisions of our memorandum of association and articles of association, as
adopted on becoming a BVI corporation, and by the provisions of applicable British Virgin Islands law.
Pursuant to our Memorandum and Articles of Association, we are authorized to issue a unlimited number of
ordinary shares of no par value of which 180,775,790 shares are issued and outstanding.
The following are summaries of material terms and provisions of our Memorandum and Articles of
Association and the BVI Act, insofar as they relate to the material terms of our ordinary shares. Unless
otherwise stated, the following summaries are of the terms of our shares as of the date of this annual report.
This summary is not intended to be complete, and you should read the form of our Memorandum and Articles
of Association, which has been filed as an exhibits to this report.
Meetings of shareholders
If our shareholders want us to hold a meeting of shareholders of the company, they may requisition the
directors to hold one upon the written request of shareholders entitled to exercise at least 10% of the voting
rights in respect of the matter for which the meeting is requested. Under British Virgin Islands law, we may
not increase the required percentage to call a meeting above 10%. However, this can be increased up to
30% provided the Memorandum and Articles of Association are amended.
38
Subject to our Memorandum and Articles of Association, a meeting of shareholders of the company will be
called by not less than twenty one days' written notice. Notice of every meeting of shareholders may be
delivered electronically and will be given to all of our shareholders. However, the inadvertent failure of the
convener or conveners of a meeting of shareholders to give notice of the meeting to a shareholder, or the fact
that a shareholder has not received the notice, does not invalidate the meeting.
A meeting may be called by shorter notice than that mentioned above, but, subject to our articles of
association, it will be deemed to have been duly called if shareholders holding at least 90% of the total
voting rights on all the matters to be considered at the meeting have waived notice of the meeting and, for
this purpose, the presence of a shareholder at the meeting shall constitute a waiver in relation to all the
shares which that shareholder holds.
A meeting of shareholders is duly constituted if, at the commencement of the meeting, there are present in
person or by proxy two or more shareholders entitled to vote at the meeting. Shareholders.
Rights attaching to shares
Voting rights
Holders of our ordinary shares have identical rights, including dividend and liquidation rights, provided that,
except as otherwise expressly provided in our Amended Memorandum and Articles of Association or
required by applicable law, on any matter that is submitted to a vote of our shareholders, holders of our
ordinary shares are entitled to one vote per ordinary share.
Under the BVI Act, the ordinary shares are deemed to be issued when the name of the shareholder is
entered in our register of members. Our register of members is maintained by our transfer agent, Equity
Transfer Services Inc., which enters the names of our shareholders in our register of members. If (a)
information that is required to be entered in the register of shareholders is omitted from the register or is
inaccurately entered in the register, or (b) there is unreasonable delay in entering information in the register,
a shareholder of the company, or any person who is aggrieved by the omission, inaccuracy or delay, may
apply to the British Virgin Islands courts for an order that the register be rectified, and the court may either
refuse the application or order the rectification of the register, and may direct the company to pay all costs of
the application and any damages the applicant may have sustained.
Subject to any rights or restrictions attached to any shares, at any general meeting on a show of hands every
shareholder of record who is present in person (or, in the case of a shareholder being a corporation, by its
duly authorized representative) or by proxy shall have one vote and on a poll every shareholder present in
person (or, in the case of a shareholder being a corporation, by its duly appointed representative) or by proxy
shall have one vote for each share which such shareholder is the holder. Voting at any meeting of the
shareholders is by show of hands unless a poll is demanded. A poll may be demanded by shareholders
present in person or by proxy if the shareholder disputes the outcome of the vote on a proposed resolution
and the chairman shall cause a poll to be taken.
No shareholder shall be entitled to vote or be reckoned in a quorum, in respect of any share, unless such
shareholder is registered as our shareholder at the applicable record date for that meeting. Shareholders of
record may also pass written resolutions without a meeting.
39
Protection of minority shareholders
Under the laws of the British Virgin Islands, there is little statutory law for the protection of minority
shareholders other than the provisions of the BVI Act dealing with shareholder remedies. The principal
protection under statutory law is that shareholders may bring an action to enforce the BVI Act or the
constituent documents of the corporation, our Memorandum and Articles of Association. Shareholders are
entitled to have our affairs conducted in accordance with the BVI Act and the Memorandum and Articles of
Association.
There are common law rights for the protection of shareholders that may be invoked, largely dependent on
English company law, since the common law of the British Virgin Islands is limited. Under the general rule
pursuant to English company law known as the rule in Foss v. Harbottle, a court will generally refuse to
interfere with the management of a company at the insistence of a minority of its shareholders who express
dissatisfaction with the conduct of the company's affairs by the majority or the board of directors. However,
every shareholder is entitled to have the affairs of the company conducted properly according to British
Virgin Islands law and the constituent documents of the company. As such, if those who control the company
have persistently disregarded the requirements of company law or the provisions of the company's
Memorandum and Articles of Association, then the courts may grant relief. Generally, the areas in which the
courts will intervene are the following: (1) an act complained of which is outside the scope of the authorized
business or is illegal or not capable of ratification by the majority; (2) acts that constitute fraud on the minority
where the wrongdoers control the company; (3) acts that infringe or are about to infringe on the personal
rights of the shareholders, such as the right to vote; and (4) where the company has not complied with
provisions requiring approval of a special or extraordinary majority of shareholders, which are more limited
than the rights afforded minority shareholders under the laws of many states in the U.S.
Pre-emption rights
British Virgin Islands law does not make a distinction between public and private companies and some of the
protections and safeguards (such as statutory pre-emption rights, save to the extent that they are expressly
provided for in the Memorandum and Articles of Association) that investors may expect to find in relation to a
public company are not provided for under British Virgin Islands law. There are no pre-emption rights
applicable to the issuance of new shares under either British Virgin Islands law or our Amended
Memorandum and Articles of Association.
Liquidation rights
As permitted by British Virgin Islands law and our Memorandum and Articles of Association, we may be
voluntarily liquidated under Part XII of the BVI Act if we have no liabilities or we are able to pay our debts as
they fall due and the value of our assets equals or exceeds our liabilities by resolution of directors and
resolution of shareholders.
Modification of rights
As permitted by British Virgin Islands law, and our Memorandum and Articles of Association, we may vary
the rights attached to our ordinary shares only with the consent in writing of or by a resolution passed at a
meeting by the holders of not less than 50% of the issued shares of a particular class of shares
40
Transfer of shares
Subject to any applicable restrictions set forth in our Memorandum and Articles of Association, any of our
shareholders may transfer all or any of his or her shares by a written instrument of transfer in the usual or
common form or in any other form which our directors may approve.
Our directors can only refuse or delay the registration of a transfer of shares if the transferor has failed to pay
an amount due in respect of those shares.
Changes in authorized ordinary shares
By resolution of our shareholders or resolution of our directors we may (i) consolidate and divide all or any of
our unissued authorized shares into shares of larger amount than our existing shares; (ii) sub-divide our
existing ordinary shares, or any of them into shares of smaller amount than is fixed by our memorandum of
association, subject nevertheless to the provisions of the BVI Act; (iii) cancel any ordinary shares which, at
the date of the passing of the resolution, have not been taken or agreed to be taken by any person; or (iv)
create new classes of shares with preferences to be determined by the board of directors at the time of
authorization, although any such new classes of shares may only be created with prior shareholder approval.
Share repurchase
As permitted by the BVI Act and our Memorandum and Articles of Association, shares may be repurchased,
redeemed or otherwise acquired by us.
Dividends
Subject to the BVI Act and our Memorandum and Articles of Association, our directors may, by resolution,
authorize a distribution to shareholders at such time and of such an amount as they think fit, if they are
satisfied, on reasonable grounds, that, immediately after the distribution, we will satisfy the 'solvency test'. A
company will satisfy the solvency test if (i) the value of the company's assets exceeds its liabilities; and (ii)
the company is able to pay its debts as they fall due. Where a distribution is made to a shareholder at a time
when the company did not, immediately after the distribution, satisfy the solvency test, it may be recovered by
the company from the shareholder unless (i) the shareholder received the distribution in good faith and
without knowledge of the company's failure to satisfy the solvency test; (ii) the shareholder has altered his
position in reliance on the validity of the distribution; and (iii) it would be unfair to require repayment in full or
at all.
Untraceable shareholders
We are entitled to sell any shares of a shareholder who is untraceable, as long as:
·
all checks, not being less than three in total number, for any sums payable in cash to the holder of such
shares have remained uncashed for a period of 12 years;
·
we have not during that time or before the expiry of the three-month period referred to in the following point
received any indication of the existence of the shareholder or person entitled to such shares by death,
bankruptcy or operation of law; and
·
upon expiration of the twelve-year period, we have caused an advertisement to be published in newspapers,
giving notice of our intention to sell these shares, and a period of three months or such shorter period has
elapsed since the date of such advertisement.
41
The net proceeds of any such sale shall belong to us, and when we receive these net proceeds we shall
become indebted to the former shareholder for an amount equal to such net proceeds.
Board of directors
We are managed by a board of directors which currently consists of four directors.
Our shareholders may, pursuant to our Memorandum and Articles of Association, at any time remove any
director before the expiration of his or her period of office with or without cause, and may, pursuant to our
Memorandum and Articles of Association, elect another person in his or her stead. Subject to our
Memorandum and Articles of Association, the directors will have power at any time and from time to time to
appoint any person to be a director, either as an addition to the existing directors or to fill a vacancy as long
as the total number of directors (exclusive of alternate directors) does not at any time exceed the maximum
number fixed by or in accordance with our Amended Memorandum and Articles of Association (if any) and
one third time the number of directors to have been elected at the last annual meeting of shareholders.
There are no share ownership qualifications for directors, unless otherwise decided by a resolution of
shareholders.
Meetings of our board of directors may be convened at any time deemed necessary by any of our directors.
Unless the quorum has been otherwise fixed by the board,  a meeting of our board of directors will be
competent to make lawful and binding decisions if at least one half of the directors are present or
represented. Unless there are only two directors, in which case, the quorum shall be two. At any meeting of
our directors, each director, whether by his or her presence or by his or her alternate, is entitled to one vote.
Questions arising at a meeting of our board of directors are required to be decided by simple majority votes
of the directors present or represented at the meeting. In the case of a tie vote, the chairman of the meeting
shall not have a second or deciding vote. Our board of directors may also pass written resolutions without a
meeting by a majority vote.
The remuneration to be paid to the directors shall be such remuneration as the directors or shareholders
shall determine through a resolution. Under our Memorandum and Articles of Association, the independent
directors shall also be entitled to reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses in connection with the
performance of their duties as director.
Issuance of additional ordinary shares
Our Memorandum and Articles of Association authorize our board of directors to issue additional ordinary
shares from time to time as our board of directors shall determine, to the extent of available authorized but
unissued shares.
Our Memorandum and Articles of Association authorize our board of directors from time to time to issue
ordinary shares to the extent permitted by the BVI Act.
42
Changes in authorized shares
We are authorized to issue unlimited number of  ordinary shares without par value,  which will be subject to
the same provisions with reference to the payment of calls, liens, transfers, transmissions, forfeitures and
otherwise as the shares in issue. We may by resolution:
·
consolidate and divide all or any of our unissued authorized shares into shares of a larger amount than our
existing shares;
·
sub-divide our existing ordinary shares, or any of them into shares of smaller amount than is fixed by our
memorandum of association, subject nevertheless to the provisions of the BVI Act;
·
•cancel any ordinary shares that, at the date of the passing of the resolution, have not been taken or agreed
to be taken by any person; or
·
create new classes of shares with preferences to be determined by the board of directors at the time of
authorization, although any such new classes of shares may only be created with prior shareholder approval.
Inspection of books and records
Under British Virgin Islands law holders of our ordinary shares will be entitled, on giving written notice to us,
to inspect and make copies or take extracts of our: (a)  Memorandum and Articles of Association; (b) register
of shareholders; (c) register of directors; and (d) minutes of meetings and resolutions of shareholders and
those classes of shareholders of which he is a shareholder.
Subject to our Memorandum and Articles of Association, our board of directors may, if they are satisfied that it
would be contrary to our interest to allow a shareholder to inspect any document, or part of a document as
referenced above, refuse to permit the shareholder to inspect the document or limit the inspection of the
document, including limiting the making of copies or the taking of extracts from the records. Where our
directors exercise their powers in these circumstances, they shall notify the shareholder as soon as
reasonably practicable.
Differences in corporate law
We are incorporated under, and are governed by, the laws of the British Virgin Islands. The flexibility
available under British Virgin Islands law has enabled us to adopt the memorandum and articles of
association that will provide shareholders with rights that do not vary in any material respect from those they
enjoyed under the Ontario Companies laws.
Conflicts of interest
Pursuant to the BVI Act and the company's memorandum and articles of association, a director of a company
who has an interest in a transaction and who has declared such interest to the other directors, may:
·
vote on a matter relating to the transaction;
·
attend a meeting of directors at which a matter relating to the transaction arises and be included among the
directors present at the meeting for the purposes of a quorum; and
·
sign a document on behalf of the company, or do any other thing in his capacity as a director, that relates to
the transaction.
43
Anti-money laundering laws
In order to comply with legislation or regulations aimed at the prevention of money laundering we are
required to adopt and maintain anti-money laundering procedures, and may require subscribers to provide
evidence to verify their identity. Where permitted, and subject to certain conditions, we may also delegate the
maintenance of our anti-money laundering procedures (including the acquisition of due diligence
information) to a suitable person.
We reserve the right to request such information as is necessary to verify the identity of a subscriber. In the
event of delay or failure on the part of the subscriber in producing any information required for verification
purposes, we may refuse to accept the application, in which case any funds received will be returned without
interest to the account from which they were originally debited.
If any person resident in the British Virgin Islands knows or suspects that another person is engaged in
money laundering or terrorist financing and the information for that knowledge or suspicion came to their
attention in the course of their business, the person will be required to report his belief or suspicion to the
Financial Investigation Agency of the British Virgin Islands, pursuant to the Proceeds of Criminal Conduct
Act 1997 (as amended). Such a report shall not be treated as a breach of confidence or of any restriction
upon the disclosure of information imposed by any enactment or otherwise.
Duties of directors
British Virgin Islands law provides that every director of the company in exercising his powers or performing
his duties shall act honestly and in good faith and in what the director believes to be in the best interests of
the company. Additionally, the director shall exercise the care, diligence, and skill that a reasonable director
would exercise in the same circumstances taking into account the nature of the company, the nature of the
decision and the position of the director and his responsibilities. In addition, British Virgin Islands law
provides that a director shall exercise his powers as a director for a proper purpose and shall not act, or
agree to the company acting, in a manner that contravenes British Virgin Islands law or the memorandum
and articles of association of the company.
Anti-takeover provisions
The BVI Act does not prevent companies from adopting a wide range of defensive measures, such as
staggered boards, blank check preferred shares, removal of directors only for cause and provisions that
restrict the rights of shareholders to call meetings and submit shareholder proposals.
Interested directors
The BVI Act provides that a director shall, after becoming aware that he is interested in a transaction entered
into or to be entered into by the company, disclose that interest to the board of directors of the company. The
failure of a director to disclose that interest does not affect the validity of a transaction entered into by the
director or the company, so long as the director's interest was disclosed to the board prior to the company's
entry into the transaction or was not required to be disclosed (for example where the transaction is between
the company and the director himself or is otherwise in the ordinary course of business and on the usual
terms and conditions). As permitted by British Virgin Islands law and our Memorandum and Articles of
Association, a director interested in a particular transaction may vote on it, attend meetings at which it is
considered, and sign documents on our behalf which relate to the transaction.
44
Voting rights and quorum requirements
Under British Virgin Islands law, the voting rights of shareholders are regulated by the company's
Memorandum and Articles of Association and, in certain circumstances, the BVI Act. The articles of
association will govern matters such as quorum for the transaction of business, rights of shares, and majority
votes required to approve any action or resolution at a meeting of the shareholders or board of directors.
Unless the articles of association otherwise provide, the requisite majority is usually a simple majority of
votes cast. Under the M&A, a resolution of shareholders requires a majority vote of those persons voting at a
meeting or in the case of a written resolution of shareholders, the vote of a majority of the shareholders.
Mergers and similar arrangements
Under the BVI Act, two or more companies may merge or consolidate in accordance with the statutory
provisions. A merger means the merging of two or more constituent companies into one of the constituent
companies, and a consolidation means the uniting of two or more constituent companies into a new
company. In order to merge or consolidate, the directors of each constituent company must approve a written
plan of merger or consolidation which must be authorized by a resolution approved at a duly convened and
constituted meeting of the shareholders of the Company by the affirmative vote of a majority of the votes of
the shares entitled to vote thereon which were present at the meeting and voted, or a resolution consented to
in writing by the same number of the votes of the Shares entitled to vote thereon.
Shareholders not otherwise entitled to vote on the merger or consolidation may still acquire the right to vote if
the plan or merger or consolidation contains any provision which, if proposed as an amendment to the
memorandum of amended association and articles of association, would entitle them to vote as a class or
series on the proposed amendment. In any event, all shareholders must be given a copy of the plan of
merger or consolidation irrespective of whether they are entitled to vote at the meeting or consent to the
written resolution to approve the plan of merger or consolidation.
Shareholder suits
We are not aware of any reported class action or derivative action having been brought against the company
in a British Virgin Islands court.
Under the BVI Act, if a company or a director of a company engages in, or proposes to engage in, conduct
that contravenes the BVI Act or the memorandum of association or articles of the company, the BVI Court
may, on the application of a shareholder or a director of the company, make an order directing the company
or director to comply with, or restraining the company or director from engaging in that conduct.
In addition, under the BVI Act, the BVI Court may, on the application of a shareholder of a company, grant
leave to that shareholder to bring proceedings in the name and on behalf of that company or to intervene in
proceedings to which the company is a party for the purpose of continuing, defending or discontinuing the
proceedings on behalf of the company. In determining whether to grant leave for such derivative actions, the
Court must take into account certain matters, including whether the shareholder is acting in good faith,
whether the derivative action is in the interests of the company taking account of the views of the company's
directors on commercial matters and whether an alternative remedy to the derivative claim is available.
45
A shareholder of a company may bring an action against the company for breach of a duty owed by the
company to him as a shareholder. The BVI Act also includes provisions for actions based on oppression,
and for representative actions where the interests of the claimant are substantially the same as those of other
shareholders.
Corporate governance
British Virgin Islands laws do not restrict transactions with directors, requiring only that directors exercise a
duty to act honestly, in good faith and in what the directors believe to be in the best interests to the
companies for which they serve.
Indemnification
British Virgin Islands law does not limit the extent to which a company's articles of association may provide
for indemnification of officers and directors, except to the extent any such provision may be held by the
British Virgin Islands courts to be contrary to public policy, such as to provide indemnification against civil
fraud or the consequences of committing a crime. Our articles of association provide for the indemnification
of our directors against all losses or liabilities incurred or sustained by him or her as a director of our
company in defending any proceedings, whether civil or criminal and this indemnity only applies if he or she
acted honestly and in good faith with a view to our best interests and, with respect to any criminal action, he
or she must have had no reasonable cause to believe his or her conduct was unlawful.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted for directors,
officers or persons controlling us under the foregoing provisions, we have been advised that, in the opinion
of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, such indemnification is against public policy as
expressed in the Securities Act and therefore is unenforceable.
Staggered board of directors
The BVI Act does not contain statutory provisions that require staggered board arrangements for a British
Virgin Islands company and our articles of association do not provide for a staggered board.
(C)  MATERIAL CONTRACTS
The Company had no material contract, other than contracts entered into in the ordinary course of business,
to which we or any of our subsidiaries is a party, for the year immediately preceding the filing of this report.
(D)  EXCHANGE CONTROLS
There is no income or other tax of the British Virgin Islands imposed by withholding or otherwise on any
payment to be made by us.
We are free to acquire, hold and sell foreign currency and securities without restriction. There is no exchange
control legislation under British Virgin Islands law and accordingly there are no exchange control regulations
imposed under British Virgin Islands law that would prevent us from paying dividends to shareholders in
United States Dollars or any other currencies, and all such dividends may be freely transferred out of the
British Virgin Islands, clear of any income or other tax of the British Virgin Islands imposed by withholding or
otherwise without the necessity of obtaining any consent of any government or authority of the British Virgin
Islands.
46
(E)  TAXATION
British Virgin Islands Tax Consequences
Under the law of the British Virgin Islands as currently in effect, a holder of shares of the Company who is not
a resident of the British Virgin Islands is not liable for British Virgin Islands income tax on dividends paid with
respect to the shares of the Company, and all holders of securities of the Company are not liable to the
British Virgin Islands for income tax on gains realized on the sale or disposal of such securities. The British
Virgin Islands does not impose a withholding tax on dividends paid by a company incorporated or re-
registered under the BCA.
There are no capital gains, gift or inheritance taxes levied by the British Virgin Islands on companies
incorporated or re-registered under the BCA. In addition, securities of companies incorporated or re-
registered under the BCA are not subject to transfer taxes, stamp duties or similar charges.
There is no income tax treaty or convention currently in effect between (i) the United States and the British
Virgin Islands or (ii) Canada and the British Virgin Islands, although a Tax Information Exchange Agreement
is in force between the United States and the BVI and Canada and the BVI
U.S. Federal Income Tax Consequences
The following discussion sets forth the material U.S. federal income tax consequences to U.S. Holders (as
defined below) of owning, and disposing of our ordinary shares as of the date hereof. This discussion is not a
complete analysis or listing of all of the possible tax consequences and does not address all tax
considerations that may be relevant to investors in light of their particular circumstances. This summary
applies only to U.S. Holders that hold Class A ordinary shares as capital assets for U.S. federal income tax
purposes (generally, property held for investment), and it does not describe all of the U.S. federal income tax
consequences that may be relevant to U.S. Holders subject to special rules, such as:
·
banks and other financial institutions;
·
insurance companies;
·
regulated investment companies;
·
real estate investment trusts;
·
dealers and traders in securities that use mark-to-market accounting for U.S. federal income tax purposes;
·
U.S. Holders holding Class A ordinary shares as part of a hedging transaction, straddle, conversion
transaction or other integrated transaction;
·
U.S. Holders whose functional currency for U.S. federal income tax purposes is not the U.S. dollar;
·
U.S. Holders liable for the alternative minimum tax;
·
tax-exempt organizations or entities, including an "individual retirement account" or "Roth IRA" as defined in
Section 408 or 408A of the Code, respectively;
·
U.S. Holders that received the Class A ordinary shares as compensation for the performance of services;
·
U.S. Holders holding Class A ordinary shares that own or are deemed to own 10% or more of the voting
shares of the Company; or
·
former citizens and residents of the United States subject to tax as expatriates.
47
This summary is based on the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the "Code"), administrative
pronouncements, judicial decisions and final, temporary and proposed Treasury regulations, all as currently
in effect and available. These authorities are subject to change, possibly with retroactive effect. U.S. Holders
should consult their own tax advisers concerning the U.S. federal, state, local, and foreign tax consequences
of owning and disposing of Class A ordinary shares in their particular circumstances.
For purposes of this summary, a "U.S. Holder" is a beneficial owner of ordinary shares who is, for U.S.
federal income tax purposes:
·
a citizen or individual resident of the United States;
·
a corporation, or other entity taxable as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes, created or
organized in or under the laws of the United States, any state thereof or the District of Columbia;
·
an estate, the income of which is subject to U.S. federal income taxation regardless of its source; or
·
a trust that (1) is subject to the primary supervision of a U.S. court and one or more U.S. persons that have
the authority to control all substantial decisions of the trust or (2) has a valid election in effect under
applicable Treasury regulations to be treated as a U.S. person.
If a partnership (or other entity treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes) holds the
ordinary shares, the tax treatment of a partner in such partnership generally will depend upon the status of
the partner and upon the activities of the partnership. Prospective investors who are partners in a partnership
should consult their tax advisers as to the particular U.S. federal income tax consequences of owning and
disposing of Class A ordinary shares in their particular circumstances.
Unless otherwise indicated, this discussion assumes that the Company is not, and will not become, a
"passive foreign investment company," or a PFIC, for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Further, this
summary does not address the U.S. federal estate and gift, state, local or non-U.S. tax consequences to U.S.
Holders of owning, and disposing of Class A ordinary shares. Prospective investors should consult their own
tax advisors regarding the U.S. federal, state and local, as well as non-U.S. income and other tax
consequences of owning and disposing of Class A ordinary shares in their particular circumstances.
Taxation of distributions
Distributions paid on ordinary shares will be treated as dividends to the extent paid out of our current or
accumulated earnings and profits (as determined under U.S. federal income tax principles). Such dividends
paid to a U.S. Holder with respect to ordinary shares generally will be taxable as ordinary income at the time
of receipt by a U.S. Holder. Distributions in excess of our current and accumulated earnings and profits will
be treated first as a non-taxable return of capital, thereby reducing such U.S. Holder's adjusted tax basis in
ordinary shares (but not below zero), and thereafter as either long-term or short-term capital gain depending
upon whether the U.S. Holder has held ordinary shares for more than one year as of the time such
distribution is received. Because we do not maintain calculations of our earnings and profits under U.S.
federal income tax principles, it is expected that distributions generally will be reported to U.S. Holders as
dividends. Distributions of additional ordinary shares to U.S. Holders that are part of a pro rata distribution to
all of our shareholders generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income tax. The amount of any
distribution of property other than cash will be the fair market value of such property on the date of
distribution. As used below, the term "dividend" means a distribution that constitutes a dividend for U.S.
federal income tax purposes.
48
With respect to non-corporate U.S. Holders, dividends received may be subject to reduced rates of taxation
provided that our ordinary shares are readily tradable on a qualifying U.S. securities market and that (i) such
U.S. Holder holds such ordinary shares for 61 days or more during the 121-day period beginning on the date
which is 60 days before the date on which such shares become ex-dividend with respect to such dividends
and (ii) the U.S. Holder is not under an obligation (whether pursuant to a short sale or otherwise) to make
related payments with respect to existing or substantially similar or related property. Our ordinary shares
currently trade on the OTCQB and are also listed and traded on Canadian Securities Exchange, which may
be treated as a qualifying securities market. However, there is no assurance that our ordinary shares will
remain "readily tradable" and, additionally, such reduced rate will not apply if we are a PFIC for the taxable
year in which we pay a dividend or were a PFIC for the preceding taxable year.
Dividends received on the ordinary shares will be treated as foreign source income and will not be eligible
for the dividends-received deduction generally allowed to U.S. corporations under the Code.
Sale or other taxable disposition of shares
For U.S. federal income tax purposes, gain or loss realized on the sale or other taxable disposition of
ordinary shares will be capital gain or loss, and will be long-term capital gain or loss if a U.S. Holder held
ordinary shares for more than one year. Non-corporate U.S. Holders may be eligible for preferential rates of
U.S. federal income tax in respect of long-term capital gains. The deductibility of capital losses is subject to
limitations under the Code.
The amount of the gain or loss realized will be equal to the difference between a U.S. Holder's adjusted tax
basis in the ordinary shares disposed of and the amount realized on the sale or other taxable disposition. A
U.S. Holder's initial tax basis in its ordinary shares will be the amount paid for ordinary shares. Such gain or
loss generally will be U.S.-source gain or loss for U.S. foreign tax credit purposes.
Passive foreign investment company considerations
Special U.S. federal income tax rules apply to U.S. persons owning shares of a PFIC. A non-U.S.
corporation will be classified as a PFIC in any taxable year in which, either:
·
at least 75% of its gross income is "passive income"; or
·
at least 50% of the average quarterly value of its total gross assets (which may be determined, in part, by the
market value of our ordinary shares, which is subject to change) is attributable to assets that produce
"passive income" or are held for the production of passive income.
Passive income for this purpose generally includes, among other things, dividends, interest, royalties, rents
and gains from commodities (other than gains that arise out of commodity hedging transactions, or that are
foreign currency gains attributable to any section 988 transactions, or gains from commodities sold in an
active trade or business) and securities transactions. If a non-United States corporation owns at least 25% by
value of the stock of another corporation, the non-United States corporation is treated for purposes of the
PFIC tests as owning its proportionate share of the assets of the other corporation and as receiving directly
its proportionate share of the other corporation's income.
49
Based on our financial statements, relevant market data and the projected composition of our income and the
valuation of our assets, we do not expect to be a PFIC for the taxable year ending March 31, 2015. Because
PFIC status is based on our income, assets and activities for the entire taxable year, it is not possible to
determine whether we will be characterized as a PFIC for the 2015 taxable year until after the close of the
year. Moreover, we must determine our PFIC status annually based on tests which are factual in nature, and
our status in future years will depend on our income, assets and activities in those years. In addition,
because the market price of our ordinary shares is likely to fluctuate and because that market price may
affect the determination of whether we will be considered a PFIC, there can be no assurance that we will not
be considered a PFIC for any taxable year.
If, however, we were a PFIC for any taxable year during which a U.S. Holder held ordinary shares, gain
recognized by a U.S. Holder upon a disposition (including, under certain circumstances, a pledge) of
ordinary shares would be allocated ratably over the U.S. Holder's holding period for such shares. The
amounts allocated to the taxable year of disposition and to years before we became a PFIC would be taxed
as ordinary income. The amount allocated to each other taxable year would be subject to tax at the highest
rate in effect for that taxable year for individuals or corporations, as appropriate, and an interest charge would
be imposed on the tax attributable to the allocated amount. Further, to the extent that any distribution
received by a U.S. Holder on ordinary shares exceeds 125% of the average of the annual distributions on
such shares received during the preceding three years or the U.S. Holder's holding period, whichever is
shorter, that distribution would be subject to taxation in the same manner as gain, described immediately
above. Certain elections may be available that would result in alternative treatments (such as mark-to-market
treatment) of ordinary shares. We do not intend to provide information necessary for U.S. Holders to make
qualified electing fund elections if, contrary to our expectation, we are classified as a PFIC. U.S. Holders
should consult their tax advisers to determine whether any of these elections would be available and if so,
what the consequences of the alternative treatments would be in their particular circumstances.
If we are determined to be a PFIC, the general tax treatment for U.S. Holders described in this paragraph
would apply to indirect distributions and gains deemed to be realized by U.S. Holders in respect of any of our
subsidiaries that also may be determined to be PFICs.
If a U.S. Holder owns ordinary shares during any year in which the Company is a PFIC, the U.S. Holder
generally will be required to file an IRS Form 8621 with respect to the Company, generally, with the U.S.
Holder's federal income tax return for that year. If the Company were classified as a PFIC for a given taxable
year, then holders should consult their tax advisers concerning their annual filing requirements.
U.S. Holders should consult their tax advisers regarding whether we are a PFIC and the potential application
of the PFIC rules.
Medicare tax
Certain U.S. Holders that are individuals, estates or trusts are subject to a 3.8% tax on all or a portion of their
"net investment income," which may include all or a portion of their dividend income and net gains from the
disposition of ordinary shares. Each U.S. Holder that is an individual, estate or trust is urged to consult its tax
advisors regarding the applicability of the Medicare tax to its income and gains in respect of its investment in
the ordinary shares.
50
Information reporting and backup withholding
Payments of dividends and proceeds from the sale or other taxable disposition that are made within the
United States or through certain U.S.-related financial intermediaries generally are subject to information
reporting, and may be subject to backup withholding, unless (1) the U.S. Holder is a corporation or other
exempt recipient or (2) in the case of backup withholding, the U.S. Holder provides a correct taxpayer
identification number and certifies that it is not subject to backup withholding.
The amount of any backup withholding from a payment to a U.S. Holder will be allowed as a credit against a
U.S. Holder's U.S. federal income tax liability and may entitle such holder to a refund, provided that the
required information is timely furnished to the United States Internal Revenue Service.
Foreign asset reporting
Certain U.S. Holders who are individuals are required to report information relating to an interest in ordinary
shares, subject to certain exceptions (including an exception for ordinary shares held in accounts maintained
by U.S. financial institutions). U.S. Holders are urged to consult their tax advisors regarding their information
reporting obligations, if any, with respect to their ownership and disposition of ordinary shares.
(F)  DIVIDEND AND PAYING AGENTS
Not applicable.
(G)  STATEMENT BY EXPERTS
Not applicable.
(H)  DOCUMENTS ON DISPLAY
We are currently subject to the informational requirements of the Exchange Act applicable to foreign private
issuers. We fulfill these requirements by filing annual, quarterly and current reports and other information with
the SEC, which you can access using the means described above. As a foreign private issuer, we are
exempt from the rules under the Exchange Act relating to the furnishing and content of proxy statements, and
our officers, directors and principal shareholders will be exempt from the reporting and short swing profit
recovery provisions contained in Section 16 of the Exchange Act. In addition, we are not required under the
Exchange Act to file periodic reports and financial statements with the Securities and Exchange Commission
as frequently or as promptly as U.S. companies whose securities are registered under the Exchange Act.
However, we are required to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission, within four months after the
end of our fiscal year ended March 31, 2014 and each subsequent fiscal year, an annual report on Form 20-
F containing financial statements which will be examined and reported on, with an opinion expressed, by an
independent public accounting firm. We also intend to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission
reports on Form 6-K containing unaudited financial information for the first three quarters of each fiscal year,
within 90 days after the end of each quarter.
51
You may read and copy any document we file with the SEC without charge at the SEC's public reference
room at 100 F Street, N.E., Room 1580, Washington, D.C. 20549. You may also obtain copies of the
documents at prescribed rates by writing to the Public Reference Section of the SEC at 100 F Street, N.E.,
Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1 800 SEC 0330 for further information on the public
reference room. The SEC also maintains an Internet site that contains reports and other information
regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC. Our filings with the SEC are also available to the
public through this web site at http://www.sec.gov.
(I)  SUBSIDIARY INFORMATION
The documents concerning the Company’s subsidiaries referred to in this Annual Report may be inspected
at the Company's office at 47 Avenue Road, Suite 200, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5R 2G3.
ITEM 11 - QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
The Company is exposed in varying degrees to a number of risks arising from financial instruments.
Management’s close involvement in the operations allows for the identification of risks and variances from
expectations. The Company does not participate in the use of financial instruments to mitigate these risks
and has no designated hedging transactions. The Board approves and monitors the risk management
processes. The Board’s main objectives for managing risks are to ensure liquidity, the fulfilment of
obligations, the continuation of the Company’s search for new business participation opportunities, and
limited exposure to credit and market risks while ensuring greater returns on the surplus funds on hand.
There were no changes to the objectives or the process from the prior year.
A summary of the Company’s risk exposures as it relates to financial instruments are reflected below:
a)  Fair value of financial instruments
The Company’s financial assets and liabilities are comprised of cash, amounts receivable, prepaid
expenses, and accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
The Company classifies the fair value of these transactions according to the following fair value hierarchy
based on the amount of observable inputs used to value the instrument:
·
Level 1 - Values are based on unadjusted quoted prices available in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities as of the reporting date.
·
Level 2 - Values are based on inputs, including quoted forward prices for commodities, time value and
volatility factors, which can be substantially observed or corroborated in the marketplace. Prices in Level 2
are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
·
Level 3 - Values are based on prices or valuation techniques that are not based on observable market data.
Assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires judgment and
may affect the placement within the fair value hierarchy.
The Company’s financial instruments are exposed to certain financial risks: credit risk, liquidity risk, other
price risk and market risk.
52
b)  Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk of loss associated with a counter-party’s inability to fulfill its payment obligations. The
credit risk is attributable to various financial instruments, as noted below. The credit risk is limited to the
carrying value amount carried on the statement of financial position.
a.
Cash- Cash is held with a major international financial institution in Canada and a major law firm in the USA
and therefore the risk of loss is minimal.
b.
Other receivable - The Company is not exposed to major credit risk attributable to customers. A significant
portion of this amount is prepaid to BPI under a master service agreement.
c)  Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Company will encounter difficulty in satisfying financial obligations as they
become due.
The Company’s approach to managing liquidity is to ensure, as far as possible, that it will have sufficient
liquidity to meet its liabilities when due, under both normal and stressed conditions without incurring
unacceptable losses or risking harm to the Company’s reputation. The Company holds sufficient cash to
satisfy obligations under accounts payable and accruals.
The Company is in pre-clinical stage and is required to perform further research and development and also
fulfil its financial obligation of $ 1,750,000 to its subsidiary, Biohaven to retain its 54% equity in Biohaven.
The Company has not yet determined whether costs incurred and to be incurred are economically
recoverable. The Company's continuing operations are dependent upon any one of:
1.
the existence of economically recoverable medical or industrial solutions;
2.
the ability of the Company to obtain the necessary financing to complete the research; or
3.
future profitable production from, or proceeds from the disposition of intellectual property.
However, as a biotech company at an early stage of development and without significant internally
generated cash flows, there are inherent liquidity risks, including the possibility that additional financing may
not be available to the Company, or that actual drug development expenditures may exceed those planned.
The current uncertainty in global markets could have an impact on the Company’s future ability to access
capital on terms that are acceptable to the Company. There can be no assurance that required financing will
be available to the Company.
ITEM 12 - DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES OTHER THAN EQUITY SECURITIES
Not applicable.
PART II
ITEM 13 - DEFAULTS, DIVIDEND ARREARAGES AND DELINQUENCIES
None.
ITEM 14 - MATERIAL MODIFICATIONS TO THE RIGHTS OF SECURITY HOLDERS AND USE OF
PROCEEDS
None
53
ITEM 15 - CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
The Company’s disclosure controls and procedures, as such term is defined in Rules 13(a)-13(e) and 15(d)-
15(e) of the Exchange Act are designed to provide reasonable assurance that all relevant information is
communicated to senior management, including the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) and the Chief Financial
Officer (“CFO”), to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. We carried out an evaluation, under
the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our CEO and CFO. Based on this
evaluation these officers concluded that as of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report on Form
20-F, our disclosure controls and procedures were not effective to ensure that the information required to be
disclosed by our company in reports it files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed,
summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the rules and forms of the Securities and
Exchange Commission. These disclosure controls and procedures include controls and procedures
designed to ensure that such information is accumulated and communicated to the Company’s management,
including our company’s principal executive officer and principal financial officer, to allow timely decisions
regarding required disclosure. The conclusion that the disclosure controls and procedures were not effective
was due to the presence of a material weakness in internal control over financial reporting as identified
below under the heading “Internal Controls over Financial Reporting Procedures”. Management anticipates
that such disclosure controls and procedures will not be effective until the material weakness is remediated.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
The management of the Company, including the CEO and CFO, is responsible for establishing and
maintaining adequate internal controls over financial reporting (as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) under the
Exchange Act). The Company’s internal control system was designed to provide reasonable assurance to
the Company’s management and the board of directors regarding the reliability of financial reporting and
preparation and fair presentation of published financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
IFRS. Internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that:
1.
pertain to the maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect the transactions
and dispositions of the assets of the Company;
2.
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
statements in accordance with IFRS, and that receipts and expenditures of the Company are being made
only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the Company; and
3.
provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or
disposition of the Company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
All internal control systems, no matter how well designed, have inherent limitations. Therefore, even those
systems determined to be effective can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to financial
statement preparation and presentation. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
54
Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our CEO ,CFO and
Chairman, we conducted an evaluation of the design and operation of internal control over financial reporting
as of March 31, 2015, based on the framework set forth in Internal Control - Integrated Framework, issued by
the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
The CEO has instituted a system of disclosure controls for the Company to ensure proper and complete
disclosure of material information. The limited number of consultants and direct involvement of the CEO and
CFO facilitates access to real time information about developments in the business for drafting disclosure
documents. All documents are circulated to the board of directors and audit committee according to the
disclosure time-lines.
However, we have no accounting support staff to ensure segregation of duties and CFO handles all
accounting, banking and treasury functions under direct supervision from the chairman and CEO. Based on
this evaluation, management concluded that the Company’s ICFR was not effective as at March 31, 2015
due to the following material weakness:
Due to the limited number of staff with an appropriate level of technical accounting knowledge, experience
and training and the inability to attract outside expert advice on a cost effective basis, there is a risk of
material misstatements related to the accounting and reporting for complex transactions. This control
deficiency creates a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the annual financial statements
would not have been prevented or detected in a timely manner.
Attestation Report of the Registered Public Accounting Firm
This Annual Report does not include an attestation report of the Company's registered public accounting firm
regarding internal control over financial reporting. Management's report is not subject to attestation by the
Company's registered public accounting firm pursuant to rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission
that permit the Company to provide only management's report in this Annual Report.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting and Planned Remediation Activities
There have been no changes in the Company's internal controls identified in connection with the evaluation
described in the preceding paragraph that occurred during the period covered by this Annual Report on Form
20-F which have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company's internal
controls over financial reporting.
No remediation activities have been undertaken to date in fiscal 2016. Due to resource constraints and the
present stage of the Company’s development the Company does not have sufficient size and scale to
warrant the hiring of additional staff to correct this material weakness at this time.
ITEM 16(A) AUDIT COMMITTEE FINANCIAL EXPERTS
The Board of Directors has determined that Mr. James Mellon, who is an independent director, is an audit
committee financial expert as such term is defined in Rule 10A-3(b)(1) under the Exchange Act .
ITEM 16 (B) CODES OF ETHICS
We have adopted a Code of Ethics, which applies to all employees, consultants, officers and directors. A
copy of our current code of ethics was included in the exhibits to the fiscal 2014 annual report.
55
A copy of our Code of Ethics can be obtained by writing to our corporate office at 47 Avenue Road, Suite
200, Toronto, ON M5R 2G3 attention: Chief Financial  Officer.
During the most recently completed fiscal year, the Company has neither: (a) amended its Code of Ethics;
nor (b) granted any waiver (including any implicit waiver) form any provision of its Code of Ethics.
ITEM 16 (C) PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT’S FEES AND SERVICES
The following outlines the expenditures for accounting fees for the last two fiscal periods ended:
March 31,
 
Audit fee
Other services
2014
$  45,000
10,000
2014
$  45,000
2,413
Under our existing policies, the audit committee must approve all audit and non-audit related services
provided by the auditors.
ITEM 16 (D) - EXEMPTIONS FROM THE LISTING STANDARDS FOR AUDIT COMMITTEES
Not applicable.
ITEM 16 (E) - PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES BY THE ISSUER AND AFFILIATED
PURCHASERS
We did not, nor did any affiliated purchaser, purchase any of our equity securities during the fiscal year 2013.
ITEM 16 (F) - CHANGE IN REGISTRANT’S CERTIFYING ACCOUNTANT
Not applicable.
ITEM 16 (G) - CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Our securities are listed on the OTC QB and on Canadian Securities Exchange. There are no significant
ways in which our corporate governance practices differ from those followed by domestic companies under
the listing standards of that exchange except for proxy delivery requirements. As a foreign private issuer, the
Company is exempt from the proxy rules set forth in Sections 14(a), 14(b), 14(c) and 14(f) of the Act. The
Company solicits proxies in accordance with applicable rules and regulations in British Virgin Islands and
requirements of Ontario Securities Commission and applicable CSE rules.
PART III
ITEM 17 - FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Refer to Item 18 - Financial Statements
ITEM 18 - FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
See the Financial Statements and Exhibits listed in Item 19 hereof and filed as part of this Annual Report.
56
ITEM 19 - EXHIBITS
(a)  Financial Statements
Description of Document
Cover Sheet
Index
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
Consolidated Statement of Shareholders Equity
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to Consolidated  Financial Statements
Page No.
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
F7-26
(b)  Exhibits
The following documents are filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 20-F
1.1
1.2
4(c) (iv).1
4(c) (iv).2
4(c) (iv).3
 
11.1
11.2
11.3
 
12.1
12.2
13.1
13.2
Certificate of Continuance - Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to Form 6-K filed on
August 1, 2013.
 
Memorandum and Articles of Association - Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 99.2 to
Form 6-K filed on August 1, 2013.
 
2011 Consultant stock compensation plan - Incorporated herein by reference to Form S-8 filed
on April 21, 2011.
 
2013 Stock option plan - Incorporated herein by reference to Form S-8 filed on December 19,
2013.
 
2013 option plan - Incorporated herein by reference to Form S-8 filed on March 17, 2015.
 
Charter of audit and compensation committee regarding compensation matters - Incorporated
herein by reference to Form F-20 filed on July 17, 2014.
 
Charter of audit and compensation committee regarding audit matters - Incorporated herein by
reference to Form F-20 filed on July 17, 2014.
 
Code of conduct - Incorporated herein by reference to Form F-20 filed on July 17, 2014.
 
Certifications of Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) under the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
 
Certifications of Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Rule 13a-14(a) or 15d-14(a) under the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
 
Certification of Chief Executive Officer Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002.
 
Certification of Chief Financial Officer Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002.
57
SIGNATURES
The Company hereby certifies that it meets all of the requirements for filing on Form 20-F and it has duly
caused and authorized the undersigned to sign this Annual Report on its behalf.
DATED at Toronto, Ontario, Canada, this 28th day of July, 2015
PORTAGE BIOTECH  INC.
Per: /s/ Declan Doogan
Title: Chief Executive Officer
Per: /s/ Kam Shah
Title: Chief Financial Officer
58
Portage Biotech Inc.
Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended March 31, 2015 and 2014
(US Dollars)

1
Portage Biotech Inc.
Consolidated Financial Statements
For the Years Ended March 31, 2015 and 2014
(US Dollars)
Index
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
Consolidated Statement of Shareholders Equity
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to Consolidated  Financial Statements
Page No.
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
F7-26
F-1
Schwartz Levitsky Feldman llp
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
LICENSED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS
TORONTO * MONTREAL
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT OF REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Shareholders of Portage Biotech Inc.
We  have  audited  the  accompanying  consolidated  financial  statements  of  Portage  Biotech  Inc.,  which
comprise the consolidated statements of financial position as at March 31, 2015 and March 31, 2014, and the
consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, changes in shareholders’ equity and cash
flows for the years ended March 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 and a summary of significant accounting policies
and other explanatory information.
Management's Responsibility for the Consolidated Financial Statements
Management  is  responsible  for  the  preparation  and  fair  presentation  of  these  consolidated  financial
statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International
Accounting  Standards  Board,  and  for  such  internal  control  as  management  determines  is  necessary  to
enable the preparation of consolidated financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether
due to fraud or error.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements based on our audits.
  We  conducted  our  audits  in  accordance  with  Canadian  generally  accepted  auditing  standards  and  the
standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).  Those standards require that
we comply with ethical requirements and plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the consolidated financial statements are free from material misstatement. We were not engaged to
perform an audit of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Our audits included consideration
of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing audit procedures that are appropriate in
the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
2300 Yonge Street, Suite 1500, Box 2434
Toronto, Ontario M4P 1E4
Tel:  416 785 5353
Fax:  416 785 5663
F-2
An audit involves performing procedures to obtain audit evidence about the amounts and disclosures in the
consolidated financial statements. The procedures selected depend on the auditor’s judgment, including the
assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to
fraud or error. An audit also includes evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness  of  accounting  estimates  made  by  management,  as  well  as  evaluating  the  overall
presentation of the consolidated financial statements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained in our audits is sufficient and appropriate to provide a
basis for our audit opinion.
Opinion
In  our  opinion,  the  consolidated  financial  statements  present  fairly,  in  all  material  respects,  the  financial
position of Portage Biotech Inc. as at March 31, 2015 and March 31, 2014, and its financial performance and
its cash flows for the years ended March 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 in accordance with International Financial
Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board.
Emphasis of Matter
Without qualifying our opinion, we draw attention to Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements which
indicates  that  the  Company  has  accumulated  losses  totaling  $9,452,864  and  negative  cash  flows  from
operating activities of $2,613,769. These conditions, along with other matters as set forth in Note 1 indicate
the existence of material uncertainties that raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as
a going concern.
July 28, 2015
Toronto, Ontario
Chartered Accountants
Licensed Public Accountants
“SCHWARTZ LEVITSKY FELDMAN LLP”
2300 Yonge Street, Suite 1500, Box 2434
Toronto, Ontario M4P 1E4
Tel:  416 785 5353
Fax:  416 785 5663
F-3
Portage Biotech Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
(US Dollars)
As at March 31,
 
Assets
Current
    Cash
    Advances and other receivable
 
 
Long-term assets
   Goodwill
   Office equipment and furniture
 
Total assets
Liabilities and Shareholders' equity
Note
2015
2014
4
5
$1,718,289
17,575
$1,735,864
$2,032,058
227,233
$2,259,291
3,000,000
-
$4,735,864
3,000,000
4,122
$5,263,413
Liabilities and Shareholders' equity
Current liabilities
    Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
 
 
Shareholders' Equity
Capital stock
Stock option reserve
Warrants
Deficit
Total Shareholders' equity
Non-controlling interests
Total equity
Total liabilities and Shareholders' equity
Commitments and Contingent Liabilities (Note 10)
Related Party Transactions (Note 12)
6
7(a)
8(i)
620,560
$620,560
9,691,715
1,312,519
1,108,402
(9,452,864)
$2,659,772
$1,455,532
4,115,304
$4,735,864
191,972
$191,972
7,256,715
362,440
1,108,402
(6,334,433)
$2,393,124
$2,678,317
5,071,441
$5,263,413
On behalf of the Board
“Kam Shah”
(signed)
Director
“Declan Doogan”
Director
(signed)
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-4
Portage Biotech Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
(US Dollars)
May 23, 2012
to
Note
11 and 12(ii)
Years ended
 
Expenses
   Acquisition related costs
   Research and development
   Consulting fees
    Professional fees
    Other operating costs
    Bank charges and interest
 
   Amortization of office furniture and equipment
 
    Write off of office furniture and equipment
 
 
Net loss and comprehensive loss for year
 
 
 
Net loss  and comprehensive loss attributable to: 
 
   Owners of the Company
 
    Non-controlling interest
 
 
Basic and diluted loss per share
 
    Net Loss per share
12(i)
6(i)
9
26,976
2015
2014
2,928,639
1,072,700
224,033
91,686
20,036
-
4,122
March 31, 2013 *
 
 
$  - $3,839,398 
1,135,779
1,162,362 
335,692 
148,884
3,351
1,164 
- 
$4,341,216 $6,626,630
$(4,341,216)$(6,626,630)
 
 
 
 
(3,118,431) (6,304,947)
(1,222,785)
(321,683) 
$(4,341,216)$(6,626,630)
 
 
$(0.04)
$29,486
$(29,486)
$(0.02)
2,470
40
(29,486)
$(29,486)
$(0.00)
* Comparatives for fiscal period 2013 are for Portage Pharma Ltd (accounting acquirer) which was
incorporated on May 23, 2012
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-5
Portage Biotech Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity
For the Year ended March 31, 2015
(US Dollars)
Number of
Shares
81,759,076
Capital
Stock
503,495
81,759,076 $ 503,495
Stock
Option
Reserve Warrants
Non-
Accumulated
controlling
Deficit
interest
$  -
$  -
(29,486) 
 
(29,486)
81,759,076 1,761,413
1,108,402
Total
Equity
$ 503,495
(29,486)
$  - $ 474,009
2,869,815
3,826,325
175,000
299,482
691,000
362,440
3,000,000 3,000,000
(321,683)(6,626,630)
$
2,678,317
$
5,071,441
238,221
711,858
-
315,000
2,000,000
100,000
(100,000)
120,000
(6,304,947)
$ (6,334,433)
Balance, May 23, 2012
 
Net loss for period
 
Balance, March 31, 2013
 
Issued on reverse
acquisition
Issued for financial
advisory services relating
to the acquisition
transaction
Exercise of warrants
Exercise of options
Value of shares issued as
compensation
Value of options issued
Acquisition of Biohaven
Net loss for year
Options vested
Options of subsidiaries
vested
Conversion of debts and
coupons
Issued under private
placement
commitment fee settled in
shares
private placement
underwriting costs
Value of shares issued as
compensation
Net loss for year
Balance, March 31, 2014 180,775,790
9,811,091 3,826,325
1,450,000
1,996,547
175,000 
299,482
4,000,000
691,000
$
7,256,715
362,440
$ 362,440
$
1,108,402
 
238,221 
711,858
3,500,001
315,000
20,000,000 2,000,000
1,000,000
100,000
(100,000)
1,500,000
120,000
$
Balance,  March 31, 2015 206,775,791
$
$ $ (9,452,864)
$
$
(3,118,431)(1,222,785)(4,341,216)
Balance,  March 31, 2015 206,775,791
$
9,691,715
$
1,312,519
$
1,108,402
$ (9,452,864)
$
1,455,532
$
4,115,304
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-8
Portage Biotech Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(US Dollars)
May 23, 2012
to
Year ended March 31,
Cash flows from operating activities
   Net loss for year
Adjustments for non-cash items:
   Amortization   of office equipment and furniture
    Write off of office  furniture and equipment
   Value of shares and options expensed as consulting fee
2015
2014
March 31, 2013
$ (4,341,216)
(6,626,630)
(29,486)
-
4,122
1,164
-
(Note 11)
     Value of options expensed as research and development
   Interest settled in shares
876,221
136,632
15,000
1,053,440
-
Acquisition related costs
Net change in working capital components
-
3,826,325
Net change in working capital components
   Other receivables
   Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
 
 
Cash flows from financing activities
   Cash received on reverse acquisition
   Options and warrants  exercised
   Capital contribution (Note 6 (i) and (ii))
Increase (decrease) in cash during year
Cash at beginning of year
Cash at end of year
 
Supplemental disclosures
Non-cash investing activities
Value of shares and warrants issued on acquisition
209,658
485,814
(73,270)
(116,447)
$ (2,613,769) $ (1,935,418)
-
-
2,300,000
3,006,593
474,482
295,441
$ 2,300,000 $ 3,776,516
 
1,841,098
190,960
$ 1,718,289 $ 2,032,058
(313,769)
2,032,058
-
-
(2,869,815)
(2,869,815)
12,392
$ (17,094)
208,054
$ 208,054
 
190,960
-
$ 190,960
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
F-9
Portage Biotech Inc.
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(US Dollars)
March 31, 2015 and 2014
1.  NATURE OF OPERATIONS AND GOING CONCERN
Portage Biotech Inc. (“the Company”) was operating as an Ontario, Canada incorporated company, Bontan
Corporation Inc. (“Bontan”), until July 5, 2013. On July 5, 2013 Bontan changed its name to the current name
and was issued a certificate of Continuance by the Registrar of Corporate Affairs of the British Virgin Islands
(“BVI”).
The  Company  now  continues  as  a  BVI  incorporated  company  with  its  registered  office  located  at  FH
Chambers, P.O. Box 4649, Road Town, Tortola, BVI. Its Toronto agent is located at 47 Avenue Road, Suite
200, Toronto, Ontario, M5R 2G3, Canada.
The  Company  is  a  reporting  issuer  with  the  Ontario  Securities  Commission  and  US  Securities  and
Exchange Commission and its shares trade on the OTC Markets under the trading symbol “PTGEF,” and are
also listed for trading in US currency on the Canadian Securities Exchange under the symbol “PBT.U”.
The Company is engaged in researching and developing pharmaceutical and biotech products through to
clinical  “proof  of  concept”  with  an  initial  focus  on  unmet  clinical  needs.  Following  proof  of  concept,  the
Company will look to sell or license the products to large pharmaceutical companies for further development
and commercialization.
The Company is in the pre-clinical stage, and as such no revenue has been generated from its operations.
The  Company  has  accumulated  losses  of  approximately  $9  million  and  has  negative  cash  flows  from
operating activities of approximately $2.6 million during the year ended March 31, 2015.
Management  has  secured  sufficient  equity  financing  which  it  believes  will  enable  it  to  complete  its  pre-
clinical work and other commitments. However, it will require additional resources to continue into clinical
trials and/or for additional acquisitions The Company continues to obtain financing, although there are no
assurances  that  the  management’s  plan  will  be  realized.  These  conditions  indicate  the  existence  of  a
material  uncertainty  that  raises  substantial  doubt  about  the  Company’s  ability  to  continue  as  a  going
concern. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability
and classification of recorded asset amounts, or the amounts and classification of liabilities, which might be
necessary should the Company be unable to continue its operations.
2.  BASIS OF PRESENTATION
(a)  Statement of Compliance and Basis of presentation
These  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  in  accordance  with  International  Financial
Reporting  Standards  (“IFRS”)  issued  by  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“IASB”),  and
interpretations of the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee.
These  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  on  a  historical  cost  basis  except  for  stock
based compensation and warrants which are measured at fair value as detailed in Notes 7 and 8 to these
financial  statements.    In  addition,  these  consolidated  financial  statements  have  been  prepared  using  the
accrual basis of accounting, except for cash flow information.
The Company has no requirement to report on segments as it operates as only one segment.
F-10
2.  BASIS OF PRESENTATION  (cont’d)
These consolidated financial statements were approved and authorized for issue by the Audit Committee
and Board of Directors on July 28, 2015.
b)  Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and,
a.
Portage Services Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary incorporated in Ontario on January 31, 2011.
b.
Portage Pharmaceuticals Ltd. a wholly owned subsidiary resulting from a merger on July 23, 2013 and is
incorporated under the laws of the British Virgin Islands, as a BVI business company.
c.
Biohaven Pharmaceutical Holding Company Limited (“Biohaven”), a private corporation incorporated in BVI
on September 25, 2013. The Company acquired approximately 54% equity in Biohaven on January 6, 2014.
All inter-company balances and transactions have been eliminated on consolidation.
(c)  Functional and presentation currency
The Company’s functional and presentation currency is US Dollar.
(d)  Use of Estimates and judgments
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires management to
make  judgments,  estimates  and  assumptions  that  affect  the  application  of  accounting  policies  and  the
reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Estimates  and  underlying  assumptions  are  reviewed  on  an  ongoing  basis.  Revisions  to  accounting
estimates are recognized in the period in which the estimates are revised and in any future periods affected.
Significant  areas  where  estimation  uncertainty  and  critical  judgments  are  applied  include  valuation  of
financial  instruments,  research  and  development  costs,  fair  value  used  for  acquisition,  assessment  of
impairment in goodwill and other intangible assets and measurement of share- based compensation.
3.  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The  accounting  policies  set  out  below  have  been  applied  consistently  to  all  periods  presented  in  these
consolidated  financial  statements,  which  have,  in  management’s  opinion,  been  properly  prepared  within
reasonable limits of materiality and within the framework of the significant accounting policies summarized
below:
Financial instruments
Financial assets
All  financial  assets  are  initially  recorded  at  fair  value  and  are  designated  upon  inception  into  one  of  the
following four categories: held-to-maturity, available-for-sale, loans and receivables or at fair value through
profit or loss (“FVTPL”).
F-11
3.  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES  (cont’d)
Financial  assets  classified  as  FVTPL  are  measured  at  fair  value  with  unrealized  gains  and  losses
recognized through earnings. The Company’s cash is classified as FVTPL.
Financial  assets  classified  as  loans  and  receivables  are  measured  at  amortized  cost  using  the  effective
interest method. The Company’s advances and other receivables are classified as loans and receivables.
Transactions  costs  associated  with  FVTPL  financial  assets  are  expensed  as  incurred,  while  transaction
costs associated with all other financial assets are included in the initial carrying amount of the asset.
Financial liabilities
All financial liabilities are initially recorded at fair value and designated upon inception as FVTPL or other
financial liabilities.
Financial liabilities classified as other financial liabilities are initially recognized at fair value less directly
attributable transaction costs. After initial recognition, other financial liabilities are subsequently measured at
amortized cost using the effective interest method. The Company’s trade and other payables are classified
as other financial liabilities.
The  effective  interest  method  is  a  method  of  calculating  the  amortized  cost  of  a  financial  liability  and  of
allocating  interest  expense  over  the  relevant  period.  The  effective  interest  rate  is  the  rate  that  exactly
discounts  estimated  future  cash  payments  through  the  expected  life  of  the  financial  liability,  or,  where
appropriate, a shorter period.
Impairment of financial assets
The  Company  assesses  at  each  date  of  the  statement  of  financial  position  whether  a  financial  asset  is
impaired.
Assets carried at amortized cost
If there is objective evidence that an impairment loss on assets carried at amortized cost has been incurred,
the amount of the loss is measured as the difference between the asset’s carrying amount and the present
value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the financial asset’s original effective interest rate. The
carrying amount of the asset is then reduced by the amount of the impairment. The amount of the loss is
recognized in profit or loss.
If, in a subsequent period, the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related
objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognized, the previously recognized impairment
loss is reversed to the extent that the carrying value of the asset does not exceed what the amortized cost
would have been had the impairment not been recognized. Any subsequent reversal of an impairment loss is
reversed through profit or loss.
Foreign currency translation
The functional and presentation currency of the Company and its subsidiaries (note 2(c)) is the US dollar.
Monetary assets and liabilities are translated at exchange rates in effect at the balance sheet date.  Non-
monetary assets are translated at exchange rates in effect when they were acquired. Revenue and expenses
are  translated  at  the  approximate  average  rate  of  exchange  for  the  period,  except  that  amortization  is
translated at the rates used to translate related assets. Foreign currency differences arising on retranslation
are recognised in profit or loss.
F-12
3.  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES  (cont’d)
Share-based payments
The Company accounts for share-based payments granted to directors, officers, employees and consultants
using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of the plan at the grant date. Share-
based payments to employees, officers and directors  are  recorded  and  reflected  as  an  expense  over  the
vesting period with a corresponding amount reflected in stock option reserve. On exercise, the associated
amounts previously recorded in the stock option reserve are transferred to the common share capital.
The quoted market price of the Company’s shares on the date of issuance under any share- based plan is
considered as fair value of the shares issued.
Share-based  payments  to  non-employees  are  recognized  and  measured  at  the  date  the  services  are
received based on the fair value of the services received unless if the fair value of the services cannot be
reliably measured in which case it is based on the fair value of equity instruments issued using the Black-
Scholes option pricing model.
Accounting for equity units
When the Company issues Units under a private placement comprising of common shares and warrants, the
Company  follows  the  relative  fair  value  method  of  accounting  for  warrants  attached  to  and  issued  with
common shares of the Company. Under this method, the fair value of warrants issued is estimated using a
Black-Scholes option pricing model which is added to fair value of the common shares determined using the
stock price at the date of issuance and the percentage relative to the fair values determined. The fair value of
the  common  shares  and  the  warrants  are  proportionately  adjusted  to  the  net  proceeds  received.  The  fair
value is then related to the total of the net proceeds received on issuance of the common shares.
Loss per Share
Basic loss per share is calculated by dividing net loss (the numerator) by the weighted average number of
common shares outstanding (the denominator) during the period.  Diluted loss per share reflects the dilution
that would occur if outstanding stock options and share purchase warrants were exercised or converted into
common  shares  using  the  treasury  stock  method  and  are  calculated  by  dividing  net  loss  applicable  to
common  shares  by  the  sum  of  the  weighted  average  number  of  common  shares  outstanding  and  all
additional common shares that would have been outstanding if potentially dilutive common shares had been
issued.
The inclusion of the Company’s stock options and share purchase warrants in the computation of diluted
loss  per  share  would  have  an  anti-dilutive  effect  on  loss  per  share  and  are  therefore  excluded  from  the
computation.  Consequently, there is no difference between basic loss per share and diluted loss per share.
Research and Development Expenses
(i)  Research and development
Expenditure  on  research  activities,  undertaken  with  the  prospect  of  gaining  new  scientific  or  technical
knowledge and understanding, is recognized in profit or loss as incurred.
F-13
3.  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES  (cont’d)
Development activities involve a plan or design for the production of new or substantially improved products
and  processes.  Development  expenditures  are  capitalized  only  if  development  costs  can  be  measured
reliably,  the  product  or  process  is  technically  and  commercially  feasible,  future  economic  benefits  are
probable, and the Company intends to and has sufficient resources to complete development and to use or
sell the asset. No development costs have been capitalized to date.
Research  and  development  expenses  include  all  direct  and  indirect  operating  expenses  supporting  the
products in development.
(ii)  Subsequent expenditure
Subsequent expenditure is capitalized only when it increases the future economic benefits embodied in the
specific asset to which it relates. All other expenditures are recognized in profit or loss as incurred.
(iii)  Clinical trial expenses:
Clinical  trial  expenses  are  a  component  of  the  Company’s  research  and  development  costs.  These
expenses include fees paid to contract research organizations, clinical sites, and other organizations who
conduct development activities on the Company’s behalf. The amount of clinical trial expenses recognized in
a period related to clinical agreements are based on estimates of the work performed using an accrual basis
of accounting. These estimates incorporate factors such as patient enrolment, services provided, contractual
terms, and prior experience with similar contracts
Intangible assets
Intangible  assets  that  are  acquired  separately  and  have  finite  useful  lives  are  measured  at  cost  less
accumulated  amortization  and  accumulated  impairment  losses.  Subsequent  expenditures  are  capitalized
only when they increase the future economic benefits embodied in the specific asset to which it relates.
Costs incurred in obtaining a patent are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the legal life
of the respective patent, ranging from five to twenty years, or its economic life, if shorter. Costs incurred in
obtaining  a  trademark  are  capitalized  and  amortized  on  a  straight-line  basis  over  the  legal  life  of  the
respective trademark, being ten years, or its economic life, if shorter. Costs incurred in obtaining a customer
list are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over its estimated economic life of approximately
ten years.
Costs  incurred  in  successfully  obtaining  a  patent,  trademark  or  customer  list  are  measured  at  cost  less
accumulated amortization and accumulated impairment losses. The cost of servicing the Company's patents
and trademarks are expensed as incurred.
At each year end, the Company reviews the carrying amounts of the intangible assets to determine whether
there is any indication that those assets have suffered an impairment loss. If any such indication exists, the
recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss (if any).
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses which are
not  reversed.  Goodwill  is  allocated  to  the  cash  generating  unit  expected  to  benefit  from  the  business
combination in which the goodwill arose, for the purpose of impairment testing.
F-14
3.  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES  (cont’d)
Business Combinations
The  Company  applies  the  acquisition  method  to  account  for  all  acquired  businesses,  whereby  the
identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed are measured at their acquisition-date fair values
(with few exceptions as required by IFRS 3 Business Combinations).
The consideration transferred in a business combination is measured at fair value, which is calculated as the
sum  of  the  acquisition-date  fair  values  of  the  assets  transferred,  the  liabilities  incurred  and  the  equity
interests issued by the Company.
Acquisition-related  costs  (e.g.  finder’s  fees,  consulting  fees,  administrative  costs,  etc.)  are  recognized  as
expenses in the periods in which the costs are incurred and the services are received.
On acquisition date, goodwill is measured as the excess of the aggregate of consideration transferred, any
non-controlling interests in the acquiree, and acquisition-date fair value of the Company's previously held
equity interest in the acquiree (if business combination achieved in stages) over the net of the acquisition-
date amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed.
If, after appropriate reassessment, the amount as calculated above is negative, it is recognized immediately
in profit or loss as a bargain purchase gain.
At acquisition date, non-controlling interests in the acquiree that are present ownership interests and entitle
their holders to a proportionate share of the entity's net assets in the event of liquidation are measured at
either fair value or the present ownership instruments’ proportionate share in the recognized amounts of the
acquiree's  identifiable  net  assets.  This  choice  of  measurement  is  made  separately  for  each  business
combination.  Other  components  of  non-controlling  interests  are  measured  at  their  acquisition-date  fair
values, unless otherwise required by IFRS.
The acquisition-date fair value of any contingent consideration is recognized as part of the consideration
transferred  by  the  Company  in  exchange  for  the  acquiree.  Changes  in  the  fair  value  of  contingent
consideration that result from additional information obtained during the measurement period (maximum one
year  from  the  acquisition  date)  about  facts  and  circumstances  that  existed  at  the  acquisition  date  are
adjusted retrospectively against goodwill.
Provisions
A provision is recognized if, as a result of a past event, the Company has a present legal or constructive
obligation  that  can  be  estimated  reliably,  and  it  is  probable  that  an  outflow  of  economic  benefits  will  be
required to settle the obligation. Provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at
a pre-tax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the
liability. The unwinding of the discount is recognized as finance cost.
Contingent liability:
A contingent liability is a possible obligation that arises from past events and of which the existence will be
confirmed only by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more uncertain future events not within the
control of the Corporation; or a present obligation that arises from past events (and therefore exists), but is
not recognized because it is not probable that a transfer or use of assets, provision of services or any other
transfer of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation; or the amount of the obligation cannot
be estimated reliably.
F-15
3.  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES  (cont’d)
Determination of fair value
A number of the Company’s accounting policies and disclosures required the determination of fair value,
both for financial and non-financial assets and liabilities. Fair values have been determined for measurement
and/or disclosure purposes based on the following methods. When applicable, further information about the
assumptions made in determining fair values is disclosed in the notes specific to that asset or liability.
a)
The fair value of advances and receivable and accounts payable and accruals is estimated as the present
value of future cash flows, discounted at the market rate of interest at the reporting date.
b)
The fair value of stock options is measured using a Black Scholes option pricing model. Measurement inputs
include  share  price  on  measurement  date,  exercise  price  of  the  instrument,  expected  volatility  (based  on
weighted  average  historic  volatility  adjusted  for  changes  expected  due  to  publicly  available  information),
weighted average expected life of the instruments (based on historical experience and general option holder
behavior), expected dividends, and the risk-free interest rate (based on government bonds).
Income Tax
The Company is a British Virgin Island corporation. The Government of British Virgin Islands does not, under
existing legislation, impose any income, corporate or capital gains tax, estate duty, inheritance tax, gift tax or
withholding  tax  upon  the  Company  or  its  security  holders.  The  British  Virgin  Islands  is  not  party  to  any
double taxation treaties.
Notwithstanding the above, the Company complies with IAS 12 which provides for the following:
Income tax expense comprises current and deferred tax. Income tax expense is recognized in profit or loss
except to the extent that it relates to items recognized directly in equity, in which case it is recognized in
equity.
Current  tax  is  the  expected  tax  payable  on  the  taxable  income  for  the  year,  using  tax  rates  enacted  or
substantively enacted at the reporting date, and any adjustments to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax is recognized using the balance sheet method, providing for temporary differences between the
carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation
purposes. Deferred tax is not recognized on the initial recognition of assets or liabilities in a transaction that
is not a business combination. In addition, deferred tax is not recognized for taxable temporary differences
arising on the initial recognition of goodwill. Deferred tax is measured at the tax rates that are expected to be
applied  to  temporary  differences  when  they  reverse,  based  on  the  laws  that  have  been  enacted  or
substantively enacted by the reporting date. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset if there is a legally
enforceable right to offset, and they relate to income taxes levied by the same tax authority on the same
taxable entity, or on different tax entities, but they intend to settle current tax liabilities and assets on a net
basis or their tax assets and liabilities will be realized simultaneously.
A deferred tax asset is recognized to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available
against which the temporary difference can be utilized. Deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting
date and are reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realized.
F-16
3.  SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES  (cont’d)
No deferred tax asset has been recognized for losses incurred as the entities in which the losses arose are
in the British Virgin Islands.
There were no significant tax liabilities or assets nor any interest and penalties at March 31, 2015 and 2014.
The Company is currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments,
accruals or material deviation from its position.
Changes in Accounting Policies Adopted
Offsetting Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities (Amendments to IAS 32)
Effective for annual periods beginning on or after April  1, 2014, on a retrospective basis. The adoption of this
standard did not have a material impact on the financial position and results of the Corporation.
Recoverable Amount Disclosures for Non-Financial Assets: Amendments to IAS 36
The IASB has published Recoverable Amount Disclosures for Non-Financial Assets (Amendments to IAS
36). These narrow-scope amendments to IAS 36, Impairment of Assets, address the disclosure of information
about the recoverable amount of impaired assets if that amount is based on fair value less costs of disposal.
The amendments are to be applied retrospectively for annual periods beginning on or after April  1, 2014.
The adoption of this standard did not have an impact on the disclosures presented in these consolidated
financial statements.
New standards and interpretations not yet adopted
Standards issued but not yet effective up to the date of issuance of the Company‘s consolidated financial
statements  are  listed  below.  This  listing  is  of  standards  and  interpretations  issued  which  the  Company
reasonably expects to be applicable at a future date. The Company intends to adopt those standards when
they become effective.
IFRS 9 ‐ Financial Instruments
The IASB intends to replace IAS 39, Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurements, with IFRS 9,
Financial Instruments. IFRS 9 will be published in six phases, of which the first phase has been published.
For financial assets, IFRS 9 uses a single approach to determine whether a financial asset is measured at
amortized cost or fair value, and replaces the multiple rules in IAS 39. The approach in IFRS 9 is based on
how an entity manages its financial instruments in the context of its business model and the contractual cash
flow characteristics of the financial assets. The new standard also requires a single impairment method to be
used.  For  financial  liabilities,  the  approach  to  the  fair  value  option  may  require  different  accounting  for
changes to the fair value of a financial liability as a result of changes to an entity’s own credit risk.
IFRS 9 (2014) is effective for the Company for annual periods beginning on April 1, 2018, but is available for
early adoption. The Company has yet to assess the full impact of IFRS 9.
F-17
4.  CASH
Cash includes $ 1,201,509(2014: $899,064) held in trust by a US lawyer, pending opening of a bank account
by Biohaven. There are no restrictions on use of cash.
5. GOODWILL
On January 6, 2014, the Company acquired approximately 54% equity in Biohaven. The initial accounting for
the  business  combination  was  incomplete  by  the  end  of  the  reporting  period  in  which  the  combination
occurred  and  as  a  result  the  Company  had  reported  provisional  amounts  for  the  items  during  the
measurement  period  (which  cannot  exceed  one  year  from  January  6,  2014)  and  which  may  result  in
additional assets or liabilities, including income taxes, being recognized, to reflect new information obtained
about facts and circumstances that existed at the acquisition date that, if known, would have affected the
amounts recognized at that date.
The intangible asset comprised a license from Yale University to use the patents for the development of a
new drug. As the development of the new drug was at a pre-clinical stage and the precise nature of drug
candidates to test commercially was not identifiable at that stage, the Company decided on the measurement
date to assign the entire amount to goodwill.
The Company assesses the recoverability of the carrying value of goodwill on an annual basis as of March
31, and whenever events occur or when circumstances change that would, more likely than not, indicate that
the fair value of our reporting unit (Biohaven) is below its carrying value.
For the purpose of impairment testing, goodwill is attributable to Biohaven, which is considered a CGU.
The recoverable amount of Biohaven was estimated based on a value in use calculation, which involved
discounting the future cash flows expected to be generated from the continuing operations of the CGU.
The discounted cash flow model is based on projections through 2029, which is the year of expiry of the
patents  relating  to  the  drug  under  current  development.  The  projections  assume  that  the  current  drug
development  efforts  will  result  in  a  commercially  marketable  drug  by  2020.  No  terminal  growth  was
recognized  at  this  stage.    Projected  cash  flows  included  in  the  calculation  were  based  upon  Biohaven’s
approved financial forecasts and strategic plan, which incorporate Biohaven’s current drug candidate as well
as management’s expectations regarding future business activity. The discount rate used as key assumption
in the estimation of the value in use was 30%
The discount rate was determined based on Biohaven’s internal weighted average cost of capital, adjusted
for the marginal return a market participant would expect to earn on an investment in the entity. It represents
a nominal figure. The rate is consistent with forecast economic growth rates observed in the market.
Other  key  assumptions  include  price  forecasts  and  perpetual  cash  flows  relating  to  the  current  drug
candidate.  Prices  of  similar  products  applied  in  the  calculation  were  based  on  approved  internal  price
forecasts, which reflect management’s experience and industry expertise. These prices are consistent with
expected long-term prices observed in the market.
The Company has validated the results of the value in use calculation by performing sensitivity tests on its
key assumptions.
As  a  result  of  these  tests,  the  Company  believes  that  any  reasonably  possible  changes  in  the  key
assumptions would not result in Biohaven’s carrying amount exceeding its recoverable amount.
F-18
6.  CAPITAL STOCK
(a)  Authorized:  Unlimited number of common shares
(b)  Issued
As at March 31,
2015
2014
Common  
Shares
Amount
Common  
Shares
Amount
Balance, beginning of year
Issued on acquisition of PPL  
Issued for financial advisory services in
connection with the acquisition of PPL
Conversion of debts and coupons (i)
Issued under private placement (ii)
Commitment fee settled in shares (ii)
Underwriting costs
Exercise of warrants
Exercise of options
Shares
180,775,790
Amount
$
7,256,715
Shares
Amount
81,759,076 $ 503,495
-
-
- 81,759,076 1,761,413
-
9,811,091 3,826,325
315,000 
3,500,001
20,000,000 2,000,000 
100,000 
1,000,000
(100,000) 
-
-
-
-
1,450,000
1,996,547
175,000
299,482
Shares issued as compensation ( iii)
1,500,000
Balance , end of year
206,775,791
120,000
$
9,691,715
4,000,000
180,775,790
691,000
$
7,256,715
(i)  On July 24, 2014, The Company raised $ 300,000 through issuance of convertible promissory notes to
three lenders, each advancing $ 100,000. Two of the lenders are the directors of the Company. The note was
for one year, carried a 5% coupon, payable in shares, to be valued at 10% discount to the next financing, due
on maturity at the time of conversion or repayment. The amount repayable under the notes was convertible at
the lender’s’ option into common shares of the Company at the time of the next financing to be priced at the
price set for the next financing discounted by 10%. On September 29, 2014, all notes and related coupons
were settled through issuance of 3,500,001 restricted common shares at the option of the note holders. The
common  shares  were  valued  at  $  0.09  being  the  price  of  $  0.10  per  common  share  of  a  recent  private
placement ( see (ii) below) discounted by 10% as per the conversion terms. $ 15,000 being the value of the
coupons was expensed as interest cost.
(ii)  On October 15, 2014, the Company completed a private placement comprising non-brokered offering of
20 million restricted common shares at a price of US$ 0.10 per share for gross proceeds of $ 2 million to
accredited investors .Two directors of the Company who  agreed to provide standby commitments in respect
of the Private Placement by subscribing for that portion of the Private Placement not otherwise subscribed for
  by  outside  investors,  up  to  a  maximum  of  US$  1  million  each,  received  a  standby  commitment  fee  of
$50,000  each,  settled  in  one  million  restricted  common  shares  of  the  Company.  These  two  directors
subscribed for 11.4 million shares for $1,140,000.
(iii)  On March 4, 2015, the Chairman was issued one and a half million shares under the 2011 Consultants
Compensation Plan in lieu of cash fee for services provided. The shares were valued at $120,000 based on
the  market  price  of  the  Company’s  common  shares  prevailing  on  the  dates  of  their  issuance.  Since  the
shares were issued without any conditions of forfeiture or cancellation, the entire value was expensed during
the year ended March 31, 2015 as consulting fee (note 11).
F-19
6.  CAPITAL STOCK  (cont’d)
On  December  12,  2013,  the  Chairman  and  CEO  were  issued  one  and  a  half  million  shares  each,  as
restricted  shares  and  on  December  16,  2013,  the  CFO  was  issued  one  million  shares  under  the  2011
Consultants Compensation Plan in lieu of cash fee for services provided and to be provided. The shares
were valued at $691,000 based on the market price of the Company’s common shares prevailing on the
dates of their issuance. Since the shares were issued without any conditions of forfeiture or cancellation, the
entire value was expensed during the year ended March 31, 2014 as consulting fee (Note 11).
(iv)  As at March 31, 2015, the Company had the following active Consultant Stock Compensation Plan:
Registered
Issued to
As at
Balance
at
Date of
shares
March 31,
April 1,
( see (iii )
Cancelled
March 31,
registration*
2011 Plan 11-Apr-11
under Plan
6,000,000 (1,938,333)4,061,667(1,500,000)
above)
2014
2014
(i)
-
2015
2,561,667
*    Registered  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  of  the  United  States  of  America  (SEC)  as
required under the Securities Act of 1933.
As at March 31, 2014, the Company had the following active Consultant Stock Compensation Plan:
Registered
Issued to
As at
Balance
at
Date of
shares
March 31,
April 1,
( see (iii )
Cancelled
March 31,
registration*
2011 Plan 11-Apr-11
under Plan
6,000,000 (938,333) 5,061,667(1,000,000)
above)
2012
2013
(i)
-
2014
4,061,667
(v)    As  required  under  listing  requirements  by  Canadian  Securities  Exchange,  the  Company  signed,  on
October  25,  2013,  an  escrow  agreement  with  TMX  Equity  Transfer  Services  to  escrow  88,444,293  of  its
common shares and 68,724,447 of its warrants issued to four insiders. The escrowed shares and warrants
will  be  released  in  agreed  tranches  over  the  period  of  three  years.  As  at  March  31,  2015,  53,066,580
common shares (as at March 31, 2014: 79,599,866 common shares) and 41,234,670 warrants (As at March
31, 2014: 61,852,002 warrants) are still under escrow.
7.  STOCK OPTION PLANS
(a)  The movements during the year were:
Balance, beginning of year
Options issued on December 17, 2013 and
vested
2014 Options to acquire equity in PPL granted
to PPI management and vested (ii.a)
Revaluation of 2014 PPL options due to
extension of maturity period (ii.b)
Options to acquire equity in Biohaven granted
to Biohaven consultants and directors (iv)
Balance, end of year
Year ended March 31,
$
2015
362,440 
238,221
188,282
5,576
518,000
2014
$
-
362,440
-
-
-
$
1,312,519
$
362,440
F-20
7.  STOCK OPTION PLANS  (cont’d)
(i)  On February 25, 2015 the Board of Directors of the Company approved and on March 17, 2015,  issued
total of 5,300,00 options to 6 consultants including 4.4 million options to the four directors under 2013 Option
Plan. These options are valid for five years and are convertible into equal number of common shares of the
Company  at  an  exercise  price  of  $0.10  per  common  share.  The  Options  were  registered  with  the  US
Securities and Exchange Commission on March 17, 2015 and will vest in 24 equal instalments over the next
two years
The fair value of these options has been estimated using a Black-Scholes option pricing
model with the following assumptions:
Risk free interest rate
Expected dividend
Expected volatility
Expected life
Market price
1%
Nil
137.86%
1847 days
US$0.07
The fair value of the options as per the Black-Scholes option pricing model amounted to $318,829. None of
the options was vested on March 31, 2015. The value of the options will be accounted upon vesting of the
related options as per the accounting policy.
On  December  17,  2013,  the  Company  issued  total  of  4,450,000  options  to  10  consultants  including  2.9
million options to the four directors under 2013 Option Plan. These options are valid for five years and are
convertible into equal number of common shares of the Company at an exercise price of $0.20 per common
share. The Options were registered with the US Securities and Exchange Commission on December 19,
2013 and will vest as follows:
-
3,850,000 options will vest in equal monthly instalments over the year ending December 31, 2014
-
300,000 options were vested on the date of their issuance and
-
300,000 options will vest on October 17, 2014
The fair value of these options has been estimated using a Black-Scholes option pricing
model with the following assumptions:
Risk free interest rate
Expected dividend
Expected volatility
Expected life
Market price
1%
Nil
105.27%
1826 days
US$0.18
The fair value of the options as per the Black-Scholes option pricing model amounted to $604,055, of which
options valued at $362,440 vested as at March 31, 2014 were accounted for as option reserve and expensed
as consulting fee. The balance was expensed during the fiscal year 2015.
ii.a  On November 13, 2013, PPL granted options to its CEO and CSO to acquire 7% equity interest in PPL
for an exercise price of $ 36,896 vesting over two years in monthly instalments. The Option Agreements were
revised for CEO on March 1, 2015 and for CSO on April 1, 2015. Under the revised agreements, all options
were vested as at March 31, 2015 and the expiry date of all options was extended by two years.
F-21
7.  STOCK OPTION PLANS  (cont’d)
The  fair  value  of  these  options  has  been  estimated  using  a  Black-Scholes  option  pricing  model  with  the
following assumptions:
Risk free interest rate
Expected dividend
Expected volatility
Expected life
Fair price*
Exercise price
·
1%
Nil
89.98%
1826 days
US$6.27
US$1.10
Fair value was based on the value offered to PPL for its shares under the reverse takeover transaction as of
June 4, 2013.
The fair value of the options as per the Black-Scholes option pricing model amounted to $188,282.
ii.b  The fair value of the two-year extension granted to the above options was estimated using a Black-
Scholes option pricing model and same assumptions as above, amounted to  $5,576 which were accounted
for as option reserve and expensed as research and development costs  as at March 31, 2015.
iii.  On March 1, 2015 and April 1, 2015, PPL granted options to its CEO and CSO respectively, to acquire
additional  3%  equity  interest  in  PPL  for  an  exercise  price  of  $74,996  vesting  over  two  years  in  equal
quarterly instalments and expiring in five years under new Option Agreements dated the dates of the grants.
The  fair  value  of  the  options  as  per  the  Black-Scholes  option  pricing  model  amounted  to  $64,941.  This
amount has not been accounted for since none of the options was vested as at March 31, 2015. The value of
the options will be accounted upon vesting of the related options as per the accounting policy.
iv.  On November 26, 2014, Biohaven granted to its consultants and directors 4,000 options to acquire equal
number of common shares in Biohaven at an exercise price of $ 304.24 per common share. The options are
to be vested 25% on grant, 25% each anniversary of grant date provided that if before all of the options are
vested if, a change of control occurs at Biohaven, 100% of the unvested options shall vest immediately. All
options will expire on November 26, 2024. Three of the Company’s directors who are on Board of Biohaven
received 1,350 options. Options expire in ten years.
The  fair  value  of  these  options  has  been  estimated  using  a  Black-Scholes  option  pricing  model  with  the
following assumptions:
Risk free interest rate
1%
Risk free interest rate
Expected dividend
Expected volatility
Expected life
Fair price*
Exercise price
·
1%
Nil
82.78%
3653 days
US$304.24
US$304.24
Fair value was based on the value offered to Biohaven by the Company to acquire its common shares on
January 6, 2014.
The fair value of the options as per the Black-Scholes option pricing model amounted to $996,256, of which
options valued at $518,000 vested as at March 31, 2015. $ 518,000 was expensed as consulting fee.
F-22
7.  STOCK OPTION PLANS  (cont’d)
(b)  The following is a summary of all active Stock Option Plans as at March 31, 2015:
Stock Option Plan
Plan
Date of Registration
Registered *
Issued
Outstanding, April 1, 2014
Issued
Exercised
Expired
Outstanding, March 31, 2015
Options fully vested - March 31,
2015
Options not yet vested as at
March 31, 2015
Total
2005 Stock
Option Plan
Dec. 5, 2005
1,000,000
1,000,000
560,000
2013 Option Plan  
Dec 19, 2013 and
March 17, 2015
20,167,579
4,450,000
4,450,000
5,300,000
560,000
560,000
(50,000)
9,700,000
4,400,000
Total
21,167,579
5,450,000
5,010,000
5,300,000
-
(50,000)
10,260,000
4,960,000
-
5,300,000
5,300,000
*      Registered  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  of  the  United  States  of  America  (SEC)  as
required  under  the  Securities  Act  of  1933.  On  March  17,  2015,  the  Company  filed  form  S-8  with  SEC
registering an additional 15,717,379 options under 2013 Stock Option Plan.
(c)  The following is a summary of all active Stock Option Plans of the Company as at March 31, 2014:
1999 Stock
2003 Stock
Option
Plan
April 30,
2003
Option
Plan
July 22,
2004
Robinson
Plan
Dec. 5,
2005
2005
Stock
Option
Plan
Dec. 5,
2005
2013
Option
Plan
Dec 19,
2013
Total
number of options
3,000,000 2,500,000 1,100,000 1,000,0004,450,00012,050,000
3,000,000 2,500,000 1,100,000 1,000,0004,450,00012,050,000
1,730,000 1,945,000 1,100,000 610,000
(482,100)(1,514,447)
(430,553)(1,100,000)
(1,247,900)
- 5,385,000
4,450,000 4,450,000
(1,996,547)
 
(50,000) 
(2,828,453)
-
-
- 560,0004,450,000 5,010,000
560,0001,262,490 1,822,490
-3,187,510 3,187,510
560,0004,450,000 5,010,000
Plan
Date of Registration
 
Registered *
Issued
Outstanding, April 1,
2013
Issued
Exercised
Expired
Outstanding, March
31, 2014
 
Options fully vested -
March 31, 2014
Options not yet vested
as at March 31, 2014
(d)  The weighted average exercise price of the outstanding stock options was US$0.16 as at March 31,
2015 (US$0.22 as at March 31, 2014) and weighted average remaining contractual life was approximately
4.18 years (approximately 4.33 years as at March 31, 2014).
The options can be exercised at any time after vesting within the exercise period in accordance with the
applicable option agreement. The exercise price was more than the market price on the date of the grants for
all options outstanding as at March 31, 2015 and March 31, 2014.
F-23
8.  WARRANTS
(i)  The movements during the year were as follows:
Issued and
outstanding,
beginning of year
Issued on acquisition
(i)
Exercised
Expired
Issued and
outstanding,
March 31, 2014
Year ended March 31,
2015
Weighted
average
exercise
Fair
# of
2014
Weighted
average
exercise
price
value
warrants
price
Fair
value
# of
warrants
114,281,420
$  0.31
$
1,108,402 66,071,420
$  0.29
-
-
- 71,456,420
0.29 1,108,402
- 
(26,375,000) $  (0.35)
-
(1,450,000)
(21,796,420)
(0.12) 
(0.19)
87,906,420
$  0.30
$
1,108,402114,281,420
$  0.31
$
 1,108,402
(i)  The Company issued 71.4 million warrants to nine shareholders of PPL in fiscal 2013 as per the terms of
the Share Exchange Agreement. These warrants are convertible into equal number of common shares at an
exercise price of $0.29 per warrant and expire within two years of their issuance.
The fair value of these warrants has been estimated using a Black-Scholes option pricing model with the
following assumptions:
Risk free interest rate
Expected dividend
Expected volatility
Expected life
Market price
1%
Nil
137.71%
730 days
US$0.39
Using the relative fair value method, an amount of $1,108,402 for warrants issued has been accounted for as
the value of warrants.
(ii)  Details of weighted average remaining life of the warrants granted and outstanding are as follows:
March 31,
2015
2014
Warrants outstanding &
Warrants outstanding &
exercisable
exercisable
Weighted
average
remaining
Weighted
average
remaining
contractual life
contractual life
Exercise price in US$
0.29
0.35
Number
71,456,420
16,450,000
87,906,420
(years)
0.18
0.06
0.16
Number
71,456,420
42,825,000
114,281,420
(years)
1.18
0.92
1.08
F-24
9.  LOSS PER SHARE
Loss per share is calculated on the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the
year, which was 193,442,457 (2014: 161,977,171).
The Company had approximately 88 million warrants (2014: 114 million) and 10 million options (2014: 5
million)  which  were  not  exercised  as  at  March  31,  2015.  Inclusion  of  these  warrants  and  options  in  the
computation  of  diluted  loss  per  share  would  have  an  anti-dilutive  effect  on  the  loss  per  share  and  are
therefore excluded from the computation. Consequently, there is no difference between loss per share and
diluted loss per share.
10.  COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENT LIABILITIES
(a)  Under the terms of the License Agreement dated January 25, 2013, PPL is required to reimburse to the
Licensor, Trojan Technologies Limited, 50% of all maintenance costs of the US Patent # 7,968,512 and to
pay royalties of 3% on Net Receipts from sales of the Licensed Product and 5% on Net Receipts from third
parties  in  respect  of  development  or  other  exploitation  of  Licensed  Intellectual  Property  and/or  Licensed
Products up to a maximum of $ 30 million. Total amount that may be payable in future under the terms of the
Agreement cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
(b)    PPL  has  extended  consulting  contracts  with  its  Chief  Executive  Officer  and  Chief  Scientific  Officer
expiring  in  or  around  March  2017  and  carrying  a  total  monthly  commitment  of  $22,683.Early  termination
without cause would require a lump sum compensation of $ 75,000 to be paid to the two consultants.
(c)  Biohaven has signed a Master Service Agreement on January 31, 2014, as subsequently amended in
April 2014, with Biohaven Pharmaceuticals Inc., a private Delaware incorporated research and development
company (“BPI”). BPI is owned by non-controlling shareholders of Biohaven and is engaged by Biohaven to
conduct,  on  behalf  of  Biohaven,  research  and  development  services  relating  to  identification  and
development of clinical stage neuroscience compounds targeting the glutamatergic system. The agreement
expires  on  December  31,  2018  and  will  automatically  renew  on  a  year  to  year  basis.  Either  party  can
terminate the agreement upon ninety days prior notice. Agreed fee for the period up to June 30, 2015 is $ 3
million payable in quarterly instalment commencing from March 1, 2014.
(d)    On  March  3,  2014,  Biohaven  signed  a  contract  with  an  independent  manufacturing  organization  to
investigate  technical  feasibility  of  developing  a  new  formulation  for  Biohaven  using  nanosuspension  and
emulsion formulation approaches. The contract is approximately for fifty five weeks involving several agreed
milestones for a total price of approximately $ 345,000, which is payable by BPI as agent out of the fees
payable to BVI as detailed in note 10(c) above.
(e)    Under  the  terms  of  the  License  Agreement  dated  September  16,  2013  signed  with  Yale  University,
Biohaven is required to pay to the Licensor a milestone royalty of $ 2 million within six months of receiving
approval of an NDA ( New Drug Application) and pay earned royalty at 3% on worldwide annual net sales of
the licensed products, subject to minimum royalty payment of $ 300,000 in the year one, $ 600,000 in year
two, $ 750,000 in year three and $ 1 million from year four onwards subject to reduction ranging from 33% to
95% depending on sales of generic exceeding an agreed market share on a country by country basis and
further reduction by 50% is licensee is required to pay third party royalties. Total amount that may be payable
in future under the terms of the Agreement cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. The Licensor also
has a right to purchase in cash up to 10% of any securities offered in future financing.
F-25
May 23, 2012
Year ended March 31,
to March 31,
2015
$  196,479
120,000
2014
$  108,921
691,000
2013
157,226
80,995
231,838
130,603
$  -
-
-
-
-
11.  CONSULTING FEE
Cash fee
Shares issued to key management
Options issued to key
management
Options issued to others
Biohaven options granted to the
Notes
6 (iii)
7 (a) (i)
7 (a) (i)
Company's directors
Biohaven options granted to
7 (a)(iv)
174,825
Biohaven options granted to
Biohaven consultants and
7 (a) (iv)
343,175
management
$  1,072,700 $  1,162,362
-
$  -
12.  RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Transactions with related parties are incurred in the normal course of business and are measured at the
exchange  amount,  which  is  the  amount  of  consideration  established  and  agreed  to  between  the  related
parties. Related party transactions and balances have been listed below, unless they have been disclosed
elsewhere in the consolidated financial statements.
(i)  Business expenses of $6,145 (2014:  $12,786, May 23, 2012 to March 31, 2013: $nil) were reimbursed to
directors of the Company.
(ii)  Consulting fees include cash fee paid to key management for services of $ 180,000(2014: $102,458, May
23, 2012 to March 31, 2013: $nil).
13.  FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT
The Company’s financial instruments recognized in the balance sheet consist of the following:
Financial assets
Cash
Advances and other receivable
 
Financial liabilities
Accounts payable and accrued
liabilities
March 31, 2015
March 31, 2014
Carrying
Carrying
value
Fair value
value
Fair value
$ 1,718,289 $ 1,718,289 $ 2,032,058 $ 2,032,058
$ 227,233
$ 227,233
$ 17,575
$ 17,575
$ 620,560
$ 620,560
$ 191,972
$ 191,972
Fair  value  estimates  are  made  at  a  specific  point  in  time,  based  on  relevant  market  information  and
information about financial instruments. These estimates are subject to and involve uncertainties and matters
of  significant  judgment,  therefore  cannot  be  determined  with  precision.  Changes  in  assumptions  could
significantly affect the estimates.
F-26
13.  FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT  (cont’d)
A summary of the Company’s risk exposures as it relates to financial instruments are reflected below:
a)  Fair value of financial instruments
The  Company’s  financial  assets  and  liabilities  are  comprised  of  cash,  advances  and  receivable  and,
accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
.
The Company classifies the fair value of these transactions according to the following fair value hierarchy
based on the amount of observable inputs used to value the instrument:
·
Level 1 - Values are based on unadjusted quoted prices available in active markets for identical assets or
liabilities as of the reporting date.
·
Level  2  -  Values  are  based  on  inputs,  including  quoted  forward  prices  for  commodities,  time  value  and
volatility factors, which can be substantially observed or corroborated in the marketplace. Prices in Level 2
are either directly or indirectly observable as of the reporting date.
·
Level 3 - Values are based on prices or valuation techniques that are not based on observable market data.
Assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires judgment and
may affect the placement within the fair value hierarchy.
The Company’s financial instruments are exposed to certain financial risks: credit risk, liquidity risk, other
price risk and market risk.
b)  Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk of loss associated with a counter-party’s inability to fulfill its payment obligations. The
credit  risk  is  attributable  to  various  financial  instruments,  as  noted  below.  The  credit  risk  is  limited  to  the
carrying value amount carried on the statement of financial position.
a.
Cash - Cash is held with major international financial institutions in Canada and a major law firm in the USA
and therefore the risk of loss is minimal.
b.
Other receivable - The Company is not exposed to major credit risk attributable to customers. A significant
portion of this amount is a prepayment of Directors & Officers insurance premiums.
c)  Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Company will encounter difficulty in satisfying financial obligations as they
become due.
The Company’s approach to managing liquidity is to ensure, as far as possible, that it will have sufficient
liquidity  to  meet  its  liabilities  when  due,  under  both  normal  and  stressed  conditions  without  incurring
unacceptable  losses  or  risking  harm  to  the  Company’s  reputation.  The  Company  holds  sufficient  cash  to
satisfy obligations under accounts payable and accruals.
F-27
13.  FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT  (cont’d)
The Company monitors its liquidity position regularly to assess whether it has the funds necessary to take
care of its operating needs and needs for investing in new projects. The Company believes that its existing
cash will allow it to finance the drug development work apart from meeting its operational needs for at least
another six months. However, the exact need for additional cash cannot be reasonably ascertained at this
stage  Should the Company require further funding, it intends to secure it through further rounds of  equity
financing.
However,  as  a  biotech  company  at  an  early  stage  of  development  and  without  significant  internally
generated cash flows, there are inherent liquidity risks, including the possibility that additional financing may
not be available to the Company, or that actual drug development expenditures may exceed those planned.
The current uncertainty in global markets could have an impact on the Company’s future ability to access
capital on terms that are acceptable to the Company. There can be no assurance that required financing will
be available to the Company.
14.  CAPITAL DISCLOSURES
The Company considers the items included in Shareholders’ Equity as capital. The Company had payables
of approximately $ 0.6 million as at March 31, 2015 (approximately $ 0.2 million as at March 31, 2014) and
current  assets,  mostly  in  cash,  of  approximately  $1.7  million  (approximately  $2.3  million  as  at  March  31,
2014). The Company’s objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Company’s ability to continue
as a going concern in order to pursue new business opportunities and to maintain a flexible capital structure
which optimizes the costs of capital at an acceptable risk.
The Company manages the capital structure and makes adjustments to it in light of changes in economic
conditions and the risk characteristics of the underlying assets. To maintain or adjust the capital structure, the
Company  may  attempt  to  issue  new  shares,  issue  new  debt,  acquire  or  dispose  of  assets  or  adjust  the
amount of cash.
As at March 31, 2015, the shareholders’ equity was approximately $ 2.7 million (approximately $ 2.4 million
as at March 31, 2014), $1.7 million ($ 2 million as at March 31, 2014) of it was held in the form of cash.
The Company is not subject to any externally imposed capital requirements and does not presently utilize
any quantitative measures to monitor its capital. There have been no changes to the Company’s approach to
capital management during the years ended March 31, 2015 and March 31, 2014.
15.  PRIOR YEAR COMPARATIVES
Certain prior year figures have been restated to conform to current year’s presentation.
16.  SUBSEQUENT EVENT
The Company raised approximately $ 5.2 million through a private placement completed on June 24, 2015
by issuing approximately 36.8 million  restricted common shares at a price of $0.14 per share. The Company
issued additional approximately 1.8 million restricted common shares to MediqVentures Ltd., owned by two
of the directors of the Company as finder’s fee at the rate of 5% of the common shares issued under the
private placement, as per the consulting agreement.
F-28