
Corporate Governance Statement
Verified by: Adam 
Santa Maria
Document Name
Version
Date
Review 
Date
Corporate Governance Statement
1
August 2016
July 2017
Introduction
The  ASX  Corporate  Governance  Council’s 
“Corporate  Governance  Principles  and 
Recommendations  –  3rd  edition”  (referred  to  as  either  “ASX  Principles”  or  “Recommendations”) 
articulate  eight  core  corporate  governance  Principles,  with  commentary  about  implementation  of 
those Principles in the form of Recommendations.
Under ASX Listing Rule 4.10.3, Matrix Composites & Engineering Ltd (“Matrix” or “the Company”) 
is  required  to  prepare  a  corporate  governance  statement  disclosing  the  extent  to  which  it  has 
followed the Recommendations in the reporting period. Where a Recommendation has not been 
followed, 
the 
Recommendation.    In  addition,  a  number  of  the  Recommendations  require  the  disclosure  of 
specific information in the corporate governance statement.
fact  must  be  disclosed,
for  departure
the
together  with
reasons
from
This corporate governance statement is current as at 24 August 2016 and discloses the extent to 
which  the  Company  has  followed  the  Recommendations  during  FY16.  The  statement  has  been 
approved by the Matrix board of directors.
Matrix’s  Corporate  Governance  Charter  was  adopted  by  the  Board  in  December  2014  and  was 
prepared  having  regard  to  the  Recommendations.  It  comprises  Charters  for  the  Board  and  its 
committees, and a range of corporate governance policies, protocols and practices. The Corporate 
Governance  Charter  is  disclosed  as  a  single  document  on  the  Company’s  website.  The  various 
Board and committee charters and corporate governance policies and protocols are also disclosed 
separately on the website for ease of reference.
Matrix’s corporate governance statement is structured with reference to the Council's third edition 
of the Principles and Recommendations, which Principles are as follows:
Principle 1 
Principle 2 
Principle 3 
Principle 4 
Principle 5 
Principle 6 
Principle 7 
Principle 8
Lay solid foundations for management and oversight 
Structure the Board to add value 
Act ethically and responsibly 
Safeguard integrity in financial reporting  
Make timely and balanced disclosure  
Respect the rights of security holders  
Recognise and manage risk 
Remunerate fairly and responsibly
Details of Matrix’s compliance with the Recommendations for the year ended 30 June 2016 are 
disclosed in this statement.  Unless disclosed below, all Recommendations have applied for the 
entire financial year ended 30 June 2016.
Corporate Governance Statement
2
Principle 1 - Lay solid foundations for Management and 
Oversight
Recommendation  1.1  –  The  Company  should  establish  and  disclose  the  functions  and 
responsibilities reserved to the Board and those delegated to management.
Under the Company’s Board Charter, the Board is responsible for the overall management and 
strategic direction of the Company and for delivering accountable corporate performance in 
accordance with the Company’s goals and objectives.  In performing its role, the specific 
responsibilities reserved to the board include:
•  providing  strategic  direction  to  the  Company  and  deciding  upon  its  strategies  and
objectives in conjunction with the CEO;
•  monitoring  the strategic direction of the Company and the attainment of its strategies
and objectives in conjunction with the executive;
•  monitoring the operational and financial position and performance of the Company; 
•  driving corporate performance and delivering shareholder value; 
•  assuring a prudential and ethical base to the Company’s conduct and activities having
regard to the relevant interests of its stakeholders;
•  assuring the principal risks faced by the  Company are identified and overseeing that 
appropriate control and monitoring systems are in place to manage the impact of these 
risks; 
reviewing and approving the Company’s internal compliance and control systems and 
codes of conduct;
•
•  assuring that the Company’s financial and other reporting mechanisms are designed to
result in adequate, accurate and timely information being provided to the Board;
•  appointing and, where appropriate, removing the CEO, monitoring other key executive
appointments, and planning for executive succession;
•  overseeing  and  evaluating  the  performance  of  the  CEO,  and  through  the  CEO, 
receiving  reports  on  the  performance  of  other  senior  executives  in  the  context  of  the 
Company’s strategies and objectives and their attainment; 
reviewing  and  approving  the  CEO's  and,  in  conjunction  with  the  CEO,  other  senior 
executives’ remuneration;
•
•  approving  the  Company’s  budgets  and  business  plans  and  monitoring  major  capital
expenditures, acquisitions and divestitures, and capital management generally;
•  ensuring that the Company’s financial results are appropriately and accurately reported
on in a timely manner in accordance with regulatory requirements;
•  as  part  of  its  oversight  and  monitoring  function,  overseeing  that  the  Company’s 
governance  systems  and  processes  are  designed  and  applied  to  assure  compliance 
with all laws, governmental regulations and accounting standards;
Corporate Governance Statement
3
•  ensuring
that 
accountability;
the  Company’s  affairs  are  conducted  with
transparency  and
•  overseeing  the  design  and  implementation  of  appropriate  and  effective  policies, 
processes  and  codes  of  conduct  for  the  Company  (including  with  respect  to  ethics, 
values, conduct, securities trading, disclosure of securities’ price sensitive information, 
employment,  remuneration,  diversity  and  otherwise)  as  well  as  monitoring  and 
reviewing those policies, processes and codes of conduct from time to time;
•  ensuring sound Board succession planning including strategies to assure the Board is 
comprised of individuals  who are  able to  discharge the responsibilities of Directors of 
the Company;
•  overseeing shareholder and stakeholder engagement, reporting and information flows.
Under the Board Charter, the Board has delegated to the CEO (for sub-delegation as appropriate 
to  his/her  senior  executive  and  management  team),  authority  over  the  management,  operations 
and day to day affairs of the Company.
The Board has established the following committees to assist in discharging its responsibilities:
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)
Nomination Committee (see Principle 2);
Audit Committee (see Principle 4);
Risk Committee (see Principle 4); and
Remuneration Committee (see Principle 8).
Each  committee  operates  according  to  its  Board  approved  charter.    The  responsibilities  of  each 
committee  are  described  in  more  detail  elsewhere  in  this  Corporate  Governance  Statement.  
Copies of the Board and Committee Charters are available on the Company’s website.
Recommendation 1.2 – The Company should undertake appropriate checks of board candidates 
and provide shareholders with all information material to their candidacy.
The  Company  has  established  a  Nomination  Committee  which  is  responsible  for  establishing 
processes for the identification and recruitment of suitable candidates for appointment to the Board, 
and for considering the re-election of existing directors.
Under  the  Board  Charter  the  Company  is  required  to  undertake  appropriate  checks  before 
appointing  a  prospective  director  or  recommending  their  candidacy.  The  Board  Charter  also 
requires  the  Company  to  provide  shareholders  with  all  material  information  in  its  possession 
relevant to a decision whether or not to elect or re-elect a director.
Corporate Governance Statement
4
Matrix’s  policy  for  the  nomination,  selection  and  appointment  of  new  Directors  is  set  out  in  the 
Board  Charter  and  requires  consideration  be  given  to  the  ability  of  a  potential  appointee  to  add 
value to the Company and its businesses
Any candidate for election as a Director who is not an existing Director seeking re-election must 
deliver to the Company, at its registered office, written notice consenting to his or her nomination 
and signifying his or her candidature for the office or the intention of a shareholder to propose them.  
The  consent  to  act  as  a  Director  must  include  all  details  required  by  the  Corporations  Act  and 
Listing Rules.
The Board may also appoint a Director to fill a casual vacancy, or as an addition to the existing 
Directors at any time, provided that any such Director holds office only until the next annual general 
meeting, is eligible for re-election at the next general meeting and will not result in the total number 
of Directors exceeding ten.
Recommendation  1.3  – The Company should have a written agreement with each Director and 
senior executive setting out the terms of their appointment.
Each  director  has  a  written  agreement  setting  out  the  terms  of  their  appointment.  Each  senior 
executive is employed under the terms of an executive service agreement. New agreements were 
put in place during the financial  year  for executive  KMPs and these took effect on 1  September 
2015,  when  their  previous  fixed  term  agreements  expired.  The  new  agreements  provide  for 
ongoing employment, subject to standard notice provisions.
Recommendation 1.4 – The Company Secretary should be accountable to the Board, through the 
Chairperson, on all matters to do with the proper functioning of the Board.
The Board Charter provides that the Company Secretary is directly accountable to the Board via 
the Chair, in relation to the following matters:
•  advising the Board and its Committees on governance matters; 
•  monitoring that Board and Committee policies and procedures are followed; 
•  co-ordinating the timely completion and despatch of Board and Committee papers; 
•  ensuring accurate minutes of business at Board and Committee meetings are prepared
and entered in the Company’s secretarial records in a timely manner; and
•  helping  to  organise  and  facilitate  Board  member  induction,  professional  development
and evaluation/review procedures.
Corporate Governance Statement
5
Recommendation 1.5 – The Company should have a diversity policy which includes measurable 
objectives for achieving gender diversity. The Company should assess and disclose its progress in 
achieving these objectives annually.
Diversity policy
Matrix recognises that a talented and diverse workforce is a key competitive advantage and that 
Matrix's success is a reflection  of the quality and skills of its people.  Specifically, the Company 
provides equal opportunities in respect to employment and employment conditions and does not 
discriminate on the basis of a candidate’s gender, age, ethical or cultural background.  Matrix is 
committed to promoting a workplace that recognises and embraces the skills, characteristics and 
experiences that people bring to the Group.
The Board has adopted a Diversity Policy, which is publicly available on the Company’s website. 
The policy requires the development of measurable diversity objectives and targets. The objectives 
and targets that are underway are noted below in reference to the Gender Diversity Action Plan.
Gender diversity
Matrix has established targets to ensure that, subject to appropriate caveats, not less than 33 per 
cent  of  new  appointments  should  be  male  and  not  less  than  33  per  cent  of  new  appointments 
should be female.  Matrix intends these targets to promote gender diversity within the Company.
As at 30 June 2016 all five Board positions (100 per cent) were held by men.
Of five  executive  KMP  positions,  five  (100  per  cent)  were  held  by  men.    Of  145  employees,  27 
(18.6  per  cent)  were  women  and  118  (81.4  per  cent)  were  men.    As  at  30  June  2016,  the 
proportion of women and men employed by the Company is set out in the table below:
GROUP WORKFORCE BY JOB CLASSIFICATION AND GENDER
CLASSIFICATION
MANAGEMENT 
CEO 
Key Management 
Senior Management 
Other Management 
TOTAL  
NON-MANAGEMENT 
Professionals 
Technicians and Trade
Corporate Governance Statement
TOTAL
FEMALE
GENDER 
 %  MALE
0 
0 
1 
1 
2 
  
6 
5
0.0 
0.0 
12.5 
12.5 
9.5
26.1 
16.7
1 
4 
7 
7 
19 
  
17 
25
1 
4 
8 
8 
21 
  
23 
30
%
100.0 
100.0 
87.5 
87.5 
90.5
73.9 
83.3
6
Clerical and Administrative 
Machinery Operators and Drivers 
Labourers 
Other 
TOTAL 
GROUP TOTAL
11 
6 
35 
19 
125 
145
9 
0 
4 
1 
25 
27
81.8 
0.0 
11.4 
5.3 
20.0 
18.6
2 
6 
31 
18 
100 
118
18.2 
100.0 
88.6 
94.7 
80.0 
81.4
The  Gender  Diversity  Action  Plan  has  been  broken  down  into  three  keys  areas,  culture  & 
environment, recruitment & selection and company policy & procedure. The initial areas of focus 
are  centred  on  raising  awareness  of  diversity  in  general  in  the  workplace  with  an  emphasis  on 
gender,  by  running  educational  workshops  for  all  management  and  supervisory  employees. 
Secondly, the inclusion of gender specific questions in the second round  of the Brand  & Culture 
Survey  currently  under  development  will  serve  as  a  health  check  on  current  practices  within  the 
business.
Reviews have been completed in regard to all policies and procedures to ensure every opportunity 
is available to promote gender diversity appropriately in the workplace.
Recruitment practices have been evaluated to ensure that promoting diversity in the workplace is 
an observable activity in every stage of the recruitment and selection process. Metrics have been 
put  in  place  to  monitor  the  application  responses  by  gender  and  there  is  mandatory  female 
representation on interview panels for all senior professional roles.
The Company will continue to promote avenues for female employees to access external mentoring 
programmes, industry networks and other professional associations or forums that are committed 
to promoting gender diversity in the workplace.
The  Nominations  Committee  is  responsible  for  the  development  monitoring  and  review  of  the 
Diversity Policy.
Recommendation  1.6  –  The  Company  should  have  and  disclose  a  process  for  periodically 
evaluating  the  performance  of  the  board,  its  committees  and  individual  directors  and  disclose 
whether a performance evaluation was undertaken in the reporting period in accordance with that 
process.
Details of the process and principles adopted by the Company for evaluating the performance of 
the  board,  its  committees  and  individual  directors  are  set  out  in  the  Board,  Committee  and 
Directors  Evaluation  Protocols  which  form  part  of  the  Company’s  Board  and  Management 
Performance Enhancement Policy; this Policy is available on the Company’s website.
Corporate Governance Statement
7
An internal performance evaluation of the board, its committees and each director was conducted 
during  FY16.  The  results  of  the  evaluation  were  considered  and  discussed  by  the  board  and 
formed the basis for the identification of potential areas for ongoing improvement.
Recommendation  1.7  -  The  Company  should  have  and  disclose  a  process  for  periodically 
evaluating the performance of its senior executives and disclose whether a performance evaluation 
was undertaken in the reporting period in accordance with that process.
Details of the process and principles adopted by the Company for evaluating the performance of its 
senior  executives  are  set  out  in  the  Senior  Executive  Performance  Review  and  Evaluation 
Protocols which form part of the Company’s Board and Management Performance Enhancement 
Policy; this Policy is available on the Company’s website.
A  formal  performance  evaluation  of  the  Company’s  senior  executives  was  conducted  during  the 
reporting  period.  The  outcome  of  the  evaluation  provides  the  basis  for  ongoing  professional 
development for the key executives.  The performance of all senior executives with greater than 12 
months’ service has been evaluated during the reporting period in accordance with this process.   
 
Principle 2 - Structure the Board to add value
Recommendation  2.1  –  The  Company  should  have  a  Nominations  Committee  composed  of  a 
majority of independent directors.
As part of the process of adopting a new Corporate Governance Charter, the Board established a 
Nominations Committee in December 2014. The Committee’s responsibilities include:
•  assessing  Board  and  Board  Committee  membership,  succession  planning  and
•
performance;  
reviewing Board Committee terms of reference and making recommendations including 
with respect to appointment to Board Committees;
•  developing and implementing a process for evaluation of Board, Committee and director
performance;
•  Board member induction and professional development 
•  periodically  reviewing  the  job  description  and  performance  of  the  CEO  according  to
agreed performance parameters;
involvement in complaints, grievance and disciplinary processes of senior executives;
•  succession planning for the CEO position; 
• 
•  diversity policy development, monitoring and review; and 
•  monitoring the implementation by the Company of diversity strategies and programs.
Corporate Governance Statement
8
A copy of the Charter for the Nominations Committee is available on the Company’s website. The 
current members of the Nominations Committee are Peter Hood (Chair), Steven Cole and Duncan 
Clegg. All members of the Committee have been assessed by the Board as independent.
For details on the number of meetings of the Nominations Committee held during the year and the 
attendees at those meetings, please refer to the Directors’ Report in the FY16 Annual Report.  For 
details of the respective experience and qualifications of Committee Members, please refer to the 
Directors’ Report in the FY16 Annual Report.
Recommendation 2.2 – The Company should have and disclose a board skills matrix.
The mix of skills, qualifications, experience and expertise which the Board seeks to achieve in its 
membership  includes  a  broad  base  of  industry,  business,  technical,  administrative,  financial  and 
corporate  skills  and  experience  considered  necessary  to  represent  shareholders  and  fulfil  the 
business objectives of the Company.
The Board utilises a skills matrix to facilitate its assessment of the individual and collective skill and 
knowledge of the directors. The matrix comprises a comprehensive list of skills which the directors 
regard as relevant and desirable to enable them to discharge their duties to the Company and its 
shareholders. During the reporting period the directors assessed their knowledge and skills against 
the skills matrix, with the result that no material skill gaps were identified for the Board as a whole. 
However, the skills assessment was useful in assisting the directors in their commitment to 
continuing professional development.
Corporate Governance Statement
9
A summary of the skills matrix is set out below:
Skill
Definition
Global Oil and Gas and 
Mineral Resources
Has particular expertise and knowledge of the global oil and gas 
industry in which the company operates
Composite Material 
Manufacturing
Has particular skills and expertise in products, systems or technologies 
relevant to the company’s operations.
Accounting and financial 
literacy
Banking
Corporate Finance
Equity Capital Markets
Mergers & Acquisitions
Complex Manufacturing 
Operations
Has the required level of knowledge and skill to: effectively analyse the 
company’s management accounts and periodic financial statements; 
assess the company’s ongoing viability; and actively contribute to the  
setting and ongoing review of the company’s annual budget. 
 
Has particular experience and skills in relation to debt financing.
Has a sound understanding of financial risk and understands the 
financial regulatory framework relating to listed companies.
Has particular experience and skills in relation to capital raising and 
equity markets.
Has particular experience and skills in relation to mergers and 
acquisitions, demergers and capital reconstructions etc.
Has executive/management experience with a significant manufacturing 
enterprise.  Has a sound understanding of operational issues and 
extracting maximum value from the company’s assets.
International Oil & Gas 
Equipment Supply business
Has extensive international business experience in the oil and gas 
equipment supply industry
Law
Strategic Marketing
Information Technology
Risk Management
Human Resources 
Management
Has particular expertise in corporate and commercial law and/or in 
relation to legislation relevant to the company
Has a sound understanding of marketing and growth strategies to 
preserve and grow the company’s market share. 
Has expertise in IT strategy and system design, procurement and 
implementation and a sound understanding of associated risks.
Has a sound understanding of risk management and the development 
of a systematic approach to protect the company’s assets and 
maximise chances of success
Is able to contribute actively to the setting of management performance 
goals that link rewards to desired performance and behaviour, the 
oversight of management performance, and the development of Board 
and executive succession plans.
y
r
t
s
u
d
n
I
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
E
d
n
a
 
s
l
l
i
k
S
l
a
c
i
n
h
c
e
T
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
E
Strategy Development and 
Implementation
Has a sound understanding of the strategy development process and 
how to convert strategy into actions and corporate success
Corporate Governance Statement
10
CEO/Senior Management 
Experience
Contemporary Corporate 
Governance
Has executive experience (CEO) with a significant enterprise
Has a strong background in or understanding of current corporate 
governance standards and compliance requirements and is familiar with 
corporate legislation.
Commercial Business 
Experience/Acumen
Demonstrated ability to understand and deal with business situations in 
a manner likely to lead to a positive outcome for the business
Strategy
Has strong strategic skills, able to contribute actively to the formulation, 
testing and approval of a business strategy designed to drive 
shareholder value in the longer term.  Alert to opportunities, risks and 
trends that require a strategic response.
CEO Selection, Monitoring and  Ability to identify the key criteria required for the CEO and apply 
Evaluation
appropriate metrics for evaluation
Monitoring
Compliance
Policy Frameworks
Networking
s
e
i
c
n
e
t
e
p
m
o
C
 
e
c
n
a
n
r
e
v
o
G
Stakeholder Communication
Decision Making
Effective Governance
Has strong skills in monitoring executive and business performance
Has strong knowledge of the regulatory framework within which the 
business operates: operationally, commercially and financially including 
ASX Listing Rules, Corporations Act and
Has relevant experience developing policy frameworks that manage the 
operational, financial and risk appetite of the business
Has strong business networks and relationships within the oil and gas 
industry, manufacturing sector and corporate Australia 
Has relevant experience in engagement with external stakeholder 
groups (shareholders, proxy advisors, community groups, regulators, 
government).
Ability to participate in Board decision making and ensure decisions are 
made after careful consideration of all available information
Ability to exercise skills and abilities to ensure the Company has an 
effectively operating governance structure
Recommendation 2.3 – The Company should disclose whether its directors are independent.
Directors are expected to bring independent views and judgement to the Board’s deliberations. The 
Board Charter requires that at least a majority of the Directors of Matrix will be independent and 
that the Chair will be an independent Director.
Under the Board Charter, the assessment of whether a Board member is independent is a matter 
of  judgement  for  the  Board  as  a  whole  and  includes  concepts  of  materiality.  In  making  that 
judgement the Board may have regard to, but need not be bound by, the Recommendations as to 
director independence.
Corporate Governance Statement
11
A Director is considered to be independent where he or she is a non-executive Director, is not a 
member  of  management  and  is  free  of  any  relationship  that  could,  or  could  reasonably  be 
perceived to, materially interfere with the independent exercise of their judgment.  The existence of 
the following relationships may affect independent status, if the Director:
•
is  employed,  or  has  previously  been  employed  in  an  executive  capacity  by  the 
Company,  and  there  has  not  been  a  period  of  at  least  three  years  between  ceasing 
such employment and serving on the Board;
•
•  has, within the last three years, been a principal of a material professional adviser or a 
material  consultant  to  the    Company,  or  an  employee  materially  associated  with  the 
services provided; 
is  a  material  supplier  or  customer  of  the    Company,  or  an  officer  of  or  otherwise 
associated directly or indirectly with a material supplier or customer; 
is a substantial shareholder of Matrix or an officer of, or otherwise associated directly 
with  a  substantial  shareholder  of  Matrix  (as  defined  in  section  9  of  the  Corporations 
Act);
•
•  has a material contractual relationship with the Company other than as a Director; 
•  has close family ties with any person who falls within any of the above categories; or 
•  has been a director of the Company for such a period that his or her independence may
have been compromised.
In  the  context  of  Director’s  independence,  the  materiality  of  a  director’s  interest,  position, 
association or relationship is assessed to determine whether it might interfere, or might reasonable 
be seen to interfere with the director’s capacity to bring independent judgement to bear on matters 
before the board and to act in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders.
In accordance with the independence criteria set out above, the Board has reviewed the positions 
and associations of each of the five Directors in office at the date of this statement. The status of 
each director and their length of service at the date of this statement is set out below:
Name
Position
Status
Length of service
Peter Hood
Non-Executive Chairperson
Independent
5 years
Aaron Begley
Managing Director
Non-independent
16 years
Steven Cole
Non-Executive Director
Independent
Craig Duncan
Non-Executive Director
Independent
Duncan Clegg
Non-Executive Director
Independent
2 years
8 years
2 years
Corporate Governance Statement
12
Accordingly, the majority of Board is independent.  To facilitate independent judgement in decision-
making,  each  Director  has  the  right  to  seek  independent  professional  advice  at  the  Company’s 
expense.    However,  prior  approval  from  the  Chair  is  required,  which  may  not  be  unreasonably 
withheld.
Recommendation 2.4 – A majority of the Company’s directors should be independent.
The  Company’s  board  comprises  four  non-executive  directors  and  one  executive  director.  The 
Board  has  assessed  the  independence  of  each  of  the  above-mentioned  non-executive  directors 
and has determined that all of them are, and were throughout the entire financial year, independent.
Recommendation 2.5 – The Chair of the Board should be an independent Director.
The Board Charter provides that the Chairperson should be non-executive and independent and 
the roles of the Chair and the CEO should not be exercised by the same person except in special 
circumstances  approved  by  the  Board.  The  Board  is  satisfied  that  the  Chairperson  is,  and  was 
throughout the entire financial year, an independent Director.
Recommendation  2.6  –  The  Company  should  have  a  program  for  inducting  new  directors  and 
provide appropriate professional development opportunities.
Under its Board Charter, the Company commits to providing induction programs for new directors 
and senior executives as well as providing opportunities for continuing professional development 
for all directors and executives.
New directors are provided with an induction pack at the time of their appointment which provides 
them with detailed information about the Company, its operations, financial position, risk profile and 
risk management framework, and its strategies and objectives. The pack also includes copies of 
the  Company  Constitution,  the  Matrix  Corporate  Governance  Charter,  the  most  recent  annual 
report, recent ASX releases, and minutes and papers of previous board and committee meetings.
New directors also receive a letter of appointment setting out, amongst other things, their rights, 
duties and responsibilities as a director of the Company.
In addition to the induction pack and letter of appointment, new directors complete a program of 
meetings with Matrix managers, including site tours, to familiarise them with the business and its 
senior personnel.
The  directors  are  encouraged  to  undertake  professional  development  activities  to  update  and 
enhance  their  skills  and  knowledge.  The  Company  has  developed  a  professional  development 
program for Board members to assist with their respective skills development.
Corporate Governance Statement
13
Principle 3 – Act ethically and responsibly
Recommendation  3.1  –  The  Company  should  have  a  code  of  conduct  for  its  directors,  senior 
executives and employees.
The  Board  considers  it  essential  that  Directors,  management  and  employees  of  the  Group  act 
ethically and responsibly in carrying out their duties and responsibilities.  In particular, the Board 
has responsibility for developing and monitoring:
•  standards and guidelines regarding ethical conduct; 
•  periods  during  which  Directors  may  deal  in  the  securities  of  the  Company  and
procedures for notification of any dealings;
•  procedures to be adopted in respect of potential conflicts of interest; and 
•  procedures for prior approval of contracts with Directors.
Matrix has established codes of conduct to:
•  provide  a  framework  for  decisions  and  actions  in  relation  to  ethical  conduct  which 
underpins the Company’s commitment to integrity and fair dealing in its business affairs; 
•  articulate the practices necessary to fulfil both its legal obligations and the reasonable
expectations of its stakeholders; and
•  set  out  the  responsibilities  and  accountabilities  of  individuals  for  reporting  and
investigating reports of unethical practices.
These codes of conduct, entitled “Board Members’ and Executives’ Code of Conduct” and “Group 
Code of Conduct/Values” are publicly available on the Company’s website. 
 
Principle 4 - Safeguard integrity in Financial Reporting
Recommendation 4.1 – The Company should have an Audit Committee composed of a majority of 
independent directors.
Prior to December 2014, oversight of financial compliance and reporting and the Company’s risk 
management framework was undertaken by the Audit and Risk Committee.  Following the adoption 
of the Company’s new Corporate Governance Charter in December 2014, the Board separated the 
roles of audit and risk oversight, with the Audit Committee assuming responsibility for oversight of
Corporate Governance Statement
14
financial  compliance  and  reporting,  and  the  Risk  Committee  assuming  responsibility  for  risk 
oversight. The Audit Committee’s responsibilities include:
•  overseeing the adequacy of the Company’s corporate reporting processes; 
•  overseeing whether the Company’s financial statements reflect the understanding of the 
Committee members and whether in their opinion they provide a true and fair view of 
the financial position and performance of the Group; 
reviewing, the appropriateness of relevant accounting judgements or choices exercised 
by management in preparing the financial statements. 
recommending selection, removal (as appropriate) and remuneration of external Auditor 
and to monitor external Auditor independence;
•
•
•  monitoring external auditor independence; 
•  providing instruction to the external Auditor including ensuring the scope and adequacy
of the external audit; 
receiving external Auditor’s preliminary Audit or Review Reports;
• 
•  overseeing  and  monitoring  implementation  of  external  Auditor’s  recommendations  (as
accepted);
•  ensuring that the audit approach covers all financial statement areas where there is a
perceived risk of material misstatement;
•  overseeing and monitoring the scope and adequacy of the Company’s internal controls 
and  compliance  requirements  to  assure  integrity  in  the  Company’s  operations  and 
affairs;
•  overseeing and monitoring application of accounting policies and reporting of financial
information to security holders, regulators and generally.
A copy of the Audit Charter for the Committee is available on the Company’s website.
The  current  members  of  the  Audit  Committee  are  Steven  Cole  (Chair),  Peter  Hood  and  Craig 
Duncan. All members of the Committee have been assessed by the Board as independent.
For details of the number of meetings of the Audit Committee held during the year, the attendees at 
those  meetings,  and  details  of  the  experience  and  qualifications  of  each  Committee  Member 
please refer to  the relevant section of the Directors’ Report in the FY16 Annual Report.
Recommendation  4.2  –  The  Board  should  receive  CEO  and  CFO  assurance  regarding  the 
Company’s financial statements prior to their approval.
The  Board  receives  a  written  assurance  in  respect  of  each  reporting  period  from  the  Chief 
Executive  Officer  and  the  Chief  Financial  Officer  that  the  declaration  provided  by  them  in 
accordance  with  section  295A  of  the  Corporations  Act  is  founded  on  their  evaluation  of  the
Corporate Governance Statement
15
Company’s  system  of  risk  management  and  internal  control  and  that  the  system  is  operating 
effectively  in  relation  to  financial  reporting  risks.    The  Board  understands  that  these  assurances 
regarding  the  internal  control  systems  provide  a  reasonable  level  of  assurance  only  and  do  not 
imply a guarantee against adverse events, or losses, or more volatile outcomes arising in the future 
and that the design and operation of the internal control systems relating to financial reporting has 
been assessed primarily through the use of declarations by process owners who are responsible 
for those systems.
Recommendation 4.3 – The Company should ensure external Auditor attendance at its AGM.
The external auditor attends the Company’s AGM. Shareholders are invited to submit questions to 
the Auditor in advance of the Company’s AGM for consideration at the meeting. Shareholders are 
also given an opportunity to ask questions of the external auditor at the AGM. No questions were 
put to the external Auditor at the Company’s 2015 annual general meeting.  
 
Principle 5 – Make timely and balanced disclosure
Recommendation 5.1 – The Company should have a written continuous disclosure policy.
The Board is committed to ensuring the Company complies with the ASX Listing Rules’ continuous 
disclosure requirements. It has approved a Continuous Disclosure Policy which:
•
•
•
sets out the roles and responsibilities of directors, officers and employees in 
complying with the Company’s continuous disclosure obligations;
establishes procedures for the proper management of the Company’s information both 
in relation to preserving its confidentiality where appropriate and in relation to 
disclosure where this is required; and
provides guidelines for communications with brokers, analysts, the media and other 
third parties.
The Continuous Disclosure Policy is publicly available on the Company’s website.
Corporate Governance Statement
16
Principle 6 - Respect the rights of Shareholders
Recommendation 6.1 – The Company should provide information about itself and its governance 
to investors via its website.
The Company’s website at www.matrix-corp.org provides detailed information about the Company, 
its operations and governance.
Under  the  “Investors”  link  on  the  website,  investors  have  access  to  all  relevant  corporate 
governance  information  including  the  Company’s  constitution,  its  Corporate  Governance  Charter 
(which includes all board and committee charters and all corporate governance policies), its annual 
and half yearly reports, ASX announcements and meeting notices.
Under  the  “About  Matrix”  link  on  the  website  investors  can  view  an  overview  of  the  Company’s 
business, a summary of its history and information regarding the Company’s directors and senior 
executive team.
Recommendation  6.2  –  The  Company  should  have  an  investor  relations  program  to  facilitate 
effective two way communication with investors.
The  Company  is  committed  to  informing  shareholders  of  all  major  developments  affecting  the 
operations of the Company, its current financial position and its future outlook.  The Company has 
adopted  a  policy  which  sets  out  the  components  of  its  investor  relations  program.  The  policy  is 
publicly available on the Company’s website.
Recommendation 6.3 – The Company should disclose the policies and processes it has in place 
to facilitate and encourage participation at meetings of shareholders.
The Company ensures that notices of meeting provide clear, concise and effective explanations of 
all business to be transacted at shareholder meetings.
Shareholders who have a question or issue which they would like addressed at a general meeting 
are invited to submit written questions and comments in advance of the meeting to the Chairperson 
or the Company’s external auditor.
At annual general meetings, shareholders are encouraged to ask questions and make comments 
about the Company’s operations and financial performance. They are also able to ask questions of 
the Company’s external auditor.
New directors or directors seeking re-election are given the opportunity to address shareholders at 
the meeting and to answer their questions.
Corporate Governance Statement
17
Recommendation  6.4  –  The  Company  should  give  shareholders  the  option  to  receive 
communications  from,  and  send  communications  to,  the  Company  and  its  share  registry 
electronically.
The Company’s share register is managed by Link Market Services (“Link”). Shareholders have the 
option of receiving all shareholder communications from the Company and from Link electronically. 
These communications include notices of meeting, dividend statements, and annual and half yearly 
reports.  As  a  general  rule,  Matrix  shareholders  receive  printed  copies  of  documents  only  where 
they specifically elect to do so, or in certain limited circumstances where, for example, an original 
signature or document is required.  
  
Principle 7 - Recognise and Manage Risk
Recommendation 7.1 – The Company should have a Risk Committee composed of a majority of 
independent directors.
Matrix  recognises  the  importance  of  risk  management  and  has  a  formal  risk  management 
framework, including policies for the oversight and management of material business risks.
Prior to December 2014, oversight of financial compliance and reporting and the Company’s risk 
management framework was undertaken by the Audit and Risk Committee.  Following the adoption 
of  the  new  Corporate  Governance  Charter  in  December  2014,  the  Board  separated  the  roles  of 
audit  and  risk  oversight,  with  the  Risk  Committee  assuming  responsibility  for  oversight  of  the 
Company’s risk management framework.
The Risk Committee’s responsibilities include:
•  approving  and  monitoring  policies  for  identifying  and  managing/mitigating/transferring
risk including in accordance with the  Company’s risk management policy;
•  approving  and  monitoring  policies  for  business  continuity  and  crisis  planning  risk
• 
•
• 
• 
•
management; 
receiving ongoing risk management reports; 
reviewing  the  risk  management  framework,  policies  and  management  processes  at 
least annually to allow the Committee to satisfy itself that they are sound; 
reviewing and ensuring the  Company carries appropriate levels of insurance; 
reviewing and monitoring terms of insurance policies. 
reviewing  and  reporting  on  these  matters  to  the  Board,  with  recommendations  as 
appropriate.
Corporate Governance Statement
18
•  Management  is  responsible  for  identifying  and  managing  operational  and  corporate 
risks  and,  where  those  risks  could  have  a  material  impact  on  the  Company’s 
businesses, formulating strategies for managing these risks.
A copy of the Charter for the Risk Committee is available on the Company’s website.
The current members of the Risk Committee are Craig Duncan (Chair), Peter Hood and Duncan 
Clegg.  All members of the Committee have been assessed by the Board as independent.
For details of the number of meetings of the Risk Committee held during the year, the attendees at 
those meetings, and the experience and qualifications of each Committee Member, please refer to 
the relevant section of the Directors’ Report in the FY16 Annual Report.
Recommendation  7.2  –  The  Risk  Committee  should  review  the  Company’s  risk  management 
framework at least annually to satisfy itself that it continues to be sound.
In  summary,  the  Matrix  risk management  framework  is  based  on  AS/NZS  ISO  31000:2009  Risk 
Management – Principles and Guidelines. It comprises:
•
•
•
•
formal processes for the identification and measurement of risks that might impact upon 
the  achievement  of  the  Company’s  goals  and  objectives,  and  for  monitoring  the 
environment to identify emerging factors and trends that affect these risks; 
risk management strategies to manage identified risks and designing and implementing 
appropriate risk management policies and internal controls; 
internal  systems  to  monitor  the  performance  of  and  improve  the  effectiveness  of  risk 
management  systems  and 
including  regular 
assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  risk  management  and  internal  compliance  and 
control; 
regular reporting to the Risk Committee and the  Board regarding the  effectiveness of 
the Company’s risk management systems and processes and the extent to which they 
are being applied within the Company.
internal  compliance  and  controls,
Management are responsible for regular reporting to the Board as to the effectiveness of Matrix’s 
management of its material business risks directly and through the Risk Committee.  Management 
are  also  responsible  for  undertaking  a  review  of  the  risk  framework  of  the  Company  under  the 
direction  of  the  Risk  Committee  on  at  least  an  annual  basis,  which  reports  independently  to  the 
Board of any changes, concerns and outcomes.  Matrix maintains a risk management and internal 
control  system  that  is  sufficient  to  manage  its  material  business  risks.  The  Company’s  Risk 
Management Policy is publicly available on the Company’s website. The Company has a number 
of other policies which address specific risk issues, including:
Corporate Governance Statement
19
the Company Code of Conduct and Values;
•  Board Members’ and Executives’ Code of Conduct; 
• 
•  Conflict of Interest Protocol; 
•  Policy on the Trading of the Company’s Securities; 
•  Policy on Continuous Disclosure/Release of Price Sensitive Information; and 
•  Safety Policy.
Recommendation 7.3 – The Company should disclose whether it has an internal audit function, its 
role and structure.
The Board has considered whether the establishment of an internal audit function would materially 
improve the Company’s ability to manage its principal business risks and has determined that the 
establishment  of  an  internal  audit  function  is  not  warranted  at  this  stage  of  the  Company’s 
development given the cost of establishing the function, the current size of the Company, and the 
nature and extent of its operations.
However,  the  Company  has  implemented  a  program  for  reviewing,  by  independent  expert,  its 
system  of  internal  controls  for  various  critical  functions  and  activities.  Under  this  program,  the 
inventory and project management functions have been reviewed in FY16.
Recommendation  7.4 – The Company should disclose whether it has any material exposure to 
economic, environmental and social sustainability risks.
The Company has no material exposure to economic, environmental and social sustainability risks, 
other  than  for  the  economic  decline  in  the  oil  and  gas  sector.  These  risks  and  the  Company’s 
approach to managing them are considered in more detail in the Review of Operations section of 
the FY16 Annual Report. 
 
Principle 8 - Remunerate Fairly and Responsibly
Recommendation  8.1 – The Company should have a Remuneration Committee composed of a 
majority of independent directors.
The Board has established a Remuneration Committee that operates under a charter approved by 
the Board.  The Committee’s responsibilities include:
•  Reviewing prevailing external remuneration benchmarks for comparable positions, with 
comparable  responsibilities,  within  comparable  companies  (revenue,  employees,  size 
and spread) including in comparable industries to that of the Company.
Corporate Governance Statement
20
•  Assessing appropriate remuneration policies, levels and packages for Board members, 
the  CEO,  and  (in  consultation  with  the  CEO)  other  senior  executive  and  managerial 
officers.
•  Monitoring the implementation by the Company of such remuneration policies. 
•  Recommending to the Board the Company’s remuneration policies so as to:
-
-
motivate directors, executives and management to pursue the long-term 
growth and success of the Company within an appropriate control framework; 
and
for executive and senior management personnel, demonstrate a clear 
relationship between performance and remuneration.
•  Reviewing and considering for recommendation to the Board:
-
-
-
-
equity based remuneration plans for senior executives and other employees;
superannuation arrangements generally;
whether there is any gender or other inappropriate bias in the Company’s 
remuneration policies or practices; and
short term incentive and long term incentive arrangements for executives.
•  Assessing,  at  appropriate  and  regular  intervals,  a  suitable  remuneration  and  reward 
package  for  the  CEO  in  relation  to  prevailing  external  practice,  internal  affordability, 
performance against goals, and other relevant matters.
•  Reviewing  and  recommending  to  the  Board  the  appropriate  level  of  the  shareholder
approved “Directors’ Remuneration Pool”.
•  Reviewing and recommending to the Board, within the limits of that Pool, an appropriate 
remuneration  framework  including  the  remuneration  levels  for  the  Chair,  the  Deputy 
Chair (if any) and Non-Executive Directors, and any supplements to those remuneration 
levels for Committee participation including for chairs of Committees.
A  copy  of  the  Charter  for  the  Committee  is  available  on  the  Company’s  website.  The  current 
members of the Committee are Peter Hood (Chair), Steven Cole and Duncan Clegg. All members 
of the Committee have been assessed by the Board as independent.
For details on the number of meetings of the Remuneration Committee held during the year, the 
attendees  at those meetings, and  the  experience  and qualifications of the respective Committee 
Members, please refer to the relevant section of the Directors’ Report in the FY16 Annual Report.
Recommendation  8.2  –  The  Company  should  distinguish  between  non-executive  Directors’ 
remuneration and that of executive Directors and Executives.
Corporate Governance Statement
21
The Company clearly distinguishes the structure of non-executive director remuneration from that 
of  executive  directors  and  senior  executives.    Non-executive  directors  are  paid  fixed  fees  in  the 
form  of  cash  benefits  and  superannuation  contributions;  they  do  not  receive  any  variable, 
performance based remuneration. More detail regarding the Company’s remuneration policies and 
practices is set out in the Remuneration Report of the FY16 Annual Report.
Recommendation 8.3 – The Company should establish a policy on whether participants in equity 
based remuneration plans are permitted to enter into arrangements that limit the economic risk of 
participating in the plans.
The  Company’s  Remuneration  policy  and  the  rules  of  the  Matrix  Rights  Plan  expressly  prohibit 
participants  in  an  equity  based  remuneration  plan  from  entering  into  transactions  which  limit  the 
economic risk of participating in the plan, whether through the use of derivatives or otherwise.
Furthermore,  key  management  personnel  of  the  Company,  and  closely  related  parties  to  them, 
may not enter into arrangements that would have the effect of limiting their exposure to risk relating 
to an element of their remuneration that either has not vested, or has vested but remains subject to 
a holding lock.
Corporate Governance Statement
22