
DEF 14C 1 d236595ddef14c.htm DEF 14C DEF 14C
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
INFORMATION REQUIRED IN INFORMATION STATEMENT
SCHEDULE 14C INFORMATION
Information Statement Pursuant to Section 14(c) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Check the appropriate box:
Preliminary Information Statement
Confidential, for Use of the Commission Only (as permitted by Rule 14c-5(d)(2))
Definitive Information Statement
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
(Name of Registrant As Specified In Its Charter)
¨
¨
x
Payment of Filing Fee (Check the appropriate box):
x
¨
No fee required.
Fee computed on the table below per Exchange Act Rules 14c-5(g) and 0-11.
(1)
Title of each class of securities to which transaction applies:
(2) Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
(2)
Aggregate number of securities to which transaction applies:
(3)
Per unit price or other underlying value of transaction computed pursuant to Exchange
Act Rule 0-11 (set forth the amount on which the filing fee is calculated and state how it
was determined):
(4)
Proposed maximum aggregate value of transaction:
(5)  Total fee paid:
Fee paid previously with preliminary materials.
Check box if any part of the fee is offset as provided by Exchange Act Rule 0-11(a)(2) and
identify the filing for which the offsetting fee was paid previously. Identify the previous filing
by registration statement number, or the Form or Schedule and the date of its filing.
(1)
Amount Previously Paid:
(2)
Form, Schedule or Registration Statement No.:
(3)
Filing Party:
(4)
Date Filed:
¨
¨
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
1160 Dairy Ashford Rd., Suite 160
Houston, Texas 77079
NOTICE OF STOCKHOLDER ACTION BY WRITTEN CONSENT
To the Stockholders of SAExploration Holdings, Inc.:
We  are  delivering  this  Notice  and  the  accompanying  Information  Statement  to  inform  our
stockholders that on August 4, 2016, the holders of a majority of the shares of SAExploration
Holdings,  Inc.  (the  “Company,”  “our”  or  “we”)  common  stock,  $.0001  par  value  per  share  (the
“Common Stock”) adopted resolutions by written consent, in lieu of a meeting of stockholders, to
amend and restate our Second Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation as set forth in
the Third Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation attached hereto as Annex A (the
“New Charter”).
The New Charter was approved by stockholder written consent pursuant to Section 228 of the
Delaware General Corporation Law and Section 2.12 of the Company’s Second Amended and
Restated By-Laws (the “By-Laws”), which permit any action that may be taken at a meeting of the
stockholders  to  be  taken  by  written  consent  by  the  holders  of  the  number  of  shares  of  stock
required to approve the action at a meeting at which all shares entitled to vote were present and
voted.  All  necessary  corporate  approvals  in  connection  with  the  adoption  of  the  New  Charter
have been obtained.
The  Information  Statement  is  being  furnished  to  the  holders  of  Common  Stock  pursuant  to
Section  14(c)  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as  amended  (the  “Exchange  Act”),  the
rules  thereunder  and  Section  2.12  of  the  By-Laws  solely  for  the  purpose  of  informing  our
stockholders of this corporate action before it takes effect. In accordance with Rule 14c-2 under
the Exchange Act, we plan to file the New Charter twenty calendar days following the mailing of
this Notice and the accompanying Information Statement, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably
practicable.
The  New  Charter  was  approved  and  recommended  by  our  Board  of  Directors  prior  to  the
stockholder action by written consent described in this Information Statement.
WE ARE NOT ASKING YOU FOR A PROXY
AND YOU ARE REQUESTED NOT TO SEND US A PROXY
You  have  the  right  to  receive  this  Notice  and  the  accompanying  Information  Statement  if  you
were a stockholder of record of our Company at the close of business on August 3, 2016.
By Order of the Board of Directors
Brent Whiteley
Chief Financial Officer, General Counsel and
Secretary
August 17, 2016
General
SAEXPLORATION HOLDINGS, INC.
1160 Dairy Ashford Rd., Suite 160
Houston, Texas 77079
INFORMATION STATEMENT
In  this  Information  Statement,  unless  the  context  otherwise  requires,  “we,”  “our,”  “us,”  the
“Company”  and  similar  expressions  refer  to  SAExploration  Holdings,  Inc.,  a  Delaware
corporation.
This  Information  Statement  is  being  sent  to  inform  our  stockholders  that  we  have  obtained
consent from the holders of a majority of the shares of our Common Stock to amend and restate
our  Second  Amended  and  Restated  Certificate  of  Incorporation  (the  “Existing  Charter”)  as  set
forth in the Third Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation attached hereto as Annex A
(the “New Charter”).
This  Information  Statement  is  being  mailed  on  or  about  August  17,  2016  to  the  Company’s
stockholders  of  record  as  of  August  3,  2016  (the  “Record  Date”).  This  Information  Statement
constitutes notice to our stockholders of corporate actions taken by our stockholders without a
meeting as required by the Delaware General Corporation Law (the “DGCL”) and pursuant to
Section 2.12 of the By-Laws.
We will pay the costs of preparing and sending out the enclosed Notice and this Information
Statement.
The date of this Information Statement is August 17, 2016.
WE ARE NOT ASKING YOU FOR A PROXY
AND YOU ARE REQUESTED NOT TO SEND US A PROXY
The Action by Written Consent
As  of  the  Record  Date,  the  holders  of  a  majority  of  the  outstanding  Common  Stock  (the
“Consenting  Stockholders”)  who  executed  a  written  consent  approving  the  New  Charter,  as
described  herein  (the  “Consent”),  collectively  beneficially  owned  6,644,533  shares  of  our
outstanding Common Stock. As of the Record Date, there were 9,344,288 shares of our Common
Stock issued and outstanding. No payment was made to any person or entity in consideration of
execution of the Consent.
Voting and Vote Required
The Company is not seeking consents, authorizations or proxies from you. Section 228 of the
DGCL (“Section 228”) and Section 2.12 of the By-Laws provide that the written consent of the
holders of outstanding shares of stock, having not less than the minimum number of votes which
would be necessary to authorize or take such action at a meeting at which all shares entitled to
vote thereon were present and voted, may be substituted for a meeting. Approval of at least a
majority of outstanding stock entitled to vote thereon was required to approve the New Charter.
As of the Record Date, the Company had 9,344,288 shares of Common Stock outstanding and
entitled to vote. Each share of Common Stock is entitled to one vote. On the Record Date, the
Consenting  Stockholders  collectively  beneficially  owned  6,644,533  shares  of  Common  Stock,
which  represents  a  majority  of  the  Company’s  outstanding  Common  Stock. Accordingly,  the
written consent executed by the Consenting Stockholders pursuant to Section 228 and
Section  2.12  of  the  By-Laws  is  sufficient  to  approve  the  New  Charter  and  no  further
stockholder action is required to approve this matter.
Notice Pursuant to Section 228
Pursuant to Section 228 and Section 2.12 of the By-Laws, the Company is required to provide
prompt  notice  of  the  taking  of  a  corporate  action  by  written  consent  to  the  Company’s
stockholders  who  have  not  consented  in  writing  to  such  action.  This  Information  Statement
serves as the notice required by Section 228 and Section 2.12 of the By-Laws.
Dissenters’ Rights of Appraisal
The DGCL does not provide dissenters’ rights of appraisal to our stockholders in connection with
the matters discussed in this Information Statement.
APPROVAL OF THE THIRD AMENDED AND RESTATED CERTIFICATE OF
INCORPORATION
Background
On June 13, 2016, the Company entered into a comprehensive restructuring support agreement
(the “Restructuring Support Agreement”) with holders (the “Supporting Holders”) of approximately
66.67% of the par value of the Company’s then-outstanding 10.000% Senior Secured Notes due
2019,  pursuant  to  which  the  Supporting  Holders  and  the  Company  agreed  to  enter  into  and
implement a comprehensive restructuring of the Company’s balance sheet. The New Charter is
being  adopted  to  give  effect  to  certain  corporate  governance  matters  contemplated  by  the
Restructuring Support Agreement as well as additional changes to the Existing Charter meant to
update it to reflect latest market practices for similarly situated companies.
Description of Amendments to the Existing Charter Contained in the New Charter
On  August  3,  2016,  the  Board  adopted  resolutions  authorizing  an  amendment  to  the  Existing
Charter to effect a number of changes contemplated by the Restructuring Support Agreement as
well  as  additional  changes  to  the  Existing  Charter  meant  to  update  it  to  reflect  latest  market
practices  for  similarly  situated  companies.  On  August  4,  2016,  following  the  approval  by  the
Board  of  Directors,  the  New  Charter  was  approved  by  the  written  consent  of  the  Company’s
stockholders holding a majority of the outstanding shares of Common Stock entitled to vote as of
August 3, 2016, and it will become effective upon its filing with the Secretary of State of the State
of Delaware, which we expect to occur on the twentieth calendar day following the mailing of this
Information Statement.
In addition to immaterial, conforming and technical changes, the New Charter will have the
effects described below.
1. Registered Office
The New Charter updates the address of the Company’s registered office to 1675 S. State St.,
Suite B, Kent County, Dover, Delaware 19901 and its registered agent to Capitol Services, Inc.
This change was made to reflect the Company’s current registered office and agent.
2. Authorized Shares
The New Charter states that the total authorized number of shares of any class of stock may be
increased  or  decreased  by  the  affirmative  vote  of  the  holders  of  a  majority  of  the  stock  of  the
Company entitled to vote.
This change removes the necessity of the Board of Directors to also approve such an increase or
decrease, and was made to give greater power to the Company’s stockholders.
3. Voting
The New Charter states that each holder of Common Stock will be entitled to one vote for each
share of Common Stock, subject to any rights granted to any future holders of preferred stock and
any effect of Section 2.9 of the By-Laws.
This  change  corresponds  with  an  amendment  to  the  Company’s  previous  by-laws,  which
adopted a new Section 2.9 thereof. Section 2.9 of the By-Laws prevents any investment entity
that is not a “United
-2-
States person,” as defined in Section 7701(a)(30) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and that
is managed by Blue Mountain Capital Management, LLC or its affiliates (a “Non-U.S. Entity”),
from possessing 10% or greater of the votes applicable to the outstanding Common Stock. The
effect of this would be to eliminate the voting power of any Non-U.S. Entity’s Common Stock to
the extent it provides 10% or greater of the voting power of the outstanding Common Stock. If this
were to occur, the other stockholders would possess greater voting power due to the reduction in
total shares able to vote.
4. Dividends
The New Charter states that, subject to any rights of future holders of preferred stock, dividends
may be declared and paid on the Common Stock at the discretion of the Board of Directors.
This change was made out of a preference to have the power to declare dividends be in the New
Charter rather than the By-Laws, where it had previously resided.
5. Dissolution, Liquidation or Winding Up
The New Charter states that, subject to any rights of future holders of preferred stock, holders of
Common Stock will be entitled to receive the assets of the Company ratably in proportion to the
number  of  shares  held  by  them  in  the  case  of  a  dissolution,  liquidation  or  winding  up  of  the
Company.
This change was made out of a preference to have this right be contained in the New Charter
rather than the By-Laws, where it had previously resided.
6. Elimination of Class Structure
The New Charter de-classifies the Board of Directors and requires that all directors be elected on
an annual basis beginning at the 2016 Annual Meeting, at which time all the terms of the current
directors  will  expire.  Previously,  the  Board  of  Directors  was  divided  into  three  classes  whose
members were elected once every three years.
This change was made to promote accountability on the Board of Directors and removes, in the
Company’s  view,  an  unnecessary  takeover  defense.  The  Company  currently  believes  the
benefits of allowing stockholders to effectively participate in the selection of directors outweighs
the risk of a party acquiring control of the Company in a single election.
7. Vacancies
The  New  Charter  states  that  any  vacancies  on  the  Board  of  Directors  may  be  filled  by  an
affirmative vote of a majority of the remaining members; provided, that for so long as Whitebox
Advisors LLC or BlueMountain Capital Management, LLC (each, a “Principal Stockholder”) hold
at least ten percent (10%) of the outstanding Common Stock, if there is a vacancy of a director
nominated by either of these Principal Stockholders, then the nominating Principal Stockholder is
entitled to nominate a successor to such director and the Company and Board of Directors must
take all actions necessary to facilitate the appointment of the person as promptly as practicable.
The  Company’s  By-Laws  give  each  of  the  Principal  Stockholders  the  right  to  nominate  one
director to be included in the Company’s slate of nominees and proxy materials as long as either
holds at least ten percent of the Company’s Common Stock. This provision provides that, should
there be a vacancy on the Board of Directors caused by one of their nominees, the nominating
Principal Stockholder will not lose their right to nominate a director for a seat on the Board of
Directors. As a result, the other members of the Board of Directors would be expected to install
the Principal Stockholder’s nominee, who will remain a director until the next annual meeting.
8. Limited Liability
-3-
The New Charter broadens the limitation of liability of directors. Previously, the Existing Charter,
while generally stating that the directors would not be personally liable to the Company or its
stockholders, had listed a series of exceptions to this general rule. As is common for Delaware
corporations,  the  New  Charter  states  that  the  directors  will  not  be  personally  liable  to  the
Company or its stockholders to the maximum extent allowed under the DGCL.
This change was made to remove any lack of overlap between the previous coverage and that
allowed under the DGCL.
9.
Indemnification
The New Charter broadens the indemnification provided to a Covered Person (as defined in the
New Charter) to expressly provide:
•
•
•
indemnification to Covered Persons to the maximum extent permitted by applicable
law, against all liability and losses suffered and expenses (including attorney’s fees)
reasonably  incurred  by  such  Covered  Person  who  is  made  a  party  to  any
Proceeding (as defined in the New Charter) by reason of the fact that he or she, or a
person for whom he or she is the legal representative, is or was a director or, while a
director or officer of the Company, is or was serving at the request of the Company
as  a  director,  officer,  employee  or  agent  of  another  entity  or  enterprise,  including
service with respect to employee benefit plans;
the prepayment of expenses (including attorney’s fees) to the extent not prohibited
by applicable law;
that  if  a  claim  for  indemnification  or  advancement  of  expenses  is  not  paid  in  full
within 30 days, the Covered Person may file to suit to recover the unpaid amount
and,  if  successful  in  whole  or  in  part,  shall  be  entitled  to  be  paid  the  expense  of
prosecuting such claim;
•
that the rights provided in the indemnification provision are not exclusive; and
•
that the Company is the indemnitor of first resort and if any third party pays or causes
to be paid the indemnifiable amounts then the third party shall be fully subrogated to
all rights of the Covered Person with respect to such payment, and the Company will
fully indemnify, reimburse and hold harmless such third party for all such payments
actually made by the third party.
The New Charter also specifies that any amendment or repeal of this provision will not adversely
affect any right or protection in respect of any act or omission occurring prior to the time of the
amendment or repeal. Finally, the Company may also advance expenses and indemnify persons
other than Covered Persons to the extent permitted by applicable law.
The  Existing  Charter  contains  an  indemnification  provision  stating  that  indemnification  will  be
provided to the full extent permitted. This addition in the New Charter makes the indemnification
rights  more  clear,  particularly  with  regard  to  any  indemnification  rights  from  third  parties  the
indemnitee may have. In addition, this change also reflects the market practice with regards to
such provisions in certificates of incorporation of many Delaware-incorporated companies.
10. Corporate Opportunities
The New Charter renounces any interest or expectancy by the Company in, or in being offered
an opportunity to participate in, business opportunities that are presented to any of the Principal
Stockholders, their respective affiliates, managed investment funds or portfolio companies or any
of their respective officers, directors, agents, stockholders, members, partners, employees, or any
director designated for nomination by the Principal Stockholders unless, in the case of any such
person who is a
-4-
director or officer of the Company, such business opportunity is expressly offered to such director
or officer in writing solely in his or her capacity as a director or officer of the Company.
This  change  was  made  to  provide  the  Principal  Stockholders,  and  their  nominee  directors,
reasonable assurance that they will not be liable to the Company by reason of the fact that they
pursue or acquire a business opportunity, direct a business opportunity to another person or fail
to  present  a  business  opportunity,  or  information  regarding  a  business  opportunity,  to  the
Company.  The  result  of  this  provision  is  that  the  Principal  Stockholders,  and  their  nominated
Directors,  may  be  presented  with,  and  participate  in,  opportunities  to  the  exclusion  of  the
Company,  even  if  the  opportunity  is  one  that  Company  might  reasonably  be  deemed  to  have
pursued  or  had  the  ability  or  desire  to  pursue  if  granted  the  opportunity  to  do  so.  This  may
preclude  the  Company  from  having  access  to  a  business  opportunity  that  the  Principal
Stockholders, and their nominated Directors, would otherwise be required to present to the Board
of Directors. As noted in the provision, the renounced expectancy does not apply to opportunities
offered  to  such  officers  or  directors  in  writing  in  their  capacity  as  officers  or  directors  of  the
Company.
11.
Amendments
Amendments
The New Charter requires the consent of any Principal Stockholder that holds at least ten percent
(10%) of the outstanding Common Stock to amend either the Vacancy or Corporate Opportunity
provisions described above. In addition, the New Charter requires that amendments to the By-
Laws must be adopted by an affirmative vote of a majority in voting power of the shares of stock
entitled to vote thereon; provided for so long as any Principal Stockholder that holds at least ten
percent (10%) of the outstanding Common Stock, consent from any such Principal Stockholder is
required  to  amend  their  rights  pursuant  to  Section  2.9,  Section  3.3(b),  Article  IV,  Article  VI  or
Section 7.7 of the By-Laws.
This  change  was  made  to  protect  the  rights  of  the  Principal  Stockholders  given  in  the  New
Charter and By-Laws as contemplated by the Restructuring Support Agreement.
12. Delaware
The New Charter adopts Delaware as the exclusive jurisdiction for (a) any derivative action or
proceeding brought on behalf of the Company, (b) any action asserting a claim of breach of a
fiduciary duty owed by any director, officer, employee or agent of the Company to the Company
or the Company’s stockholders, (c) any action asserting a claim arising pursuant to any provision
of the DGCL, this Certificate of Incorporation or the By-Laws, or (d) any action asserting a claim
governed by the internal affairs doctrine shall be the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware.
If  the  Court  of  Chancery  of  the  State  of  Delaware  lacks  jurisdiction  over  such  action  or
proceeding, the sole and exclusive forum for such action or proceeding shall be another court of
the State of Delaware or, if no court of the State of Delaware has jurisdiction, then the federal
district court for the District of Delaware.
Every  stockholder  of  the  Company  will  be  deemed  to  have  consented  to  this  provision.  This
change was made to provide the Company with the benefit of (i) litigating derivative and other
shareholder  litigation  in  the  Delaware  Court  of  Chancery,  which  is  widely  recognized  as
possessing deep expertise both in substantive corporate law and in the procedural aspects of
shareholder litigation, and (ii) avoiding the inefficiencies and the risk of inconsistent judgments
regarding the same legal matters associated with potentially litigating such actions in multiple
jurisdictions.
13. Severability
The New Charter adds a severability provision to make clear that if any provision of the New
Charter is held to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable, such provisions in any other circumstance
and of the
-5-
remaining provisions shall not be affected or in any way impaired thereby. It is also made clear
that  the  provisions  of  the  New  Charter  (including  any  provision  held  to  be  invalid,  illegal  or
unenforceable) will be construed so as to permit the Company to protect its directors, officers,
employees and agents from personal liability to the fullest extent permitted by law.
This change was made to reflect market practice for similarly situated companies.
The foregoing summary of the changes in the New Charter does not purport to be complete and
is qualified in its entirety by reference of the text of the New Charter, a copy of which is attached
to this Information Statement as Annex A.
INTEREST OF CERTAIN PERSONS IN MATTERS TO BE ACTED UPON
The New Charter provides two of the Company’s Principal Stockholders, Whitebox Advisors LLC
and BlueMountain Capital Management, LLC with (i) Board member nomination rights, as more
fully  described  above  in  the  section  entitled  “Approval  of  the  Third  Amended  and  Restated
Certificate of Incorporation – Description of Amendments to the Existing Charter Contained in the
New Charter – Vacancies,” (ii) corporate opportunity protection, as more fully described above in
the section entitled “Approval of the Third Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation –
Description of Amendments to the Existing Charter Contained in the New Charter – Corporate
Opportunities” and (iii) the right to provide required consent to certain amendments to provisions
of the New Charter and certain provisions of the By-Laws, as more fully described above in the
section  entitled  “Approval  of  the  Third  Amended  and  Restated  Certificate  of  Incorporation  –
Description  of  Amendments  to  the  Existing  Charter  Contained  in  the  New  Charter  –
Amendments.” In connection with the previously disclosed resignations of Gregory R. Monahan,
Eric  S.  Rosenfeld,  David  D.  Sgro  and  Brent  Whiteley  from  the  Board  of  Directors,  two  of  our
current  directors,  Jacob  Mercer  and  Michael  Kass,  were  appointed  to  the  Board  of  Directors
following their referral to the Board of Directors by Whitebox Advisors LLC and BlueMountain
Capital Management, LLC, respectively.
Other than as described above, and except in their capacity as stockholders (which interest does
not differ from that of the other holders of Common Stock), none of our officers, directors, or any of
their respective affiliates or associates has any interest in the New Charter.
DELIVERY OF DOCUMENTS TO STOCKHOLDERS
Pursuant  to  the  rules  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (the  “SEC”),  we  and  the
services that we employ to deliver communications to our stockholders, are permitted to deliver to
two or more stockholders sharing the same address a single copy of this Information Statement.
Upon written or oral request, we will deliver a separate copy of the Information Statement to any
stockholder  at  a  shared  address  to  which  a  single  copy  of  the  Information  Statement  was
delivered and who wishes to receive a separate copy of the Information Statement. Stockholders
receiving  multiple  copies  of  the  Information  Statement  may  likewise  request  that  we  deliver
single copies of such documents in the future. Stockholders may notify us of their requests by
calling or writing us at:
SAExploration Holdings, Inc.
1160 Dairy Ashford Rd., Suite 160
Houston, Texas 77079
Attention: Investor Relations
Telephone: (281) 258-4409
Email: rabney@saexploration.com
-6-
STOCK OWNERSHIP
The following table sets forth information as of July 28, 2016, regarding the beneficial ownership
of our Common Stock by:
•  each person known to be the beneficial owner of more than five percent of our outstanding
shares of Common Stock;
•  each of our Directors and our Named Executive Officers; and
•  all current Executive Officers and Directors as a group.
Unless otherwise indicated, we believe that all persons named in the table have sole voting and
investment power with respect to all shares of Common Stock beneficially owned by them.
Beneficial Ownership as of
July 28, 2016 (2)
Amount and Nature
of Beneficial
Ownership
Approximate
Percentage
of Beneficial
Ownership
Name and Address of Beneficial Owner(1)   
Directors and Executive Officers:
  
Jeff Hastings(3)
    
Brian Beatty(3)
    
    
Brent Whiteley
Mike Scott(3)
    
Darin Silvernagle(3)
    
    
Ryan Abney
Trish Gerber
    
Mel Cooper(6)
    
Michael Kass(7)
    
Jake Mercer(8)
    
Gary Dalton
    
All directors and executive officers as a group
168,019(4)    
9,062(5)    
   
2,227  
382  
   
   
289  
   
61  
29  
   
   
—    
   
—    
—    
   
   
299
1.8%
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
*  
—    
—    
—    
*
All directors and executive officers as a group
(11 persons)
Five Percent Holders:
  
Whitebox Advisors LLC(9)
    
BlueMountain Capital Management, LLC(10)
    
FMR LLC(11)
    
Aristides Capital LLC(12)
    
Morgan Stanley Investment Management(13)
180,368
1.93%
2,609,039  
2,409,106  
806,405  
728,280  
506,833
27.9% 
25.8% 
8.63% 
7.8% 
5.42%
Less than 1%.
*
(1) Unless otherwise indicated, the business address of each of the individuals is 1160 Dairy
Ashford Rd., Suite 160, Houston, Texas 77079.
(2) The percentage of beneficial ownership is calculated based on 9,344,288 shares of common
stock outstanding as of July 28, 2016.
(3) The business address of this individual is 3333 8th Street SE, 3rd Floor, Calgary Alberta, T2G
3A4.
(4) Includes  (i)  830  shares  held  directly  by  Jeff  Hastings,  (ii)  24,221  shares  held  indirectly
through CLCH, LLC (“CLCH”), and (iii) 142,968 shares held indirectly through Speculative
Seismic Investments, LLC (“SSI”). CLCH and SSI are both controlled by Mr. Hastings. The
business address for CLCH is 4721 Golden Spring Circle, Anchorage, Alaska 99507. The
business address for SSI is 11 Crestwood Dr., Houston, TX 77007.
(5) Includes (i) 197 shares directly owned by Mr. Beatty and (ii) 8,865 shares directly owned by
Seismic Holdings. Seismic Holdings is controlled by Mr. Beatty and his wife, Sheri L. Beatty.
The business address for Seismic Holdings is 59 Westpoint Court SW, Calgary, AB, T3H
4M7.
(6) The business address of the reporting person is 603 Shiloh Rd., Bastrop, TX 78602.
-7-
(7) The business address of the reporting person is 280 Park Avenue, 12th Floor, New York, NY
10017.
(8) The  business  address  of  the  reporting  person  is  3033  Excelsior  Blvd.,  Suite  300,
Minneapolis, MN 55416.
(9) The  business  address  of  the  reporting  person  is  3033  Excelsior  Blvd.,  Suite  300,
Minneapolis, MN 55416. The foregoing information was derived from a Schedule 13D/A filed
on August 8, 2016, in which the reporting person identifies itself as having shared voting and
dispositive  power  over  2,609,039  shares  of  Common  Stock.  The  Schedule  13D/A  further
indicated that Whitebox General Partner LLC has shared voting and dispositive power over
2,609,039 shares of Common Stock, Whitebox Multi-Strategy Partners, LP has shared voting
and dispositive power over 1,582,394 shares of Common Stock, Whitebox Credit Partners,
LP  has  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  510,492  shares  of  Common  Stock,  and
WBox  2015-7  Ltd.  has  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  1,026,461  shares  of
Common Stock.
(10)
The business address of the reporting person is 280 Park Avenue, 12th Floor, New York, NY
The business address of the reporting person is 280 Park Avenue, 12th Floor, New York, NY
10017. The foregoing information was derived from a Schedule 13D filed on August 8, 2016,
in which the reporting person identifies itself as having shared voting and dispositive power
over  2,409,106  shares  of  Common  Stock.  The  Schedule  13D  further  indicated  that
BlueMountain GP Holdings, LLC has shared voting and dispositive power over 1,976,336
shares of Common Stock, Blue Mountain CA Master Fund GP, Ltd. and Blue Mountain Credit
Alternatives  Master  Fund  L.P.  have  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  1,674,107
shares  of  Common  Stock,  BlueMountain  Long/Short  Credit  GP,  LLC  and  BlueMountain
Guadalupe Peak Fund L.P. have shared voting and dispositive power over 80,647 shares of
Common  Stock,  BlueMountain  Kicking  Horse  Fund  GP,  LLC  and  BlueMountain  Kicking
Horse Fund L.P. have shared voting and dispositive power over 61,411 shares of Common
Stock, BlueMountain Timberline Ltd. has shared voting and dispositive power over 59,405
shares of Common Stock, BlueMountain Summit Opportunities GP II, LLC and BlueMountain
Summit  Trading  L.P.  have  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  160,171  shares  of
Common  Stock,  and  BlueMountain  Montenvers  GP  S.a.r.l.  and  BlueMountain  Montenvers
Master  Fund  SCA  SICAV-SIF  have  shared  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  373,365
shares of Common Stock.
(11)The business address of the reporting person is 245 Summer Street, Boston, MA 02210. The
reporting  person  filed  a  Schedule  13G/A  on  August  10,  2016,  which  indicated  that  the
reporting person no longer holds any shares of Common Stock.
(12)The  business  address  of  the  reporting  person  is  25  S.  Huron  St.,  Suite  2A,  Toledo,  OH
43604. The foregoing information was derived from a Schedule 13G filed on August 5, 2016,
in  which  the  reporting  person  identifies  itself  as  having  sole  voting  and  dispositive  power
over 728,280 shares of Common Stock. The Schedule 13G further indicated that Christopher
M.  Brown  has  sole  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  728,280  shares  of  Common  Stock,
Aristides  Fund  QP,  LP  has  sole  voting  and  dispositive  power  over  127,478  shares  of
Common Stock, and Aristides Fund LP has sole voting and dispositive power over 600,802
shares of Common Stock.
(13)The business address of the reporting person is 440 S. LaSalle Street, 39th Floor, Chicago,
IL 60605.
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Information Statement contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the U.S.
federal securities laws, with respect to our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows
and business, and our expectations or beliefs concerning future events. These forward-looking
statements  can  generally  be  identified  by  phrases  such  as  “expects,”  “anticipates,”  “believes,”
“estimates,”  “intends,”  “plans  to,”  “ought,”  “could,”  “will,”  “should,”  “likely,”  “appears,”  “projects,”
“forecasts,” “outlook” or other similar words or phrases. There are inherent risks and uncertainties
in any forward-looking statements. Although we believe that our expectations are reasonable, we
can give no assurance that these expectations will prove to have been correct, and actual results
may vary materially. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update, amend or
clarify any forward-looking statements to reflect events, new information or otherwise. Some of
the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations are
discussed below. All written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us, or persons
acting on our behalf, are expressly qualified in their entirety by these cautionary statements.
-8-
You should refer to our periodic and current reports filed with the SEC and the risk factors from
our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, as amended by our
Annual Report on Form 10-K/A filed on April 29, 2016 (collectively, the “2015 Form 10-K”) for
specific risks which would cause actual results to be significantly different from those expressed
or implied by any of our forward-looking statements. It is not possible to identify all of the risks,
uncertainties  and  other  factors  that  may  affect  future  results.  In  light  of  these  risks  and
uncertainties,  the  forward-looking  events  and  circumstances  discussed  in  this  Information
Statement  may  not  occur  and  actual  results  could  differ  materially  from  those  anticipated  or
implied in the forward-looking statements. Accordingly, readers of this Information Statement are
cautioned not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements.
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We file annual, quarterly and current reports and other information (File No. 001-35471) with the
SEC pursuant to the Exchange Act. For further information regarding us, please see our filings
with the SEC, including our annual, quarterly, and current reports and proxy statements, which
you may read and copy at the Public Reference Room maintained by the SEC at 100 F Street,
N.E.,  Washington,  D.C.  20549.  You  may  obtain  information  on  the  operation  of  the  Public
Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. Our public filings with the SEC are also
available to the public on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
We  maintain  a  website  at  www.saexploration.com.  The  information  on  our  website  or  on  any
other website is not, and you must not consider such information to be, a part of this Information
Statement. You should rely only on the information contained in this Information Statement and in
the documents incorporated by reference.
By Order of the Board of Directors
Brent Whiteley
Chief Financial Officer, General Counsel and
Secretary
August 17, 2016
-9-
ANNEX A
THIRD AMENDED AND RESTATED
CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION
of
SAExploration Holdings, Inc.
SAExploration Holdings, Inc., a corporation existing under the laws of the State of Delaware, by
its Chief Executive Officer, certifies as follows:
1. The name of the Corporation is “SAExploration Holdings, Inc.”
2. The Corporation’s Certificate of Incorporation was filed in the office of the Secretary of State of
the  State  of  Delaware  on  February  2,  2011.  The  First  Amended  and  Restated  Certificate  of
Incorporation was filed in the office of the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware on June 20,
2011. The Second Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation was filed in the office of
the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware on June 24, 2013. An amendment to the Second
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation was filed in the office of the Secretary of State
of the State of Delaware on July 26, 2016.
3.  This  Third  Amended  and  Restated  Certificate  of  Incorporation  (hereafter,  the  “Certificate  of
Incorporation”) was duly adopted by the board of directors of the Corporation and the vote of the
holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of common stock of the Corporation in accordance
with  Section  228,  Section  242,  Section  245  and  other  applicable  provisions  of  the  General
Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (“DGCL”).
4. The text of the Second Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Corporation
is hereby amended and restated in its entirety to read as follows:
ARTICLE I
Name
The name of the corporation is SAExploration Holdings, Inc. (the “Corporation”).
ARTICLE II
Address; Registered Office and Agent
The address of the Corporation’s registered office  is  1675  S.  State  St.,  Suite  B,  Kent  County,
Dover, Delaware; and the name of its registered agent at such address is Capitol Services, Inc.
ARTICLE III
Purposes
The purpose of the Corporation is to engage in any lawful act or activity for which corporations
may be organized under the DGCL.
A-1
ARTICLE IV
Capital Stock
4.1 Authorized Stock. The total number of shares of all classes of stock that the Corporation shall
have  authority  to  issue  is  (a):  56,000,000  shares,  divided  into  55,000,000  shares  of  Common
Stock, with the par value of $0.0001 per share (the “Common Stock”), and (b) 1,000,000 shares of
Preferred Stock, with the par value of $0.0001 per share (the “Preferred Stock”). The authorized
number of shares of any class of stock may be increased or decreased (but not below the number
of shares thereof then outstanding) by the affirmative vote of the holders of a majority of the stock
of the Corporation entitled to vote, and no separate vote of such class of stock the authorized
number of which is to be increased or decreased shall be necessary to effect such change.
4.2 Board Issuance of Preferred Stock. The Board of Directors of the Corporation (the “Board”) is
hereby authorized, by resolution or resolutions thereof, to provide, out of the unissued shares of
Preferred Stock, for series of Preferred Stock and, with respect to each such series, to fix the
number  of  shares  constituting  such  series  and  the  designation  of  such  series,  the  voting  and
other  powers  (if  any)  of  the  shares  of  such  series,  and  the  preferences  and  any  relative,
participating,  optional  or  other  special  rights  and  any  qualifications,  limitations  or  restrictions
thereof, of the shares of such series. The powers, preferences and relative, participating, optional
and other special rights of each series of Preferred Stock, and the qualifications, limitations or
restrictions  thereof,  if  any,  may  differ  from  those  of  any  and  all  other  series  at  any  time
outstanding.
4.3 Voting. Except as may otherwise be provided in this Certificate of Incorporation, Section 2.9
of the By-laws or by applicable law, each holder of Common Stock (a “Stockholder”), as such,
shall be entitled to one vote for each share of Common Stock held of record by such Stockholder
on all matters on which Stockholders generally are entitled to vote. Except as may otherwise be
provided in this Certificate of Incorporation (including any certificate filed with the Secretary of
State of the State of Delaware establishing the terms of a series of Preferred Stock in accordance
with Section 4.2) or by applicable law, no holder of any series of Preferred Stock, as such, shall
be entitled to any voting powers in respect thereof.
4.4 Dividends. Subject to applicable law and the rights, if any, of the holders of any outstanding
series of Preferred Stock, dividends may be declared and paid on the Common Stock at such
times and in such amounts as the Board in its discretion shall determine.
4.5 Dissolution, Liquidation or Winding Up. Upon the dissolution, liquidation or winding up of the
Corporation,  subject  to  the  rights,  if  any,  of  the  holders  of  any  outstanding  series  of  Preferred
Stock,  Stockholders  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  the  assets  of  the  Corporation  available  for
distribution to its Stockholders ratably in proportion to the number of shares held by them.
ARTICLE V
Directors
5.1 Election of Directors. Unless and except to the extent that the By-laws of the Corporation (the
“By-laws”) shall so require, the election of  directors  of  the  Corporation  need  not  be  by  written
ballot.
5.2 Board Composition. The directors of the Corporation shall be elected annually and shall hold
office  until  the  next  annual  meeting  of  the  Corporation’s  stockholders  and  until  his  or  her
successor  shall  be  duly  elected  and  qualified,  or  his  or  her  earlier  death,  resignation,
disqualification  or  removal  from  office,  and  any  director  who,  prior  to  the  effective  date  of  this
Certificate of Incorporation, was elected to a  term  that  continues  beyond  the  date  of  the  2016
annual meeting of the Corporation’s stockholders shall hold office until the annual meeting of the
Corporation’s  stockholders  in  2016  and  until  his  or  her  successor  shall  be  duly  elected  and
qualified,  or  his  or  her  earlier  death,  resignation,  disqualification  or  removal  from  office.  As  a
result, effective as
A-2
of  the  effective  date  of  this  Certificate  of  Incorporation,  the  Board  will  no  longer  be  classified
under Section 141(d) of the Delaware General Corporation Law and directors shall no longer be
divided into classes.
5.3 Vacancy. Subject to the rights of holders of any series of Preferred Stock then outstanding,
any newly created directorships resulting from an increase in the authorized number of directors
and any vacancies occurring in the Board, may be filled by the affirmative votes of a majority of
the  remaining  members  of  the  Board  (or  the  sole  remaining  director,  as  the  case  may  be);
provided, that for so long as White Box Advisors LLC or BlueMountain Capital Management, LLC
(each, a “Principal Stockholder”) holds (together with its affiliates, excluding the Corporation and
its other affiliates) at least ten percent (10%) of the outstanding Common Stock, in the event of
any vacancy occurring due to the death, resignation, removal or other event causing the absence
of  a  director  nominated  by  either  of  the  Principal  Stockholders,  the  Principal  Stockholder  that
nominated  such  director  shall  be  entitled  to  nominate  a  successor  to  such  director,  and  the
Company  and  the  Board  shall  take  all  actions  necessary  to  ensure  that  such  successor  is
appointed to the Board as promptly as practicable. A director so elected shall be elected to hold
office until the earlier of the expiration of the term of office of the director whom he or she has
replaced,  a  successor  is  elected  and  qualified  or  the  director’s  earlier  death,  resignation,
disqualification or removal.
ARTICLE VI
Limitation of Liability
To the fullest extent permitted under the DGCL, as amended from time to time, no director of the
Corporation  shall  be  personally  liable  to  the  Corporation  or  its  stockholders  for  monetary
damages for breach of fiduciary duty as a director. Any amendment or repeal of this Article VI
shall  not  adversely  affect  any  right  or  protection  of  a  director  of  the  Corporation  hereunder  in
respect of any act or omission occurring prior to the time of such amendment or repeal.
ARTICLE VII
Indemnification
7.1 Right to Indemnification. The Corporation shall indemnify and hold harmless, to the fullest
extent  permitted  by  applicable  law  as  it  presently  exists  or  may  hereafter  be  amended,  any
person (a “Covered Person”) who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any
threatened,  pending  or  completed  action,  suit  or  proceeding,  whether  civil,  criminal,
administrative or investigative (a “Proceeding”), by reason of the fact that he or she, or a person
for whom he or she is the legal representative, is or was a director or officer of the Corporation or,
while a director or officer of the Corporation, is or was serving at the request of the Corporation as
a director, officer, employee or agent of another entity or enterprise, including service with respect
to  employee  benefit  plans,  against  all  liability  and  loss  suffered  and  expenses  (including
attorneys’  fees)  reasonably  incurred  by  such  Covered  Person.  Notwithstanding  the  preceding
sentence,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in  Section  7.3,  the  Corporation  shall  be  required  to
indemnify a Covered Person in connection with a Proceeding (or part thereof) commenced by
such  Covered  Person  only  if  the  commencement  of  such  Proceeding  (or  part  thereof)  by  the
Covered Person was authorized by the Board.
7.2 Prepayment  of  Expenses.  To  the  extent  not  prohibited  by  applicable  law,  the  Corporation
shall pay the expenses (including attorneys’ fees) incurred by a Covered Person in defending
any Proceeding in advance of its final disposition; provided, however, that, to the extent required
by  applicable  law,  such  payment  of  expenses  in  advance  of  the  final  disposition  of  the
Proceeding shall be made only upon receipt of an undertaking by the Covered Person to repay
all amounts advanced if it should be ultimately determined that the Covered Person is not entitled
to be indemnified under this Article VII or otherwise.
A-3
7.3 Claims. If a claim for indemnification or advancement of expenses under this Article VII is not
paid in full within 30 days after a written claim therefor by the Covered Person has been received
by the Corporation, the Covered Person may file suit to recover the unpaid amount of such claim
and, if successful in whole or in part, shall be entitled to be paid the expense of prosecuting such
claim.  In  any  such  action  the  Corporation  shall  have  the  burden  of  proving  that  the  Covered
Person  is  not  entitled  to  the  requested  indemnification  or  advancement  of  expenses  under
applicable law.
7.4 Nonexclusivity of Rights. The rights conferred on any Covered Person by this Article VII shall
not be exclusive of any other rights  that  such  Covered  Person  may  have  or  hereafter  acquire
under any statute, provision of this Certificate of Incorporation, the By-laws, agreement, vote of
stockholders or disinterested directors or otherwise.
7.5 Other Sources. In all events, (i) the Corporation hereby agrees that it is the indemnitor of first
resort (meaning, its obligation to provide advancement and/or indemnification to such Covered
Person  is  primary  and  any  obligation  of  any  third  parties  to  such  Covered  Person  to  provide
advancement  or  indemnification  hereunder  or  under  any  other  indemnification  agreement
(whether pursuant to contract, by-laws or charter), or any obligation of any insurer of such third
party  to  provide  insurance  coverage,  for  the  same  expenses,  liabilities,  judgments,  penalties,
fines and amounts paid in settlement (including all interest, assessments and other charges paid
or payable in connection with or in respect of such expenses, liabilities, judgments, penalties,
fines and amounts paid in settlement) incurred by such Covered Person is secondary) and (ii) if
any third party pays or causes to be paid, for any reason, any amounts otherwise indemnifiable
hereunder or under any other indemnification agreement (whether pursuant to contract, by-laws
or charter) with such Covered Person, then (x) such third party shall be fully subrogated to all
rights of such Covered Person with respect to such payment and (y) the Corporation shall fully
indemnify, reimburse and hold harmless such third party for all such payments actually made by
such third party.
7.6 Amendment or Repeal. Any amendment or repeal of the foregoing provisions of this Article
VII shall not adversely affect any right or protection hereunder of any Covered Person in respect
of any act or omission occurring prior to the time of such amendment or repeal.
7.7 Other Indemnification and Prepayment of Expenses. This Article VII shall not limit the right of
the Corporation, to the extent and in the manner permitted by applicable law, to indemnify and to
advance  expenses  to  persons  other  than  Covered  Persons  when  and  as  authorized  by
appropriate corporate action.
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
8.1 Certificate Amendments.  The  Corporation  reserves  the  right  at  any  time,  and  from  time  to
time,  to  amend  or  repeal  any  provision  contained  in  this  Certificate  of  Incorporation,  and  add
other  provisions  authorized  by  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Delaware  at  the  time  in  force,  in  the
manner now or hereafter prescribed by applicable law; and all rights, preferences and privileges
of whatsoever nature conferred upon stockholders, directors or any other persons whomsoever
by and pursuant to this Certificate of Incorporation (as amended or amended and restated from
time to time in accordance with the terms hereof) are granted subject to the rights reserved in this
Section 8.1. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in addition to any vote required by the Certificate of
Incorporation or otherwise required by law, so long as any Principal Stockholder (together with its
affiliates, excluding the Corporation and its other affiliates) holds at least ten percent (10%) of the
Corporation’s  outstanding  capital  stock,  the  consent  of  such  Principal  Stockholder  shall  be
required for any amendment, repeal or addition hereto that would have the effect of limiting (i) the
proviso to the first sentence of Section 5.3, (ii) this sentence of this Section 8.1 or (iii) the second
sentence of Section 8.2 or (iv) Article IX.
A-4
8.2 By-law Amendments. The By-laws may be amended or repealed and new By-laws may be
adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority in voting power of shares of stock entitled to vote
thereon. Notwithstanding the foregoing, so long as either Principal Stockholder (together with its
affiliates, excluding the Corporation and its other affiliates) holds at least ten percent (10%) of the
Corporation’s  outstanding  capital  stock,  the  consent  of  such  Principal  Stockholder  shall  be
required  for  any  amendment,  repeal  or  addition  to  the  By-laws  that  would  have  the  effect  of
limiting such Principal Stockholder’s rights pursuant to Section 2.9, Section 3.3(b), Section 3.16,
Article IV, Article VI or Section 7.7 thereof.
ARTICLE IX
Corporate Opportunity
To the fullest extent permitted from time to time under the DGCL and except as may be otherwise
expressly  agreed  in  writing  by  the  Corporation  and  any  Principal  Stockholder  with  respect  to
such Principal Stockholder, the Corporation, on behalf of itself and its subsidiaries, renounces
any  interest  or  expectancy  of  the  Corporation  and  its  subsidiaries  in,  or  in  being  offered  an
opportunity to participate in, business opportunities, that are from time to time presented to any of
the  Principal  Stockholders,  their  respective  affiliates  (excluding  the  Corporation  and  its  other
affiliates), managed investment funds or portfolio companies (other than the Corporation and its
subsidiaries)  or  any  of  their  respective  officers,  directors,  agents,  stockholders,  members,
partners, employees, or any director designated for nomination by such Principal Stockholder or
its  affiliates  (excluding  the  Corporation  and  its  other  affiliates)  (collectively,  the  “Exempted
Persons”), even if the opportunity is one that the Corporation or its subsidiaries might reasonably
be deemed to have pursued or had the ability or desire to pursue if granted the opportunity to do
so and no such person shall be liable to the Corporation or any of its subsidiaries for breach of
any fiduciary or other duty, as a director or officer or otherwise, by reason of the fact that such
person  pursues  or  acquires  such  business  opportunity,  directs  such  business  opportunity  to
another  person  or  fails  to  present  such  business  opportunity,  or  information  regarding  such
business opportunity, to the Corporation or its subsidiaries unless, in the case of any such person
who is a director or officer of the Corporation, such business opportunity is expressly offered to
such  director  or  officer  in  writing  solely  in  his  or  her  capacity  as  a  director  or  officer  of  the
Corporation.  To  the  fullest  extent  permitted  by  law  or  regulation,  including  the  rules  of  any
exchange  on  which  the  Corporation’s  securities  may  be  listed,  any  person  purchasing  or
otherwise acquiring any interest in any shares of stock of the Corporation shall be deemed to
have  notice  of  and  consented  to  the  provisions  of  this  Article  IX.  Neither  the  alteration,
amendment  or  repeal  of  this  Article  IX  nor  the  adoption  of  any  provision  of  this  Certificate  of
Incorporation inconsistent with this Article IX shall eliminate or reduce the effect of this Article IX
in respect of any business opportunity first identified or any other matter occurring, or any cause
of action, suit or claim that, but for this Article IX, would accrue or arise, prior to such alteration,
amendment, repeal or adoption. For the avoidance of doubt, each Principal Stockholder and its
Exempted  Persons  shall  have  the  right  to,  and  shall  have  no  duty  (whether  contractual  or
otherwise) not to, directly or indirectly: (A) engage in the same, similar or competing business
activities or lines of business as the Corporation or its affiliates, (B) do business with any client or
customer of the Corporation or its affiliates, or (C) make investments in competing businesses of
the Corporation or its affiliates, and such acts shall not be deemed wrongful or improper.
ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous
10.1 Exclusive  Forum.  Unless  the  Corporation  consents  in  writing  to  the  selection  of  an
alternative forum, the sole and exclusive forum for (a) any derivative action or proceeding brought
on behalf of the Corporation, (b) any action asserting a claim of breach of a fiduciary duty owed
by  any  director,  officer,  employee  or  agent  of  the  Corporation  to  the  Corporation  or  the
Corporation’s stockholders, (c) any action
A-5
asserting a claim arising pursuant to any provision of the DGCL, this Certificate of Incorporation
or the By-laws, or (d) any action asserting a claim governed by the internal affairs doctrine shall
be  the  Court  of  Chancery  of  the  State  of  Delaware.  If  the  Court  of  Chancery  of  the  State  of
Delaware lacks jurisdiction over such action or proceeding, the sole and exclusive forum for such
action or proceeding shall be another court of the State of Delaware or, if no court of the State of
Delaware has jurisdiction, then the federal district court for the District of Delaware. Any person
who, or entity that, holds, purchases or otherwise acquires an interest in stock of the Corporation
shall be deemed (a) to have notice of, and to have consented to and agreed to comply with, this
Section 10.1, and (b) to have consented to the personal jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery of
the State of Delaware (or if the Court of Chancery does not have jurisdiction, another court of the
State of Delaware, or if no court of the State of Delaware has jurisdiction, the federal district court
for  the  District  of  Delaware)  in  any  proceeding  brought  to  enjoin  any  action  by  that  person  or
entity that is inconsistent with the exclusive jurisdiction provided for in this Section 10.1. If any
action the subject matter of which is within the scope of this Section 10.1 is filed in a court other
than as specified above in the name of any stockholder, such stockholder shall be deemed to
have consented to (a) the personal jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware,
another court in the State of Delaware or the federal district court in the District of Delaware, as
appropriate, in connection with any action brought in any such court to enforce this Section 10.1
and (b) having service of process made upon such stockholder in any such action by service
upon such stockholder’s counsel in the action as agent for such stockholder.
10.2 Severability. If any provision or provisions of this Certificate of Incorporation shall be held to
be invalid, illegal or unenforceable as applied to any circumstance for any reason whatsoever:
(i) the validity, legality and enforceability of such provisions in any other circumstance and of the
remaining provisions of this Certificate of Incorporation (including, without limitation, each portion
of  any  paragraph  of  this  Certificate  of  Incorporation  containing  any  such  provision  held  to  be
invalid, illegal or unenforceable that is not itself held to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable) shall
not  in  any  way  be  affected  or  impaired  thereby  and  (ii)  to  the  fullest  extent  possible,  the
provisions of this Certificate of Incorporation (including, without limitation, each such portion of
any paragraph of this Certificate of Incorporation containing any such provision held to be invalid,
illegal  or  unenforceable)  shall  be  construed  so  as  to  permit  the  Corporation  to  protect  its
directors,  officers,  employees  and  agents  from  personal  liability  in  respect  of  their  good  faith
service to or for the benefit of the Corporation to the fullest extent permitted by law.
[Signature Page Follows]
A-6
IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,  the  Corporation  has  caused  this  Third  Amended  and  Restated
Certificate of Incorporation to be signed by Jeff Hastings, its Chief Executive Officer, as of the     
day of             , 2016.
Name: Jeff Hastings
Title: Chief Executive Officer
A-7