
EX-4.2 3 sn-20160630ex42856607c.htm EX-4.2 sn_EX_4_2
Exhibit 4.2
THIS INSTRUMENT OF RESIGNATION, APPOINTMENT AND ACCEPTANCE (this
“Instrument”), dated as of May 20, 2016 (“Effective Date”), is by and among Sanchez Energy
Corporation, a Delaware corporation (the “Issuer”),  Delaware Trust Company, a Delaware state
chartered trust company duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of Delaware (the
“Successor Trustee”), and U.S. Bank National Association, a national banking association duly
organized and existing under the laws of the United States of America (the “Resigning Trustee”).
Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the same meaning ascribed to such
terms in the Indenture (as defined below).
RECITALS
WHEREAS, pursuant to an Indenture dated as of June 27, 2014, (as the same may be
supplemented and amended from time to time, the “Indenture”), entered into by the Issuer, certain
Guarantors from time to time parties thereto and the Resigning Trustee, the Issuer issued
$1,150,000,000.00 aggregate principal amount of their 6.125% Senior Notes due 2023 (the
“Notes”) in two tranches in the aggregate principal amount of $850,000,000.00 on June 27, 2014
and $300,000,000.00 on September 12, 2014, respectively;
WHEREAS, the Issuer appointed the Resigning Trustee as the Trustee, Notes Custodian,
Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture;
WHEREAS, there is presently issued and outstanding $1,150,000,000.00 in aggregate principal
amount of Notes;
WHEREAS, Section 7.08 of the Indenture provides that the Trustee may at any time resign by
giving written notice of such resignation to the Issuer;
WHEREAS, the Resigning Trustee desires to resign as Trustee, Notes Custodian, Registrar and
Paying Agent under the Indenture, and the Issuer desires to appoint the Successor Trustee as
Trustee, Notes Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture to succeed the
Resigning Trustee in each of such capacities under the Indenture; and
WHEREAS, the Successor Trustee is willing to accept the appointment as Trustee, Notes
Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the covenants herein and other good and valuable
consideration, the receipt and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged, the parties hereto
agree as follows:
1.Acceptance of Resignation of Resigning Trustee; Appointment of Successor Trustee.  The
Resigning Trustee hereby resigns as Trustee, Notes Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent
under the Indenture. The Issuer accepts the resignation of the Resigning Trustee as Trustee,
Notes Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent
under the Indenture.  The Issuer hereby appoints the Successor Trustee as Trustee, Notes
Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture.  The Issuer hereby acknowledges
that, as of the Effective Date, the Successor Trustee shall be the Trustee under the Indenture and
shall hold all rights, powers, duties and obligations which the Resigning Trustee now holds
under and by virtue of the Indenture as Trustee, Notes Custodian, Registrar and Paying
Agent.  The Issuer shall execute and deliver such further instruments and shall do such other
things as the Successor Trustee may reasonably require so as to more fully and certainly vest in
and confirm to the Successor Trustee all the rights, powers, duties and obligations hereby
assigned, transferred, delivered and confirmed to the Successor Trustee as Trustee, Notes
Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent. The Issuer waives compliance with any applicable
advance notice requirements for resignation and appointment of a successor trustee contained in
the Indenture.
2.Issuer Representations and Warranties.  The Issuer represents and warrants to the Successor
Trustee that:
a.It is duly organized and validly existing under the laws of the State of Delaware;
b.It has full power, authority, and right to execute, deliver and perform this Instrument;
c.The Indenture was validly and lawfully executed and delivered by the Issuer and the
Guarantors and is in full force and effect.  The current outstanding aggregate principal amount of
the Notes is $1,150,000,000.00;
d.There is no action, suit or proceeding pending or, to the best of the Issuer’s knowledge,
threatened against the Issuer before any court or any governmental authority arising out of any
act or omission of the Issuer under the Indenture;
e.Assuming the accuracy of the representation made by the Successor  Trustee in Section 4
hereof, all conditions precedent relating to the
appointment of the Successor Trustee as Trustee, Notes Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent
under the Indenture have been complied with by the Issuer, and such appointment is permitted
by the Indenture;
f.No event has occurred and is continuing which is, or after notice or lapse of time would become,
an Event of Default under the Indenture; and
g.Except as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, the Indenture has not been supplemented and remains
in full force and effect.
3.Resigning Trustee Representations and Warranties.  The Resigning Trustee hereby represents
and warrants to the Successor Trustee that:
a.To the knowledge of the responsible officer of the Resigning Trustee who is signing this
document, no covenant or condition contained in the Indenture has been waived by the
Resigning Trustee or by the holders of the percentage in aggregate principal amount of Notes
required by the Indenture to effect any such waiver;
b.To the knowledge of the responsible officer of the Resigning Trustee who is signing this
document, there is no action, suit or proceeding pending or threatened against the Resigning
Trustee before any court or governmental authority arising out of any action or omission by the
Resigning Trustee as Trustee, Notes Custodian, Registrar or Paying Agent under the Indenture;
c.Resigning Trustee shall endeavor to deliver to Successor Trustee, as of or immediately after
the Effective Date, to the extent available, all of the documents listed in Exhibit B hereto;
d.The execution and delivery of this Instrument has been duly authorized by the Resigning
Trustee, and this Instrument constitutes the Resigning Trustee’s legal, valid, binding and
enforceable obligation;
e.The Resigning Trustee certifies that $1,150,000,000.00 in principal amount of Notes is
outstanding and interest due on the Notes has been paid to January 15, 2016; and
f.Except as set forth on Exhibit B hereto, the Indenture has not been supplemented and remains
in full force and effect.
4.Successor Trustee Representation and Warranty.  The Successor Trustee represents and
warrants to the Resigning Trustee and the Issuer that it is eligible to serve as Trustee under
Section 7.10 of the Indenture.
5.Assignment by Resigning Trustee.  Effective on the Effective Date, the Resigning Trustee
hereby confirms, assigns, transfers, delivers and conveys to the Successor Trustee, as Trustee,
Notes Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture, all rights, powers, duties and
obligations which the Resigning Trustee now holds under and by virtue of the Indenture as
Trustee, Notes Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent, and effective as of such date does
hereby pay over to the Successor Trustee any and all property and moneys held by the
Resigning Trustee under and by virtue of the Indenture.
6.Acceptance by Successor Trustee. The Successor Trustee accepts its appointment as Trustee,
Notes Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture and shall assume said rights,
powers, duties and obligations upon the terms and conditions set forth in the Indenture. Promptly
after the execution and delivery of this Instrument, the
Successor Trustee shall cause a notice, the form of which is annexed hereto as Exhibit A, to be
sent to the Issuer and each Holder of the Notes.
7.Additional Documentation.  The Resigning Trustee, for the purposes of more fully and certainly
vesting in and confirming to the Successor Trustee the rights, powers, duties and obligations
hereby assigned, transferred, delivered and conveyed, agrees, upon reasonable request of the
Successor Trustee, to execute, acknowledge and deliver such further instruments of conveyance
and further assurance and to do such other things as may reasonably be required by the
Successor Trustee.
8.Choice of Laws.  This Instrument shall be governed by the laws of the State of New York.
9.Counterparts.  This Instrument may be executed in any number of counterparts, each of which,
when so executed and delivered, shall be deemed an original, but all counterparts shall
constitute but one Instrument.  Delivery of a counterpart hereof by facsimile transmission or by e-
mail transmission of an Adobe portable document format file (also known as a “PDF” file) shall be
effective as delivery of a manually executed counterpart hereof.
10.Patriot Act.The Issuer acknowledges that, in accordance with Section 326 of the USA Patriot
Act, the Successor Trustee, like all financial institutions, is required to obtain, verify, and record
information that identifies each person or legal entity that establishes a relationship or opens an
account with the Successor Trustee.  The Issuer agrees that it will provide the Successor Trustee
with such information as it may reasonably request in order for it to satisfy the requirements of the
USA Patriot Act.
11.Notices.  All notices, whether faxed or mailed, will be deemed received in accordance with
Section 11.02 of the Indenture to the following:
IF TO THE SUCCESSOR TRUSTEE WITH RESPECT TO DELIVERY OF ANY REQUEST,
DEMAND, AUTHORIZATION, DIRECTION, NOTICE, CONSENT, WAIVER OR ACT OF
HOLDERS OR OTHER DOCUMENT AT THE CORPORATE TRUST OFFICE OF THE
SUCCESSOR TRUSTEE:
Delaware Trust Company
2711 Centerville Road, Suite 400
Wilmington, Delaware 19808
Attention: Trust Administration
Email: trustadmin@delawaretrust.com
Facsimile: (302) 636-8666
IF TO THE SUCCESSOR TRUSTEE WITH RESPECT TO THE PLACE OF PRESENTATION
OR SURRENDER OF NOTES:
Delaware Trust Company
c/o Corporation Service Company
1180 Avenue of the Americas
New York, New York 10036
Email: trustadmin@delawaretrust.com
With a copy to:
Arent Fox LLP
1675 Broadway
New York, New York 10019-5820
Attention: Leah M. Eisenberg
Facsimile: (212) 484-3990
TO THE RESIGNING TRUSTEE:
U.S. Bank National Association
Global Corporate Trust Services
5555 San Filipe Street, 11th Floor
Houston, Texas 77056-2701
Attention: Steven A. Finklea, Vice President
Facsimile: (713) 235-9213
TO THE ISSUER:
Sanchez Energy Corporation
1000 Main Street, Suite 3000
Houston, Texas 77002
Attention: Chief Financial Officer
Facsimile: (713) 783-3523
With a copy to:
Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP
1111 Louisiana Street, 44th Floor
Houston, Texas 77002-5200
Attention: David P. Elder
Facsimile: (713) 236-0822
12.Effectiveness.  This Instrument and the resignation, appointment and acceptance effected
hereby shall be effective as of the close of business on the Effective Date, upon the execution
and delivery hereof by each of the parties hereto; provided, that the resignation of the Resigning
Trustee as Registrar and Paying Agent and the
appointment of the Successor Trustee as Registrar and Paying Agent under the Indenture shall
be effective 10 business days after the Effective Date.
[Remainder of page left intentionally blank]
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have executed this Instrument as of the date set
forth above.
Sanchez Energy Corporation, as Issuer
By /s/ Antonio R. Sanchez, III
Name: Antonio R. Sanchez, III
Its CEO
U.S. Bank National Association, as Resigning Trustee
By /s/ Steven A. Finklea, CCTS
Name: Steven A. Finklea, CCTS
Its Vice President
Delaware Trust Company, as Successor Trustee
By /s/ Alan R. Halpern
Name: Alan R. Halpern
Its Vice President
EXHIBIT A
[Delaware Trust Company Letterhead]
Notice to Holders of Sanchez Energy Corporation (the “Issuer”) 6.125% Senior Notes due 2023
(the “Notes”):
Cusip Numbers:
THIS NOTICE CONTAINS IMPORTANT INFORMATION THAT IS OF INTEREST TO THE
REGISTERED AND BENEFICIAL HOLDERS OF THE SUBJECT NOTES.  IF APPLICABLE,
ALL DEPOSITORIES, CUSTODIANS, AND OTHER INTERMEDIARIES RECEIVING THIS
NOTICE ARE REQUESTED TO EXPEDITE RE-TRANSMITTAL TO BENEFICIAL OWNERS
OF THE NOTES IN A TIMELY MANNER.
Reference is hereby made to that certain Indenture, dated as of June 27, 2014 (as supplemented,
modified or amended from time to time, the “Indenture”), by and among the Issuer, each of the
Guarantors named in the Indenture, and U.S. Bank National Association, as Trustee, pursuant to
which the above-referenced Notes were issued and are outstanding.
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN, pursuant to Section 7.08 of the Indenture that U.S. Bank National
Association has resigned as Trustee, Notes Custodian, Registrar and Paying Agent under the
Indenture.
NOTICE IS HEREBY FURTHER GIVEN, pursuant to Section 7.08 of the Indenture, that the
Issuer has appointed Delaware Trust Company, whose corporate trust office is located at 2711
Centerville Road, Suite 400, Wilmington, Delaware 19808, as Successor Trustee, Notes
Custodian, Registrar, and Paying Agent under the Indenture, and Delaware Trust Company has
accepted such appointment.
NOTICE IS HEREBY FURTHER GIVEN that U.S. Bank National Association’s resignation as
Trustee and Delaware Trust Company’s appointment as Successor Trustee were effective as of
the opening of business on May 20, 2016.  U.S. Bank National Association’s resignation as
Registrar and Paying Agent, and Delaware Trust Company’s appointment as Notes Custodian,
Registrar and Paying Agent will be effective as of the opening of business on May 20, 2016.
Dated:  May 20, 2016
Delaware Trust Company,
as Successor Trustee
EXHIBIT B
Documents to be delivered by Resigning Trustee to Successor Trustee as to the Indenture:
1. Executed copy of the Indenture.
2. Certified list of noteholders as of the Effective Date, certificate detail and all “stop transfers”
and the reason for such “stop transfers” (or, alternatively, if there are a substantial number of
registered noteholders, the computer tape reflecting the identity of such noteholders).
3. Copies of any official notices sent by the Resigning Trustee to all the holders of the Notes
pursuant to the terms of the Indenture during the past twelve months and a copy of the Resigning
Trustee’s most recent annual report to Holders, if any.
4. Original Global Notes.
5. Such other non-confidential, unprivileged documents or information as the Successor Trustee
may reasonably request on or after the Effective Date.
