
EX-23.6 10 v417231_ex23-6.htm EXHIBIT 23.6
Exhibit 23.6
CONSENT OF MILLER AND LENTS, LTD.
INDEPENDENT PETROLEUM ENGINEERS
As independent petroleum engineers, we hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in (i)
this Registration Statement on Form S-4/A of Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Joint Proxy
Statement of Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC and Eagle Rock Energy Partners, L.P. and (ii)
the Registration Statement on Form S-3 of Vanguard Natural Resources, LLC, filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission on February 13, 2015 (File No. 333-202064) of
information from our reserves report dated January 7, 2015 included in or made a part of the LRR
Energy, L.P. Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission on March 4, 2015, and our summary report attached as
Exhibit 99.1 to such Annual Report on Form 10-K. We also hereby consent to all references to
our firm included in the Registration Statement.
The analysis, conclusions, and methods contained in the report are based upon information that
was in existence at the time the report was rendered and Miller and Lents, Ltd. has not updated
and undertakes no duty to update anything contained in the report. While the report may be used
as a descriptive resource, investors are advised that Miller and Lents, Ltd. has not verified
information provided by others except as specifically noted in the report, and Miller and Lents,
Ltd. makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy of such information. Moreover, the
conclusions contained in such report are based on assumptions that Miller and Lents, Ltd.
believed were reasonable at the time of their preparation and that are described in such report in
reasonable detail. However, there are a wide range of uncertainties and risks that are outside of
the control of Miller and Lents, Ltd. which may impact these assumptions, including but not
limited to unforeseen market changes, actions of governments or individuals, natural events,
economic changes, and changes of laws and regulations or interpretation of laws and
regulations.
Very truly yours,
MILLER AND LENTS, LTD.
 
Texas Registered Engineering Firm No. F-1442
 
 
 
 
 
By:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Houston, Texas 
August 5, 2015
/s/ Leslie A. Fallon
Leslie A. Fallon, P.E.
Vice President