
S-4/A 1 d221542ds4a.htm S-4/A S-4/A
Table of Contents
As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 16, 2016
Registration No. 333-212544
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, DC 20549
Amendment No. 1
to
FORM S-4
REGISTRATION STATEMENT
UNDER
THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933
Sunoco LP
Sunoco Finance Corp.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
5172
30-0740483
Delaware
5172
(State or other jurisdiction of
(Primary Standard Industrial
47-3415419
(I.R.S. Employer
incorporation or organization)
Classification Code Number)
Identification Number)
8020 Park Lane
Suite 200
Dallas, Texas 75231
(832) 234-3600
(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s
principal executive offices)
Thomas R. Miller
Sunoco GP LLC
8020 Park Lane
Suite 200
Dallas, Texas 75231
(832) 234-3600
(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent
for service)
Copy to:
William N. Finnegan IV
Debbie P. Yee
Latham & Watkins LLP
811 Main Street, Suite 3700
Houston, Texas 77002
(713) 546-5400
Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale of the securities to the public: As
soon as practicable after the effective date of this Registration Statement.
If the securities being registered on this Form are being offered in connection with the formation
of a holding company and there is compliance with General Instruction G, check the following
box.  ¨
If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under
the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement
number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering.  ¨
If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act,
check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier
effective registration statement for the same offering.  ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a
non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated
filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer x
Accelerated filer
¨
Non-accelerated filer
¨ (Do not check if a smaller reporting
company)
Smaller reporting company ¨
If applicable, place an X in the box to designate the appropriate rule provision relied upon in
conducting this transaction:
Exchange Act Rule 13e-4(i) (Cross-Border Issuer Tender Offer)  ¨
Exchange Act Rule 14d-1(d) (Cross-Border Third-Party Tender Offer)  ¨
Each registrant hereby amends this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may
be necessary to delay its effective date until the registrants shall file a further amendment
which specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective
in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 or until the Registration
Statement shall become effective on such date as the SEC, acting pursuant to said
Section 8(a), may determine.
Table of Contents
TABLE OF ADDITIONAL REGISTRANT GUARANTORS
I.R.S.
Employee
Identification
Primary
Standard
Industrial
State or
Other
Jurisdiction
of
Classification
Incorporation
or Formation   
Code Number    
   
  Delaware
   
  Hawaii
   
  Virginia
Number
5172      47-4277565  
5172      99-0170854  
5172      54-1766927  
5172      27-2681601  
5172      01-0864257  
5172      54-0276181
Exact Name of Registrant Guarantor(1)  
Aloha Petroleum LLC
Aloha Petroleum, Ltd.
MACS Retail LLC
Mid-Atlantic Convenience Stores, LLC   Delaware
  Delaware
Susser Holdings Corporation
Susser Holdings, L.L.C.
  Delaware
Susser Petroleum Operating Company
LLC
Susser Petroleum Property Company
LLC
Sunoco, LLC
Sunoco Energy Services LLC
Sunoco Retail LLC
Stripes Holdings LLC
Stripes LLC
Southside Oil, LLC
Delaware
Delaware
   
  Delaware
  Texas
   
  Pennsylvania    
  Delaware
   
   
  Texas
  Virginia
5172      35-2449652
5172      90-0866975  
5172      46-4151222  
5172      75-1476269  
5172      81-1141412  
5172      42-1686837  
5172      74-2737572  
5172      54-1904070
(1) Unless otherwise specified, the address, including zip code, and telephone number,
including area code, of each additional registrant guarantor’s principal executive office is
8020 Park Lane, Suite 200, Dallas, TX 75231, (832) 234-3600.
Table of Contents
The information in this prospectus is not complete and may be changed. We may not sell
these securities until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission is effective. This prospectus is not an offer to sell these securities and it is
not soliciting an offer to buy these securities in any state where the offer or sale is not
permitted.
PROSPECTUS
SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED AUGUST 16, 2016
SUNOCO LP
SUNOCO FINANCE CORP.
OFFER TO EXCHANGE
$600,000,000 of 5.500% Senior Notes due 2020 and Related Guarantees That Have Not
Been Registered Under the Securities Act of 1933
For
$600,000,000 of 5.500% Senior Notes due 2020 and Related Guarantees That Have Been
Registered Under the Securities Act of 1933
We are offering to exchange our 5.500% Senior Notes due 2020 and related guarantees, which
were issued on July 20, 2015 in a private offering (the “private notes”), for a like aggregate
amount of our registered 5.500% Senior Notes due 2020 and related guarantees (the “exchange
notes” and, together with the private notes, the “notes”). The exchange notes are substantially
identical to the private notes, except that the exchange notes have been registered under the
federal securities laws and will not bear any legend restricting their transfer. The exchange notes
will represent the same debt as the private notes, and we will issue the exchange notes under
the same indenture as the private notes.
The principal features of the exchange offer are as follows:
•
•
The exchange offer expires at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on                     , 2016,
unless extended.
We will exchange all private notes that are validly tendered and not validly withdrawn
prior to the expiration of the exchange offer for the exchange notes.
•
You may withdraw tenders of private notes at any time before the exchange offer expires.
•
The exchange of private notes for exchange notes pursuant to the exchange offer will not
be a taxable event for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
•
We will not receive any proceeds from the exchange offer.
•
We do not intend to apply for listing of the exchange notes on any securities exchange or
automated quotation system.
Broker-dealers receiving exchange notes in exchange for private notes acquired for their own
account through market-making or other trading activities must deliver a prospectus in any resale
of the exchange notes.
You should carefully consider the risk factors beginning on page 12 of this prospectus
before participating in the exchange offer.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor any state securities commission
has approved or disapproved of the notes or determined if this prospectus is truthful or
complete. Any representation to the contrary is a criminal offense.
The date of this prospectus is                     , 2016.
Table of Contents
This prospectus is part of a registration statement we filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission. In making your investment decision, you should rely only on the
information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus and in the
accompanying letter of transmittal. We have not authorized anyone to provide you with
any other information. We are not making an offer to sell these securities or soliciting an
offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction where an offer or solicitation is not
authorized or in which the person making that offer or solicitation is not qualified to do so
or to anyone whom it is unlawful to make an offer or solicitation. You should not assume
that the information contained in this prospectus, as well as the information we previously
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission that is incorporated by reference
herein, is accurate as of any date other than its respective date.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN DOCUMENTS BY REFERENCE
DISCLOSURE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
RISK FACTORS
EXCHANGE OFFER
USE OF PROCEEDS
1  
     1  
     3  
     4  
     12  
     17
USE OF PROCEEDS
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES OF SUNOCO LP
DESCRIPTION OF THE EXCHANGE NOTES
CERTAIN FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
LEGAL MATTERS
EXPERTS
ANNEX A: LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
Table of Contents
24  
     25  
     26  
     71  
     72  
     73  
     73  
    A-1
WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION
We have filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) a registration statement
on Form S-4 (including all amendments, exhibits, annexes and schedules, the “exchange offer
registration statement”) pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and the rules and
regulations thereunder (collectively, the “Securities Act”) covering the exchange notes being
offered. This prospectus does not contain all of the information in the exchange offer registration
statement. For further information with respect to us and the exchange offer, reference is made to
the exchange offer registration statement. Statements made in this prospectus as to the contents
of any contract, agreement or other documents referred to are not necessarily complete. For a
more complete understanding and description of each contract, agreement or other document
filed as an exhibit to the exchange offer registration statement, we encourage you to read the
documents contained in the exhibits thereto.
In addition, we file annual, quarterly, current and other reports with the SEC under the Securities
and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). You may read and copy any
document we file with the SEC at the SEC’s public reference room at 100 F Street, N.E., Room
1580, Washington, D.C. 20549. Please call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 for further information
about the public reference room. Our SEC filings are also available to the public through the
SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. You can also obtain information about us at the offices of the
NYSE, 20 Broad Street, New York, New York 10005.
Our internet address is www.sunocolp.com. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports
on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K and other filings with the SEC are available, free of
charge, through our website, as soon as reasonably practicable after those reports or filings are
electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. Information on our website or any other website
is not incorporated by reference in this prospectus or the exchange offer registration statement.
INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN DOCUMENTS BY REFERENCE
The SEC allows us to “incorporate by reference” the information we file with it, which means that
we can disclose important information to you by referring you to documents containing that
information. The information incorporated by reference is considered to be part of this prospectus,
and later information that we file with the SEC will automatically update and supersede this
information. We incorporate by reference the documents listed below and any future filings we
make with the SEC under Sections 13(a), 13(c), 14 or 15(d) of the Exchange Act (other than
information determined to be furnished and not filed with the SEC), after the date of the initial
exchange offer registration statement and prior to the effectiveness of the exchange offer
registration statement and after the date of this prospectus and prior to the completion or
termination of the exchange offer:
•  our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015, filed on
February 26, 2016;
•  our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2016, filed on May 5,
2016, and for the quarter ended June 30, 2016, filed on August 4, 2016; and
•  our Current Reports on Forms 8-K filed on March 23, 2015, July 15, 2015, January 5,
2016, March 17, 2016, March 30, 2016, April 1, 2016, April 8, 2016, May 6, 2016, June 8,
2016, July 15, 2016 and August 3, 2016.
We also incorporate by reference the consolidated financial statements of Mid-Atlantic
Convenience Stores, LLC (successor) and subsidiaries and MACS Holdings, LLC (predecessor)
and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2013 (successor) and for the period from October 3, 2013 to
December 31, 2013 (successor) and the period from January 1, 2013 to October 2, 2013
(predecessor), which are included in Exhibit 99.2 to our Current Report on Form 8 K/A filed with
the SEC on October 21, 2014 (except that we do not incorporate by reference the
Table of Contents
1
Independent Auditor’s Report on page 3 of Exhibit 99.2 for the consolidated financial statements
of MACS Holdings, LLC (predecessor) and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2012 (predecessor)
and for each of the two years in the period ended December 31, 2012 (predecessor)).
Any statement contained herein, or in any documents incorporated or deemed to be incorporated
by reference herein, shall be deemed to be modified or superseded for the purpose of this
prospectus to the extent that a subsequent statement contained herein or in any subsequently
filed document which also is or is deemed to be incorporated by reference herein modifies or
supersedes such statement. Any such statement so modified or superseded shall not be
deemed, except as so modified or superseded, to constitute a part of this prospectus.
You may request a copy of these filings, at no cost, by writing or telephoning us at:
Sunoco LP
Investor Relations
8020 Park Lane
Suite 200
Dallas, Texas 75231
(832) 234-3600
IR@sunocolp.com
You may also obtain copies of these filings, at no cost, by accessing our website at
www.sunocolp.com; however, the information found on our website is not considered part of this
prospectus. To obtain timely delivery of any copies of filings requested, please write or telephone
no later than                     , 2016, five days prior to the expiration of the exchange offer.
The exchange offer is not being made to, nor will we accept surrenders for exchange from,
holders of private notes in any jurisdiction in which the exchange offer or the acceptance thereof
would not be in compliance with the securities or blue sky laws of such jurisdiction.
Table of Contents
2
DISCLOSURE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This prospectus, including without limitation, our discussion and analysis of our financial
condition and results of operations, and any information incorporated by reference, contains
statements that we believe are “forward-looking” statements. Forward-looking statements
generally can be identified by use of phrases such as “believe,” “plan,” “expect,” “anticipate,”
“intend,” “forecast” or other similar words or phrases. Descriptions of our objectives, goals,
targets, plans, strategies, costs, anticipated capital expenditures, expected cost savings and
benefits are also forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are based on our
current plans and expectations and involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause
actual results and events to vary materially from the results and events anticipated or implied by
such forward-looking statements, including:
•
•
our ability to make, complete and integrate acquisitions from affiliates or third-parties,
including the recently completed acquisition (the “Acquisition”) of the remaining
membership interests in Sunoco, LLC (“Sunoco LLC”) and all of the membership interests
in Sunoco Retail LLC (“Sunoco Retail”);
the business strategy and operations of Energy Transfer Equity, L.P. (“ETE”) and Energy
Transfer Partners, L.P. (“ETP”), and ETE’s and ETP’s conflicts of interest with us;
•
changes in the price of and demand for the motor fuel that we distribute and our ability to
appropriately hedge any motor fuel we hold in inventory;
•
our dependence on limited principal suppliers;
•
•
competition in the wholesale motor fuel distribution industry and convenience store
industry;
changing customer preferences for alternate fuel sources or improvement in fuel
efficiency;
•
environmental, tax and other federal, state and local laws and regulations;
•
the fact that we are not fully insured against all risks incident to our business;
•
dangers inherent in the storage and transportation of motor fuel;
•
our reliance on senior management, supplier trade credit and information technology; and
•
our partnership structure, which may create conflicts of interest between us and our
general partner and its affiliates, and limits the fiduciary duties of our general partner and
its affiliates.
Other factors described herein or incorporated by reference, or factors that are unknown or
unpredictable, could also have a material adverse effect on future results. Please read “Risk
Factors” beginning on page 12 of this prospectus, the risk factors included in our most recent
Annual Report on Form 10-K, subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on
Form 8-K and those that may be included in an applicable prospectus supplement, as well as
risks described in all of the other information included or incorporated by reference in this
prospectus and any prospectus supplement and in the documents that we incorporate by
reference.
The list of factors that could affect future performance and the accuracy of forward-looking
statements is illustrative but by no means exhaustive. Accordingly, all forward-looking statements
should be evaluated with the understanding of their inherent uncertainty. The forward-looking
statements included in this prospectus are based on, and include, our estimates as of the date
hereof. We anticipate that subsequent events and market developments will cause our estimates
to change. However, while we may elect to update these forward-looking statements at some
point in the future, we specifically disclaim any obligation to do so, even if new information
becomes available in the future.
All forward-looking statements are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing cautionary
statements.
Table of Contents
3
PROSPECTUS SUMMARY
This summary highlights information included or incorporated by reference in this prospectus.
Because it is abbreviated, this summary does not contain all of the information that you should
consider before investing in the notes. You should read the entire prospectus and the documents
incorporated by reference carefully before making an investment decision, including the
information presented under the headings “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements,” and
the consolidated historical and pro forma financial statements and the related notes thereto
included in and incorporated by reference in this prospectus.
As used in this prospectus, the “Partnership,” “Sunoco,” “we,” “our,” “us” or similar terms refer to
Sunoco LP (known prior to October 27, 2014 as Susser Petroleum Partners LP) and our
consolidated subsidiaries, as applicable and appropriate. In this prospectus, (i) our “General
Partner” refers to Sunoco GP LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and the general partner
of the Partnership; (ii) “ETE” refers to Energy Transfer Equity, L.P., a Delaware limited
partnership that owns a 2.0% limited partner interest in us and owns and controls our general
partner and the general partner of ETP; (iii) “ETP” refers to Energy Transfer Partners, L.P., a
Delaware limited partnership that owns a 38.9% limited partner interest in us; (iv) “MACS” refers
to Mid-Atlantic Convenience Stores, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and our indirect
wholly owned subsidiary, and MACS Retail LLC, a Virginia limited liability company and its
wholly owned subsidiary; (v) “Aloha” refers to Aloha Petroleum, Ltd., a Hawaii corporation and
our indirect wholly owned subsidiary; and (vi) “Sunoco LLC” refers to Sunoco, LLC, a Delaware
limited liability company and our indirect wholly owned subsidiary.
Sunoco LP
We are a growth-oriented Delaware master limited partnership engaged in the retail sale of motor
fuels and merchandise through our company-operated convenience stores and retail fuel sites,
as well as the wholesale distribution of motor fuels to convenience stores, independent dealers,
commercial customers and distributors. Additionally, through Sunoco LLC, we are the exclusive
wholesale supplier of the iconic Sunoco-branded motor fuel, supplying an extensive distribution
network of approximately 5,290 Sunoco-branded company and third-party operated locations
throughout the East Coast, Midwest and Southeast regions of the United States including
approximately 200 company-operated Sunoco-branded Stripes locations in Texas.
We are managed by our General Partner. ETE, a publicly traded master limited partnership,
owns 100% of the membership interests in our General Partner, a 2.0% limited partner interest in
us and all of our incentive distribution rights. ETP, another publicly traded master limited
partnership which is also owned by ETE, owns a 38.9% limited partner interest in us.
We believe we are one of the largest independent motor fuel distributors by gallons in Texas and
one of the largest distributors of Chevron, Exxon, and Valero branded motor fuel in the United
States. In addition to distributing motor fuel, we also distribute other petroleum products such as
propane and lube oil, and we receive rental income from real estate that we lease or sublease.
Sales of fuel from our wholesale segment to our retail segment are delivered at a cost plus profit
margin.
We purchase motor fuel primarily from independent refiners and major oil companies and
distribute it across 32 states throughout the East Coast, Midwest and Southeast regions of the
United States, as well as Hawaii to:
•
approximately 1,340 company-operated convenience stores and fuel outlets;
•
165 independently operated consignment locations where we sell motor fuel under
consignment arrangements to retail customers;
4
Table of Contents
•
•
5,410 convenience stores and retail fuel outlets operated by independent operators,
which we refer to as “dealers,” or “distributors” pursuant to long-term distribution
agreements; and
1,870 other commercial customers, including unbranded convenience stores, other fuel
distributors, school districts and municipalities and other industrial customers.
Our retail segment operates approximately 1,340 convenience stores and fuel outlets. Our retail
convenience stores operate under several brands, including our proprietary brands Stripes,
APlus, and Aloha Island Mart, and offer a broad selection of food, beverages, snacks, grocery
and non-food merchandise, motor fuel and other services. We sold 1.2 billion retail motor fuel
gallons at these sites during the six months ended June 30, 2016. We opened ten new retail sites
during the six months ended June 30, 2016, which is reflected in retail activity for the period.
We operate approximately 730 Stripes convenience stores that carry a broad selection of food,
beverages, snacks, grocery and non-food merchandise. Our proprietary in-house Laredo Taco
Company restaurant is implemented in approximately 450 Stripes convenience stores and we
intend to implement it in all newly constructed Stripes convenience stores. Additionally, we have
approximately 55 national branded restaurant offerings in our Stripes stores.
We operate approximately 455 retail convenience stores and fuel outlets primarily under our
proprietary iconic Sunoco fuel brand and primarily located in Pennsylvania, New York, and
Florida as of June 30, 2016, including 360 APlus convenience stores.
We operate approximately 160 MACS and Aloha convenience stores and fuel outlets in Virginia,
Maryland, Tennessee, Georgia, and Hawaii offering merchandise, foodservice, motor fuel and
other services.
Our Business Strategy
Our primary business objective is to increase our quarterly cash distribution per unit over time.
We intend to accomplish this objective by executing the following strategies:
•
Expand our business organically by:
•
•
•
Growing fuel volumes at our existing dealer locations, recruiting new dealers and
acquiring or developing new sites;
Adding new commercial customers; and
Participating in organic retail growth, which provides additional sources of cash flow;
•
•
•
Opportunistically pursue multi-site third-party retail and wholesale acquisition
opportunities;
Continue to leverage our relationship with ETE and ETP to maintain and grow stable
cash flows and to pursue accretive third-party acquisitions;
Continue to leverage our volume growth and relationships with fuel suppliers to provide
attractive motor fuel pricing to our customers;
•
Pursue a disciplined financial policy and maintain a conservative capital structure; and
•
Introduce the “Sunoco” fuel brand into our retail geographies and our portfolio of
wholesale dealer fuel branding options.
5
Table of Contents
Our Competitive Strengths
We believe that we are well positioned to execute our business strategies successfully because
of the following competitive strengths:
•
•
•
Relatively stable cash flows from long-term, fee-based contracts and real estate rental
income, as well as relatively low maintenance capital requirements and working capital
requirements;
Our strong, long-term relationships with suppliers and competitive pricing through
ongoing purchases of large volumes of motor fuel;
Our position as one of the largest independent motor fuel distributors in Texas markets
and our exposure to other regional markets;
•
Our relationships with ETE and ETP; and
•
Our management team’s proven ability to develop and maintain customer relationships,
integrate acquisitions and grow operations while maintaining financial discipline.
Recent Developments
On April 7, 2016, we and Sunoco Finance Corp. completed an offering of $800.0 million
aggregate principal amount of our 6.250% Senior Notes due 2021 (the “2021 notes”). We
received net proceeds of approximately $789.4 million from the offering, which we used to repay
a portion of the borrowings outstanding under our term loan facility.
Principal Executive Offices
Our principal executive offices are located at 8020 Park Lane, Suite 200, Dallas, Texas 75231.
Our telephone number is (832) 234-3600.
Table of Contents
6
The Exchange Offer
On July 20, 2015, we completed a private offering of the private notes and entered into a
registration rights agreement with the initial purchasers in such private offering pursuant to which
we agreed to deliver to you this prospectus and to use reasonable efforts to consummate the
exchange offer no later than 365 days after the date we issued the private notes.
The following summary contains basic information about the exchange offer and the exchange
notes. It does not contain all the information that may be important to you. For a complete
understanding of the exchange notes, please refer to the sections of this prospectus entitled
“Exchange Offer” and “Description of the Exchange Notes.”
The Exchange Offer
Expiration Date
Conditions to the Exchange Offer
We are offering to exchange the private notes for the
exchange notes.
The exchange offer will expire at 5:00 p.m., New York City
time, on                 , 2016, unless extended, in which case the
expiration date will mean the latest date and time to which
we extend the exchange offer.
The registration rights agreement does not require us to
accept the private notes for exchange if the exchange offer,
or the making of any exchange by a holder of the private
notes, would violate any applicable law or interpretation of
the staff of the SEC. The exchange offer is not conditioned
on a minimum aggregate amount of private notes being
Procedures for Tendering Private
Notes
tendered.
To participate in the exchange offer, you must follow the
procedures established by The Depository Trust Company
(“DTC”) for tendering private notes held in book-entry form.
These procedures, which we call “ATOP” (“Automated
Tender Offer Program”), require that
(i) the exchange agent receive, prior to the expiration date of the exchange offer, a computer
generated message known as an “agent’s message” that is transmitted through DTC’s
automated tender offer program, and (ii) DTC has received:
• your instructions to exchange your private notes; and
• your agreement to be bound by the terms of the letter of
transmittal.
For more information on tendering your private notes,
please refer to the sections in this prospectus entitled
“Exchange Offer—Terms of the Exchange Offer,” “Exchange
Offer—Procedures for Tendering,” “Description of the
Exchange Notes,” “Description of the Exchange Notes—
Book-Entry, Delivery and Form.”
Guaranteed Delivery Procedures
None.
You may withdraw your tender of the private notes at any
time prior to the expiration date for the exchange offer. To
withdraw, you must submit a notice of withdrawal to the
exchange agent using ATOP procedures before 5:00 p.m.,
New York City time, on the expiration date. Please refer to
the section in this prospectus entitled “Exchange Offer—
Withdrawal of Tenders.”
Withdrawal of Tenders
7
If you fulfill all conditions required for proper acceptance of
the private notes, we will accept any and all private notes
that you properly tender on or before 5:00 p.m., New York
City time, on the expiration date. We will return any private
notes that we do not accept for exchange to you without
expense promptly after the expiration date. Please refer to
the section in this prospectus entitled “Exchange Offer—
Terms of the Exchange Offer.”
We will bear all expenses related to the exchange offer.
Please refer to the section in this prospectus entitled
“Exchange Offer—Fees and Expenses.”
The issuance of the exchange notes will not provide us with
any new proceeds. We are making the exchange offer
solely to satisfy our obligations under our registration rights
agreement.
If you do not exchange your private notes in the exchange
offer, you will no longer be able to require us to register the
private notes under the Securities Act except in limited
circumstances provided under the registration rights
agreement. In addition, you will not be able to resell, offer to
resell or otherwise transfer the private notes unless we have
registered the private notes under the Securities Act, or
unless you resell, offer to resell or otherwise transfer them
under an exemption from the registration requirements of, or
in a transaction not subject to, the Securities Act.
In addition, after the consummation of the exchange offer, it
is anticipated that the outstanding principal amount of the
private notes available for trading will be significantly
reduced. The reduced float may adversely affect the liquidity
and market price of the private notes. A smaller outstanding
principal amount of private notes available for trading may
also make the price of the private notes more volatile.
Table of Contents
Acceptance of Private Notes and
Delivery of Exchange Notes
Fees and Expenses
Use of Proceeds
Consequences of Failure to
Exchange Private Notes
Certain Federal Income Tax
Consequences
The exchange of private notes for exchange notes will not
be a taxable event for U.S. federal income tax purposes. For
a discussion of material U.S. federal income tax
considerations relating to the exchange of notes, see the
section in this prospectus entitled “United States Federal
Income Tax Consequences.”
Exchange Agent
We have appointed U.S. Bank National Association, the
trustee under the indenture governing the notes, as
exchange agent for the exchange offer. You should direct
questions and requests for assistance, requests for
additional copies of this prospectus or the letter of
transmittal to the exchange agent addressed as follows: By
First Class Mail: U.S. Bank National Association, Attn:
Specialized Finance, 111 Fillmore Avenue, St. Paul, MN
55107-1402 or By Courier or Overnight Delivery: U.S.
Bank National Association,
Attn: Specialized Finance, 111 Fillmore Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55107-1402. Eligible institutions
may make requests for facsimile transmission at (651) 495-8158, Attn: Specialized Finance.
Table of Contents
8
Terms of the Exchange Notes
The summary below describes the principal terms of the exchange notes. The financial terms
and covenants of the exchange notes are the same as the private notes. Some of the terms and
conditions described below are subject to important limitations and exceptions. You should
carefully read the “Description of the Exchange Notes” section of this prospectus for a more
detailed description of the exchange notes.
For purposes of this section of the prospectus summary, references to “Sunoco LP” “we,” “us,”
“our” and “ours” refer only to Sunoco LP and do not include its subsidiaries.
Issuers
Sunoco LP and Sunoco Finance Corp. (the “Issuers”).
Notes Offered
Interest
Maturity Date
Denominations
Ranking
$600,000,000 aggregate principal amount of 5.500% Senior
Notes due 2020.
Interest on the exchange notes will accrue at the per annum
rate of 5.500%, payable semi-annually on February 1 and
August 1 of each year. Interest on the private notes
commenced accruing on February 1, 2016.
Unless redeemed prior to maturity as described below, the
exchange notes will mature on August 1, 2020.
The exchange notes will be issued in minimum
denominations of $2,000 and integral multiples of $1,000 in
excess thereof.
The exchange notes will be senior unsecured obligations of
the Issuers and will:
• rank equally in right of payment with all of the Issuers’
existing and future senior obligations, including the
Issuers’ $800,000,000 aggregate principal amount of
6.375% Senior Notes due 2023 (the “2023 notes”) and the
2021 notes;
• rank senior in right of payment to all of the Issuers’
indebtedness and other obligations that are, by their terms,
expressly subordinated in right of payment to the notes;
• be effectively subordinated to all of the Issuers’ existing
and future secured indebtedness (including obligations
under our revolving credit facility and term loan facility), to
the extent of the value of the assets securing such
indebtedness; and
• be structurally subordinated to the obligations of each of
our subsidiaries that is not a guarantor of the notes.
Table of Contents
Guarantees
Optional Redemption
As of June 30, 2016, we had approximately $4.2 billion of
debt outstanding, including $675.0 million of secured
indebtedness under our revolving credit facility (excluding
approximately $22.2 million of letters of credit outstanding
thereunder) and approximately $1.2 billion of secured
indebtedness under the term loan facility.
9
The exchange notes will be guaranteed on a senior basis
by all of our subsidiaries that guarantee our obligations
under our revolving credit facility and term loan facility and
certain of our future subsidiaries.
The Issuers may, at their option, redeem some or all of the
exchange notes at any time on or after August 1, 2017, at
the redemption prices described herein. Prior to such time,
the Issuers may redeem some or all of the exchange notes
at 100% of the aggregate principal amount thereof, plus the
“applicable premium” and accrued and unpaid interest, if
any, to, but not including, the redemption date. In addition,
prior to August 1, 2017, the Issuers may redeem up to 35%
of the aggregate principal amount of the exchange notes
with an amount of cash not greater than the net cash
proceeds of certain equity offerings, at a redemption price of
105.500% of the aggregate principal amount of the
exchange notes being redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid
interest to, but not including, the redemption date.
Please read “Description of the Exchange Notes—Optional
Redemption.”
Change of Control
If a change of control event occurs, which occurrence (other
than one involving the adoption of a plan relating to
liquidation or dissolution) is followed by a ratings decline
within 90 days of consummation of the transaction, each
holder of the exchange notes may require the Issuers to
repurchase all or a portion of the holder’s exchange notes at
a purchase price equal to 101% of the principal amount of
the exchange notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if
any, to, but not including, the date of settlement. Please read
“Description of the Exchange Notes—Repurchase at the
Option of Holders—Change of Control.”
The indenture governing the exchange notes will, among
other things, limit our and our restricted subsidiaries’ ability
to:
• incur additional indebtedness or issue certain types of
preferred equity;
• make distributions, repurchase equity, or redeem or make
payments with respect to subordinated indebtedness;
• create liens or other encumbrances;
• make investments, loans or other guarantees;
• sell or otherwise dispose of a portion of our assets;
• engage in certain transactions with affiliates; and
• make acquisitions or merge or consolidate with another
entity.
However, many of these covenants will terminate if either
Moody’s or S&P assigns the notes an investment grade
Certain Covenants
Table of Contents
No Public Market
Risk Factors
Table of Contents
rating and no default exists with respect to the notes. These
covenants are subject to a number of important
qualifications and exceptions which are described in
“Description of the Exchange Notes—Certain Covenants.”
10
The exchange notes are a series of securities for which
there is currently no established trading market. As a result,
a liquid market for the exchange notes may not be available
if you try to sell such exchange notes. We do not intend to
apply for a listing of the exchange notes on any securities
exchange or any automated dealer quotation system.
Investing in the exchange notes involves risks. See “Risk
Factors” beginning on page 12 for a discussion of certain
factors you should consider in evaluating an investment in
the exchange notes.
11
RISK FACTORS
An investment in the notes involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the
information included and incorporated by reference in this prospectus, including the matters
addressed under “Disclosure Regarding Forward- Looking Statements,” the following risk factors
and the risk factors in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015,
as well as all other information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus, before
participating in the exchange offer.
We are subject to certain risks and uncertainties due to the nature of the business activities we
conduct. The risks discussed below and in any of the documents incorporated by reference in
this prospectus, any of which could materially and adversely affect our business, financial
condition, cash flows and results of operations, are not the only risks and uncertainties that we
face. We may experience additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we
currently deem to be immaterial that may also impair our business operations. If any of those
risks actually occurs, our business, financial condition and results of operations could suffer, we
might not be able to make payments on the notes and investors could lose all or part of their
investment.
Risks Related to Our Indebtedness and the Notes
If you do not properly tender your private notes, you will continue to hold unregistered
private notes and your ability to transfer the private notes will be adversely effected.
We will only issue exchange notes in exchange for private notes that are timely received by the
exchange agent. Therefore, you should allow sufficient time to ensure timely delivery of the
private notes, and you should carefully follow the instructions on how to tender your private
notes. Neither we nor the exchange agent is required to tell you of any defects or irregularities
with respect to your tender of the private notes. If you do not tender your private notes or if we do
not accept your private notes because you did not tender your private notes properly, then, after
we consummate the exchange offer, you may continue to hold private notes that are subject to
transfer restrictions. In addition, if you tender your private notes for the purpose of participating in
a distribution of the exchange notes, you will be required to comply with the registration and
prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities Act in connection with any resale of the
exchange notes. If you are a broker-dealer that receives exchange notes for your own account in
exchange for private notes that you acquired as a result of market-making activities or any other
trading activities, you will be required to acknowledge that you will deliver a prospectus in
connection with any resale of such exchange notes.
After the exchange offer is consummated, if you continue to hold any private notes, you may have
difficulty selling them because there will be fewer private notes outstanding. In addition, if a large
amount of private notes are not tendered or are tendered improperly, the limited amount of
exchange notes that would be issued and outstanding after we consummate the exchange offer
could lower the market price of such exchange notes.
Our future debt levels may impair our financial condition and prevent us from fulfilling our
obligations under the notes.
As of June 30, 2016, we had approximately $4.2 billion of debt outstanding, of which $675.0
million was secured indebtedness under the revolving credit facility (excluding approximately
$22.2 million of letters of credit outstanding thereunder) and approximately $1.2 billion of which
was secured indebtedness under the term loan facility, and we had approximately $802.8 million
of remaining borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility. The level of our future
indebtedness could have important consequences to us, including:
•
making it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations with respect to the notes, our credit
agreement governing our revolving credit facility (“credit agreement”) and other debt
agreements;
Table of Contents
12
•
•
•
•
limiting our ability to borrow additional amounts to fund working capital, capital
expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, the execution of our growth
strategy and other activities;
requiring us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to pay
interest on our debt, which would reduce our cash flow available to fund working capital,
capital expenditures, acquisitions, execution of our growth strategy and other activities;
making us more vulnerable to adverse changes in general economic conditions, our
industry and government regulations and in our business by limiting our flexibility in
planning for, and making it more difficult for us to react quickly to, changing conditions;
and
placing us at a competitive disadvantage compared with our competitors that have less
debt.
In addition, we may not be able to generate sufficient cash flow from our operations to repay our
indebtedness when it becomes due and to meet other cash needs. Our ability to service our debt
will depend upon, among other things, our future financial and operating performance, which will
be affected by prevailing economic conditions and financial, business, regulatory and other
factors, some of which are beyond our control. In addition, our ability to service our debt will
depend on market interest rates, since we anticipate that the interest rates applicable to
borrowings under our revolving credit facility will fluctuate. If we are not able to pay our debts as
they become due, we will be required to pursue one or more alternative strategies, such as
selling assets, refinancing or restructuring our indebtedness or selling additional debt or equity
securities. We may not be able to refinance our debt or sell additional debt or equity securities or
our assets on favorable terms, if at all, and if we must sell our assets, it may negatively affect our
ability to generate revenues.
Despite our current level of indebtedness, the indenture governing the notes permit us
and our subsidiaries to incur substantially more indebtedness. This could further increase
the risks associated with our substantial indebtedness.
We and our subsidiaries may be able to incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future.
The terms of the indenture governing the notes limit, but do not prohibit us or our subsidiaries
from doing so. If we incur any additional indebtedness that ranks equally with the notes and the
guarantees, the holders of that indebtedness will be entitled to share ratably with the notes and
the related guarantees in any proceeds distributed in connection with any insolvency, liquidation,
reorganization, dissolution or other winding-up of us. This may have the effect of reducing the
amount of any proceeds paid to you. If our current debt levels increase, the related risks that we
and our subsidiaries now face could intensify.
The notes and the guarantees are unsecured and effectively subordinated to the Issuers’
and the guarantors’ existing and future secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of
the assets securing such indebtedness.
The notes and the guarantees are general unsecured obligations ranking effectively junior in
right of payment to all of the Issuers’ and the guarantors’ existing and future secured
indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness. Additionally,
the indenture governing the notes permit us to incur additional secured indebtedness in the
future. As of June 30, 2016, we had approximately $4.2 billion of debt outstanding, of which
$675.0 million was secured indebtedness under the revolving credit facility (excluding
approximately $22.2 million of letters of credit outstanding thereunder) and approximately $1.2
billion of which was secured indebtedness under the term loan facility. Additionally, we had
approximately $802.8 million of remaining borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility.
In the event that either of the Issuers or any guarantor is declared bankrupt, becomes insolvent or
is liquidated or reorganized, any indebtedness that is senior in right to payment on the notes or
the guarantees will be entitled to be paid in full from the Issuers’ assets or the assets of the
guarantor, as applicable, before any payment may be made with respect to the notes or the
affected guarantees. Holders of the notes will participate ratably with all holders of the Issuers’
and the guarantors’
Table of Contents
13
unsecured indebtedness that is deemed to be of the same class as the notes, including the 2021
notes and the 2023 notes, and potentially with all of their other general creditors, based upon the
respective amounts owed to each holder or creditor, in their remaining assets. In any of the
foregoing events or in the event of the liquidation, dissolution, reorganization, bankruptcy or
similar proceeding of the business of a non-guarantor subsidiary, as described below, we cannot
assure you that there will be sufficient assets to pay amounts due on the notes. As a result,
holders of the notes may receive less, ratably, than holders of secured indebtedness.
The notes are structurally subordinated to all liabilities of any non-guarantor subsidiaries.
The notes are structurally subordinated to the indebtedness and other liabilities of any of our
subsidiaries that do not guarantee the notes. Any non-guarantor subsidiaries are separate and
distinct legal entities and will have no obligation, contingent or otherwise, to pay any amounts
due pursuant to the notes, or to make any funds available therefor, whether by loans, distributions
or other payments. Any right that we or the guarantors have to receive any assets of any such
non-guarantor subsidiaries upon the liquidation or reorganization of those subsidiaries, and the
consequent rights of holders of notes to realize proceeds from the sale of any of those
subsidiaries’ assets, will be structurally subordinated to the claims of those subsidiaries’
creditors, including trade creditors and holders of preferred equity interests of those subsidiaries.
Accordingly, in the event of a bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of any such non-guarantor
subsidiaries, these non-guarantor subsidiaries will pay the holders of their debts, holders of
preferred equity interests and their trade creditors before they will be able to distribute any of their
assets to us.
Certain restrictive covenants in the indenture governing the notes will be terminated if the
notes achieve investment grade ratings from either Moody’s or S&P and no default exists
with respect to such notes.
Most of the restrictive covenants in the indenture governing the notes will cease to apply if the
notes achieve investment grade ratings from Moody’s or S&P, and no default or event of default
has occurred and is then continuing. If these restrictive covenants cease to apply, we may take
actions, such as incurring additional debt or making certain dividends or distributions that would
otherwise be prohibited under the indenture. Ratings are given by these rating agencies based
upon analyses that include many subjective factors. We cannot assure you that the notes will
achieve investment grade ratings, nor can we assure you that investment grade ratings, if
granted, will reflect all of the factors that would be important to holders of the notes.
Our existing debt agreements and the indenture governing the notes have substantial
restrictions and financial covenants that may restrict our business and financing activities.
We are dependent upon the earnings and cash flow generated by our operations in order to meet
our debt service obligations. The operating and financial restrictions and covenants in our credit
agreement, term loan agreement governing our term loan facility (“term loan agreement”), the
indentures governing the notes, the 2021 notes and the 2023 notes, respectively, and any future
financing agreements may restrict our ability to finance future operations or capital needs and to
engage in or expand our business activities. For example, our credit agreement, term loan
agreement and the indentures governing the notes, the 2021 notes and the 2023 notes,
respectively, restrict our ability to, among other things:
•
incur certain additional indebtedness;
•
incur, permit or assume certain liens to exist on our properties or assets;
•
make certain investments or enter into certain restrictive material contracts; and
•
merge or dispose of all or substantially all of our assets.
In addition, our credit agreement and term loan agreement contain covenants requiring us to
maintain certain financial ratios.
14
Table of Contents
Our future ability to comply with these restrictions and covenants is uncertain and will be affected
by the levels of cash flow from our operations and other events or circumstances beyond our
control. If market or other economic conditions deteriorate, our ability to comply with these
covenants may be impaired. If we violate any provisions of our debt agreements or the indentures
governing the notes, the 2021 notes or the 2023 notes that are not cured or waived within the
appropriate time period provided therein, a significant portion of our indebtedness may become
immediately due and payable and the commitment of our revolving credit facility lenders to make
further loans to us may terminate. We might not have, or be able to obtain, sufficient funds to
make these accelerated payments.
Federal and state statutes allow courts, under specific circumstances, to void subsidiary
guarantees and require noteholders to return payments received from subsidiary
guarantors.
Under the federal bankruptcy law and comparable provisions of state fraudulent transfer laws, a
subsidiary’s guarantee of the notes could be voided, or claims in respect of a guarantee could be
subordinated to all other debts of that guarantor, if, among other things, the guarantor, at the time
it incurred the debt evidenced by its guarantee:
•
received less than reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration for the incurrence of
such guarantee;
•
was insolvent or rendered insolvent by reason of such incurrence;
•
•
was engaged in a business or transaction for which the guarantor’s remaining assets
constituted unreasonably small capital; or
intended to incur, or believed that it would incur, debts beyond its ability to pay such debts
as they mature.
In addition, any payment by that guarantor pursuant to its guarantee could be voided and
required to be returned to the guarantor, or to a fund for the benefit of our creditors or the creditors
of the guarantor.
The measures of insolvency for purposes of these fraudulent transfer laws will vary depending
upon the law applied in any proceeding to determine whether a fraudulent transfer has occurred.
Generally, however, a guarantor would be considered insolvent if:
•
•
the sum of its debts, including contingent liabilities, was greater than the fair saleable
value of all of its assets;
the present fair saleable value of its assets was less than the amount that would be
required to pay its probable liability on its existing debts, including contingent liabilities,
as they become absolute and mature; or
•
it could not pay its debts as they become due.
On the basis of historical financial information, recent operating history and other factors, we
believe that each guarantor, after giving effect to its guarantee of the notes, will not be insolvent,
will not have unreasonably small capital for the business in which it is engaged and will not have
incurred debts beyond its ability to pay such debts as they mature. We cannot assure you,
however, as to what standard a court would apply in making these determinations or that a court
would agree with our conclusions in this regard.
We may not have the funds necessary to finance the repurchase of the notes in
connection with a change of control offer required by the indenture.
Upon the occurrence of specific kinds of change of control events, which occurrence (other than
one involving the adoption of a plan relating to liquidation or dissolution) is followed by a ratings
decline within
Table of Contents
15
90 days of consummation of the transaction, the indenture governing the notes requires the
Issuers to make an offer to repurchase the notes at 101% of the principal amount thereof, plus
accrued and unpaid interest (and liquidated damages, if any) to, but not including, the date of
repurchase. However, it is possible that we will not have sufficient funds, or the ability to raise
sufficient funds, at the time of the change of control to make the required repurchase of the notes.
In addition, restrictions under our credit agreements may not allow us to make a repurchase of
the notes upon a change of control. If we could not refinance the revolving credit facility and term
loan or otherwise obtain a waiver from the lenders thereunder, we would be prohibited from
repurchasing the notes, which would constitute an event of default under the indenture. Because
the definition of change of control under our credit agreements will differ from that under the
indenture that govern the notes, there may be a change of control and resulting default under our
credit agreements at a time when no change of control has occurred under the indenture. Please
read “Description of the Exchange Notes—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Change of
Control.”
Table of Contents
16
Purpose and Effect of the Exchange Offer
EXCHANGE OFFER
In connection with the sale of the private notes on July 20, 2015, we, Sunoco Finance and the
guarantors entered into a registration rights agreement with the initial purchasers of the private
notes (the “registration rights agreement”), which requires us to file a registration statement under
the Securities Act with respect to the exchange notes and, upon the effectiveness of the
registration statement, offer to the holders of the private notes the opportunity to exchange their
private notes for a like principle amount of exchange notes. The exchange notes will be issued
without a restrictive legend and generally may be reoffered and resold without registration under
the Securities Act.
The registration rights agreement provides that we must use our reasonable efforts to
consummate the exchange offer not later than 365 days after the original issuance of the private
notes. The registration rights agreement further provides that, under certain circumstances, we
must file a shelf registration statement for the resale of the private notes and use reasonable best
efforts to cause such registration statement to become effective under the Securities Act and to
keep such registration statement effective for a period of one year, or such shorter period that will
terminate when all private notes covered by the shelf registration statement have been sold.
For each private note surrendered to us pursuant to the exchange offer, the holder of such private
note will receive an exchange note having a principal amount equal to that of the surrendered
private note. Interest payments on the exchange notes will be made semi-annually in cash, on
February 1 and August 1 of each year. The registration rights agreement also provides an
agreement to include in the prospectus for the exchange offer certain information necessary to
allow a broker-dealer who holds private notes that were acquired for its own account as a result
of market-making activities or other trading activities (other than private notes acquired directly
from us or one of our affiliates) to exchange such private notes pursuant to the exchange offer
and to satisfy the prospectus delivery requirements in connection with resales of exchange notes
received by such broker-dealer in the exchange offer. We agreed to use reasonable efforts to
maintain the effectiveness of the exchange offer registration statement for these purposes for a
period of 180 days after the completion of the exchange offer, which period may be extended
under certain circumstances.
The preceding agreement is needed because any broker-dealer who acquires private notes for
its own account as a result of market-making activities or other trading activities is required to
deliver a prospectus meeting the requirements of the Securities Act. This prospectus covers the
offer and sale of the exchange notes pursuant to the exchange offer and the resale of exchange
notes received in the exchange offer by any broker-dealer who held private notes acquired for its
own account as a result of market-making activities or other trading activities (other than private
notes acquired directly from us or one of our affiliates).
Holders that are broker-dealers may be deemed “underwriters” within the meaning of the
Securities Act in connection with any resale of exchange notes acquired in the exchange offer.
Holders that are broker-dealers must acknowledge that they acquired their private notes in
market-making activities or other trading activities and must deliver a prospectus when they resell
the exchange notes they acquire in the exchange offer in order not to be deemed an underwriter.
Based on interpretations by the staff of the SEC set forth in no-action letters issued to third
parties, we believe that the exchange notes issued in exchange for private notes may be offered
for resale, resold and otherwise transferred by any exchange noteholder without compliance with
the registration and prospectus delivery provisions of the Securities Act, if:
•
such holder is not an “affiliate” of ours within the meaning of Rule 405 under the
Securities Act;
•
such exchange notes are acquired in the ordinary course of the holder’s business; and
•
the holder does not intend to participate in the distribution of such exchange notes.
17
Table of Contents
Any holder who tenders notes in the exchange offer with the intention of participating in any
manner in a distribution of the exchange notes:
•
•
cannot rely on the position of the staff of the SEC set forth in Exxon Capital Holdings
Corp., SEC No- Action Letter (April 13, 1988); Morgan Stanley & Co. Inc., SEC No-Action
Letter (June 5, 1991); Shearman & Sterling, SEC No-Action Letter (July 2, 1993) or
similar interpretive letters; and
must comply with the registration and prospectus delivery requirements of the Securities
Act in connection with a secondary resale transaction.
If, as stated above, a holder cannot rely on the position of the staff of the SEC set forth in “Exxon
Capital Holdings Corporation” or similar interpretive letters, any effective registration statement
used in connection with a secondary resale transaction must contain the selling security holder
information required by Item 507 of Regulation S-K under the Securities Act.
Each holder of the private notes (other than certain specified holders) who desires to exchange
private notes for the exchange notes in the exchange offer will be required to make the
representations described below under “—Procedures for Tendering—Your Representations to
Us.”
In the event that (i) we determine that the exchange offer registration provided for in the
registration rights agreement is not available or that the exchange offer may not be completed as
soon as practicable after the last exchange date because it would violate any applicable law or
applicable interpretations of the SEC; (ii) the exchange offer is not for any other reason
completed by the Target Registration Date (as defined below) or (iii) upon receipt of a written
request (a “Shelf Request”) from any initial purchaser representing that it holds registrable
securities (as defined in the registration rights agreement) that are or were ineligible to be
exchanged in the exchange offer, we will use our reasonable best efforts to cause to be filed as
soon as practicable after such determination, date or Shelf Request, as the case may be, a shelf
registration statement providing for the sale of all the registrable securities by the holders thereof
and to have such shelf registration statement become effective.
If (i) on or prior to the time the exchange offer is completed, existing law or SEC interpretations
are changed such that the exchange notes would not generally be freely transferable after the
exchange offer without further registration under the Securities Act; (ii) the exchange offer
registration statement is not declared effective by 365 days after the issue date of the private
notes or (iii) the exchange offer has not been completed within 20 business days of the exchange
offer registration statement being declared effective, then we will use our reasonable best efforts
to file and to have become effective a shelf registration statement relating to resales of the
exchange notes and to keep that shelf registration statement effective until the date that the
exchange notes cease to be “registrable securities” (as defined in the registration rights
agreement), including when all exchange notes covered by the shelf registration statement have
been sold pursuant to the shelf registration statement. We will, in the event of such a shelf
registration, provide to each participating holder of exchange notes copies of a prospectus, notify
each participating holder of exchange notes when the shelf registration statement has become
effective and take certain other actions to permit resales of the exchange notes. A holder of
exchange notes that sells exchange notes under the shelf registration statement generally will be
required to make certain representations to us (as described in the registration rights agreement),
to be named as a selling security holder in the related prospectus and to deliver a prospectus to
purchasers, will be subject to certain of the civil liability provisions under the Securities Act in
connection with those sales and will be bound by the provisions of the registration rights
agreement that are applicable to such a holder of exchange notes (including certain
indemnification obligations). Holders of exchange notes will also be required to suspend their
use of the prospectus included in the shelf registration statement under specified circumstances
upon receipt of notice from us. Under applicable interpretations of the staff of the SEC, our
affiliates will not be permitted to exchange their private notes for registered notes in the exchange
offer.
If the exchange offer is not completed (or, if required, the shelf registration statement is not
declared effective) on or before the date that is 365 days after the issue date of the private notes
(the “Target Registration
18
Table of Contents
Date”), then we agree to pay each holder of private notes liquidated damages in the form of
additional interest in an amount equal to 0.25% per annum of the principal amount of notes held
by such holder, with respect to the first 90 days after the Target Registration Date (which rate
shall be increased by an additional 0.25% per annum for each subsequent 90-day period that
such liquidated damages continue to accrue), in each case until the exchange offer is completed
or the shelf registration statement is declared effective; provided, however, that at no time will the
amount of liquidated damages accruing with respect to the private notes exceed in the aggregate
1.0% per annum. Upon the completion of the exchange offer (or, if required, the effectiveness of
the shelf registration statement) liquidated damages described in this paragraph with respect to
the private notes will cease to accrue.
If we effect the registered exchange offer, we will be entitled to close the registered exchange
offer 20 business days after their commencement as long as we have accepted all private notes
validly tendered in accordance with the terms of the exchange offer and no brokers or dealers
continue to hold any private notes.
This summary of the material provisions of the registration rights agreement does not purport to
be complete and is subject to, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, all the provisions of
the registration rights agreement, a copy of which is incorporated by reference into this
prospectus.
Except as set forth above, after consummation of the exchange offer, holders of private notes that
are the subject of the exchange offer have no registration or exchange rights under the
registration rights agreement. See “—Consequences of Failure to Exchange.”
Terms of the Exchange Offer
Subject to the terms and conditions described in this prospectus and in the letter of transmittal,
we will accept for exchange any private notes properly tendered and not withdrawn prior to 5:00
p.m., New York City time, on the expiration date. We will issue exchange notes in principal
amount equal to the principal amount of private notes surrendered in the exchange offer. Private
notes may be tendered only for exchange notes and only in minimum denominations of $2,000
and integral multiples of $1,000 in excess thereof.
The exchange offer is not conditioned upon any minimum aggregate principal amount of private
notes being tendered for exchange.
As of the date of this prospectus, $600.0 million in aggregate principal amount of the private
notes are outstanding. This prospectus and the letter of transmittal are being sent to all registered
holders of private notes. There will be no fixed record date for determining registered holders of
private notes entitled to participate in the exchange offer.
We intend to conduct the exchange offer in accordance with the provisions of the registration
rights agreement, the applicable requirements of the Securities Act and the Exchange Act and
the rules and regulations of the SEC. Private notes that the holders thereof do not tender for
exchange in the exchange offer will remain outstanding and continue to accrue interest. These
private notes will continue to be entitled to the rights and benefits such holders have under the
indenture relating to the private notes.
We will be deemed to have accepted for exchange properly tendered private notes when we
have given oral (promptly followed in writing) or written notice of the acceptance to the exchange
agent and complied with the applicable provisions of the registration rights agreement. The
exchange agent will act as agent for the tendering holders for the purposes of receiving the
exchange notes from us.
If you tender private notes in the exchange offer, you will not be required to pay brokerage
commissions or fees or, subject to the letter of transmittal, transfer taxes with respect to the
exchange of private notes. We will pay all charges and expenses, other than certain applicable
taxes described below, in connection with the exchange offer. It is important that you read the
section entitled “—Fees and Expenses” for more details regarding fees and expenses incurred in
the exchange offer.
Table of Contents
19
We will return any private notes that we do not accept for exchange for any reason without
expense to their tendering holder promptly after the expiration or termination of the exchange
offer.
Expiration Date
The exchange offer will expire at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on                     , 2016, unless
extended, in which case the expiration date will mean the latest date and time to which we
extend the exchange offer.
Delays in Acceptance, Extensions, Termination or Amendment
We expressly reserve the right, at any time or various times, to extend the period of time during
which the exchange offer is open. We may delay acceptance of any private notes by giving oral
(promptly followed in writing) or written notice of such delay to their holders. During any such
extensions, any private notes previously tendered will remain subject to the exchange offer, and
we may accept them for exchange.
In order to extend an exchange offer, we will notify the exchange agent by giving oral (promptly
followed in writing) or written notice of such extension. We will notify the registered holders of the
private notes of the extension no later than 9:00 a.m., New York City time, on the business day
after the previously scheduled expiration date.
If any of the conditions described below under “—Conditions to the Exchange Offer” have not
been satisfied with respect to the exchange offer, we reserve the right, in our sole discretion:
•
to delay accepting for exchange any private notes in the exchange offer;
•
to extend the exchange offer; or
•
to terminate the exchange offer,
by giving oral (promptly followed in writing) or written notice of such delay, extension or
termination to the exchange agent. Subject to the terms of the registration rights agreement, we
also reserve the right to amend the terms of the exchange offer in any manner.
Any such delay in acceptance, extension, termination or amendment will be followed promptly by
oral (promptly followed in writing) or written notice thereof to the registered holders of the private
notes. If we amend the exchange offer in a manner that we determine to constitute a material
change, we will promptly disclose such amendment by means of a prospectus supplement. The
supplement will be distributed to the registered holders of the private notes. Depending upon the
significance of the amendment and the manner of disclosure to the registered holders, we may
extend the exchange offer. In the event of a material change in the exchange offer, including the
waiver by us of a material condition, we will extend the exchange offer period if necessary so that
at least five business days remain in the exchange offer following notice of the material change.
Conditions to the Exchange Offer
We will not be required to accept for exchange, or exchange any exchange notes for, any private
notes if the exchange offer, or the making of any exchange by a holder of private notes, would
violate applicable law or any applicable interpretation of the staff of the SEC. Similarly, we may
terminate the exchange offer as provided in this prospectus before accepting private notes for
exchange in the event of such a potential violation.
In addition, we will not be obligated to accept for exchange the private notes of any holder that
has not made to us the representations described under “—Purpose and Effect of the Exchange
Offer,” “—Procedures for Tendering” and “Plan of Distribution” and such other representations as
may be reasonably necessary under applicable SEC rules, regulations or interpretations to allow
us to use an appropriate form to register the exchange notes under the Securities Act.
Table of Contents
20
We expressly reserve the right to amend or terminate the exchange offer, and to reject for
exchange any private notes not previously accepted for exchange, upon the occurrence of any of
the conditions to the exchange offer specified above. We will give prompt oral (promptly followed
in writing) or written notice of any extension, amendment, non-acceptance or termination to the
holders of the private notes as promptly as practicable.
These conditions are for our sole benefit, and we may assert them or waive them in whole or in
part at any time or at various times in our sole discretion. If we fail at any time to exercise any of
these rights, this failure will not mean that we have waived our rights. Each such right will be
deemed an ongoing right that we may assert at any time or at various times.
In addition, we will not accept for exchange any private notes tendered, and will not issue
exchange notes in exchange for any such private notes, if at such time any stop order has been
threatened or is in effect with respect to the exchange offer registration statement of which this
prospectus constitutes a part or the qualification of the indenture governing the exchange notes
under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939.
Procedures for Tendering
In order to participate in the exchange offer, you must properly tender your private notes to the
exchange agent as described below. It is your responsibility to properly tender your private notes.
We have the right to waive any defects. However, we are not required to waive defects and are
not required to notify you of defects in your tender.
If you have any questions or need help in exchanging your private notes, please call the
exchange agent, whose address and phone number are set forth in “Prospectus Summary—The
Exchange Offer—Exchange Agent.”
All of the private notes were issued in book-entry form, and all of the private notes are currently
represented by global certificates held for the account of DTC. We have confirmed with DTC that
the private notes may be tendered using the ATOP instituted by DTC. The exchange agent will
establish an account with DTC for purposes of the exchange offer promptly after the
commencement of the exchange offer and DTC participants may electronically transmit their
acceptance of the exchange offer by causing DTC to transfer their private notes to the exchange
agent using the ATOP procedures. In connection with the transfer, DTC will send an “agent’s
message” to the exchange agent. The agent’s message will be deemed to state that DTC has
received instructions from the participant to tender such private notes and that the participant
agrees to be bound by the terms of the letter of transmittal.
By using the ATOP procedures to exchange private notes, you will not be required to deliver a
letter of transmittal to the exchange agent. However, you will be bound by its terms just as if you
had signed it.
There is no procedure for guaranteed late delivery of the private notes.
Determinations Under the Exchange Offer
We will determine in our sole discretion all questions as to the validity, form, eligibility, time of
receipt, acceptance of tendered private notes and withdrawal of tendered private notes. Our
determination will be final and binding. We reserve the absolute right to reject any private notes
not properly tendered or any private notes our acceptance of which would, in the opinion of our
counsel, be unlawful. We also reserve the right to waive any defects, irregularities or conditions
of tender as to particular private notes. Our interpretation of the terms and conditions of the
exchange offer, including the instructions in the letter of transmittal, will be final and binding on all
parties. Unless waived, all defects or irregularities in connection with tenders of private notes
must be cured within such time as we shall determine. Although we intend to notify holders of
defects or irregularities
21
Table of Contents
with respect to tenders of private notes, neither we, the exchange agent nor any other person will
incur any liability for failure to give such notification. Tenders of private notes will not be deemed
made until such defects or irregularities have been cured or waived. Any private notes received
by the exchange agent that are not properly tendered and as to which the defects or irregularities
have not been cured or waived will be returned to the tendering holder, unless otherwise
provided in the letter of transmittal, promptly following the expiration date of the exchange offer.
When We Will Issue Exchange Notes
In all cases, we will issue exchange notes for private notes that we have accepted for exchange
under the exchange offer only after the exchange agent timely receives:
•
a book-entry confirmation of such private notes into the exchange agent’s account at
DTC; and
•
a properly transmitted agent’s message.
Return of Private Notes Not Accepted or Exchanged
If we do not accept any tendered private notes for exchange or if private notes are submitted for a
greater principal amount than the holder desires to exchange, the unaccepted or non-exchanged
private notes will be returned without expense to their tendering holder. Such non-exchanged
private notes will be credited to an account maintained with DTC. These actions will occur
promptly after the expiration or termination of the exchange offer.
Your Representations to Us
By agreeing to be bound by the letter of transmittal, you will represent to us that, among other
things:
•
•
any exchange notes that you receive will be acquired in the ordinary course of your
business;
you have no arrangement or understanding with any person or entity to participate in the
distribution of the exchange notes;
•
you are not our “affiliate,” as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act; and
•
if you are a broker-dealer that will receive exchange notes for your own account in
exchange for private notes, you acquired those private notes as a result of market-making
activities or other trading activities and you will deliver a prospectus (or to the extent
permitted by law, make available a prospectus) in connection with any resale of such
exchange notes.
Withdrawal of Tenders
Except as otherwise provided in this prospectus, you may withdraw your tender at any time prior
to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the expiration date. For a withdrawal to be effective you must
comply with the appropriate procedures of DTC’s ATOP system. Any notice of withdrawal must
specify the name and number of the account at DTC to be credited with withdrawn private notes
and otherwise comply with the procedures of DTC.
We will determine all questions as to the validity, form, eligibility and time of receipt of notice of
withdrawal. Our determination shall be final and binding on all parties. We will deem any private
notes so withdrawn not to have been validly tendered for exchange for purposes of the exchange
offer.
Any private notes that have been tendered for exchange but are not exchanged for any reason
will be credited to an account maintained with DTC for the private notes. This crediting will take
place as soon as practicable after withdrawal, rejection of tender or termination of the exchange
offer. You may re-tender properly withdrawn private notes by following the procedures described
under “—Procedures for Tendering” above at any time prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on
the expiration date.
Table of Contents
Fees and Expenses
22
We will bear the expenses of soliciting tenders. The principal solicitation is being made by mail;
however, we may make additional solicitation by facsimile, telephone, electronic mail or in
person by our officers and regular employees and those of our affiliates.
We have not retained any dealer-manager in connection with the exchange offer and will not
make any payments to broker-dealers or others soliciting acceptances of the exchange offer. We
will, however, pay the exchange agent reasonable and customary fees for its services and
reimburse it for its related reasonable out-of-pocket expenses.
We will pay the cash expenses to be incurred in connection with the exchange offer. They
include:
•
all registration and filing fees and expenses;
•
•
all fees and expenses of compliance with federal securities and state “blue sky” or
securities laws;
accounting fees, legal fees incurred by us, disbursements and printing, messenger and
delivery services, and telephone costs; and
•
related fees and expenses.
Transfer Taxes
We will pay all transfer taxes, if any, applicable to the exchange of private notes under the
exchange offer. The tendering holder, however, will be required to pay any transfer taxes,
whether imposed on the registered holder or any other person, if a transfer tax is imposed for any
reason other than the exchange of private notes under the exchange offer.
Consequences of Failure to Exchange
If you do not exchange your private notes for exchange notes under the exchange offer, you will
remain subject to the existing restrictions on transfer of the private notes. In general, you may not
offer or sell the private notes unless the offer or sale is either registered under the Securities Act
or exempt from registration under the Securities Act and applicable state securities laws. Except
as required by the registration rights agreement, we do not intend to register resales of the private
notes under the Securities Act.
Accounting Treatment
We will record the exchange notes in our accounting records at the same carrying value as the
private notes. This carrying value is the aggregate principal amount of the private notes plus or
minus any bond premium or discount, as reflected in our accounting records on the date of
exchange. Accordingly, we will not recognize any gain or loss for accounting purposes in
connection with the exchange offer.
Other
Participation in the exchange offer is voluntary, and you should carefully consider whether to
accept. You are urged to consult your financial and tax advisors in making your own decision on
what action to take.
We may in the future seek to acquire untendered private notes in open market or privately
negotiated transactions, through subsequent exchange offers or otherwise. We have no present
plans to acquire any private notes that are not tendered in the exchange offer or to file a
registration statement to permit resales of any untendered private notes.
Table of Contents
23
USE OF PROCEEDS
We will not receive any cash proceeds from the exchange offer. The exchange offer is intended
to satisfy our obligations under the registration rights agreement. We will retire or cancel all of the
outstanding private notes tendered in the exchange offer. Accordingly, the issuance of the
exchange notes will not result in any increase in our outstanding indebtedness or in the
obligations of the guarantors of the notes.
Table of Contents
24
RATIO OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES OF SUNOCO LP
On October 1, 2014, we acquired 100% of the membership interests of MACS. On April 1, 2015,
we acquired a 31.58% membership interest and a 50.1% voting interest in Sunoco LLC. On
July 31, 2015, we acquired 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of Susser
Holdings Corporation (“Susser”). Finally, on March 31, 2016, we acquired the remaining 68.42%
membership interest and 49.9% voting interest in Sunoco LLC as well as 100% of the issued and
outstanding membership interest in Sunoco Retail. Results of operations for the MACS, Sunoco
LLC, Susser and Sunoco Retail acquisitions have been deemed transactions between entities
under common control, and accordingly, have been included in our consolidated results of
operations since September 1, 2014, the date of common control.
The following table set forth our ratios of earnings to fixed charges for the periods presented:
Ratio of earnings to fixed
charges(2)
Year ended December 31,
2012      2013      2014(1)     2015
Six months ended 
June 30, 2016
12.49x      11.24x       2.75x      2.83x
3.12x
(1) For the year ended December 31, 2014, we have combined the Predecessor Period and the
Successor Period and presented the unaudited financial data on a combined basis for
comparative purposes.
(2) For purposes of computing the ratio of earnings to fixed charges, “earnings” consist of income
from continuing operations and fixed charges. “Fixed charges” consist of interest expenses,
capitalized interest and the estimated portion of interest within rental expense.
25
Table of Contents
DESCRIPTION OF THE EXCHANGE NOTES
You can find the definitions of certain terms used in this description under the subheading “—
Certain Definitions.” In this description, the term “Sunoco LP” refers only to Sunoco LP and not to
any of its subsidiaries, the term “Finance Corp.” refers to Sunoco Finance Corp. and the term
“Issuers” refers to Sunoco LP and Finance Corp.
The Issuers issued the private notes, and will issue the exchange notes, under an indenture
dated as of July 20, 2015 among themselves, the Guarantors and U.S. Bank National
Association, as trustee (as amended, the “Indenture”). The terms of the private notes include, and
the exchange notes will include, those stated in the Indenture and those made part thereof by
reference to the Trust Indenture Act of 1939, as amended (the “Trust Indenture Act”).
The following description is a summary of the material provisions of the Indenture. It does not
restate the Indenture in its entirety. We urge you to read the Indenture because it, and not this
description, defines your rights as holders of notes. Copies of the Indenture are available as set
forth below under “—Additional Information.” Certain defined terms used in this description but
not defined below under “—Certain Definitions” have the meanings assigned to them in the
Indenture.
The registered holder of a note will be treated as its owner for all purposes. Only registered
holders will have rights under the Indenture. Unless the context otherwise requires for all
purposes of the Indenture, and for this “Description of the Exchange Notes,” all references to the
“notes” include the private notes, the exchange notes and any additional notes actually issued
under the Indenture.
General
The Notes
The notes:
•
are general unsecured obligations of the Issuers;
•
are pari passu in right of payment with all existing and future senior Indebtedness of the
Issuers;
•
are senior in right of payment to any future subordinated Indebtedness of the Issuers; and
•
are unconditionally guaranteed by the Guarantors.
The notes, however, are effectively subordinated to all secured Indebtedness under the Credit
Agreement and Sunoco LP’s $1.4 billion term loan (the “Term Loan”), which are secured by
substantially all of the assets of Sunoco LP and the Guarantors, to the extent of the value of the
collateral securing that Indebtedness. The notes will also be structurally subordinated to any
Indebtedness of our Subsidiaries that do not guarantee the notes. See “Risk Factors—Risks
Relating to Our Indebtedness and the Notes—The notes and the guarantees will be unsecured
and effectively subordinated to our and the guarantors’ existing and future secured indebtedness
to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness” and “—The notes are
structurally subordinated to all liabilities of any non-guarantor subsidiaries.”
Each guarantee of the notes:
The Note Guarantees
•
is a general unsecured obligation of the Guarantor;
•
is pari passu in right of payment with all existing and future senior Indebtedness of that
Guarantor; and
•
is senior in right of payment to any future subordinated Indebtedness of that Guarantor.
26
Table of Contents
The Note Guarantees, however, are effectively subordinated to all secured Indebtedness of the
Guarantors, including their guarantees of Indebtedness under the Credit Agreement and the
Term Loan, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing those guarantees.
All of Sunoco LP’s current significant Subsidiaries, with the exception of Finance Corp.,
guarantee the notes. The notes will also be guaranteed by any of Sunoco LP’s future Domestic
Subsidiaries that incurs Indebtedness under a Credit Facility and by any Restricted Subsidiaries
that guarantee Indebtedness of an Issuer or a Guarantor under a Credit Facility. In the event of a
bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of any of our non-guaranteeing Subsidiaries, such non-
guaranteeing Subsidiaries will pay the holders of their debt and their trade creditors before they
will be able to distribute any of their assets to us and, as a result, the obligations of our non-
guaranteeing subsidiaries will be structurally senior to the notes and Note Guarantees. See “Risk
Factors—Risks Relating to Our Indebtedness and the Notes—The notes and the guarantees will
be unsecured and effectively subordinated to our and the guarantors’ existing and future secured
indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness” and “—The
notes are structurally subordinated to all liabilities of any non-guarantor subsidiaries.”
All of our Subsidiaries are “Restricted Subsidiaries.” Under the circumstances described below
under the caption “—Certain Covenants—Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted
Subsidiaries,” however, we are permitted to designate certain of our existing and future
Subsidiaries as “Unrestricted Subsidiaries.” Our Unrestricted Subsidiaries are not subject to the
restrictive covenants in the Indenture. Our Unrestricted Subsidiaries do not guarantee the notes.
Principal, Maturity and Interest
The Issuers will issue $600 million in aggregate principal amount of the exchange notes in the
exchange offer. The Issuers may issue additional notes under the Indenture from time to time
after this offering. Any issuance of additional notes is subject to all the covenants in the
Indenture, including the covenant described below under the caption “—Certain Covenants—
Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Disqualified Equity.” The exchange notes and any
additional notes subsequently issued under the Indenture will be treated as a single class for all
purposes under the Indenture, including waivers, amendments, redemptions and offers to
purchase. The Issuers have issued the notes in denominations of $2,000 and integral multiples
of $1,000 in excess thereof. The notes will mature on August 1, 2020.
Interest on the notes will accrue at the rate of 5.500% per annum and will be payable semi-
annually in arrears on February 1 and August 1 of each year. Interest on overdue principal and
interest accrues at the interest rate on the notes. The Issuers will make each interest payment on
the notes to the holders of record on January 15 and July 15 immediately preceding each
payment date. Additional interest will accrue as liquidated damages in certain circumstances
described in the registration rights agreement. All references in this “Description of the Exchange
Notes” include any such additional interest to the extent payable.
Interest on the notes accrues from the date of original issuance or, if interest has already been
paid, from the date it was most recently paid. Interest is computed on the basis of a 360-day year
comprised of twelve 30-day months.
Methods of Receiving Payments on the Notes
Interest on global notes will be paid in accordance with the procedures of the applicable
depositary. If a holder of $5.0 million or more in principal amount of notes held in certificated form
has given wire transfer instructions to Sunoco LP, to an account in the United States, the Issuers
will pay all principal of, and interest and premium, if any, on, that holder’s notes in accordance
with those instructions. All other payments on certificated notes will be made at the office or
agency of the paying agent and registrar unless the Issuers elect to make interest payments by
check mailed to the holders of notes at their addresses set forth in the register of holders.
Table of Contents
27
Paying Agent and Registrar for the Notes
The trustee acts as paying agent and registrar. The Issuers may change the paying agent or
registrar without prior notice to the holders of notes, and Sunoco LP, Finance Corp. or any of
Sunoco LP’s other Subsidiaries may act as paying agent or registrar.
Transfer and Exchange
A holder may transfer or exchange notes in accordance with the provisions of the Indenture. The
registrar and the trustee may require a holder, among other things, to furnish appropriate
endorsements and transfer documents in connection with a transfer of notes. No service charge
will be imposed by the Issuers or the trustee or registrar for any transfer or exchange of notes,
except that holders will be required to pay all taxes due on transfer. The Issuers will not be
required to transfer or exchange any note selected for redemption. Also, the Issuers will not be
required to transfer or exchange any note for a period of 15 days before a selection of notes to be
redeemed.
Note Guarantees
The notes are guaranteed by each of Sunoco LP’s current significant Subsidiaries, with the
exception of Finance Corp. The notes may also be guaranteed by certain of Sunoco LP’s future
Restricted Subsidiaries under the circumstances described under “—Certain Covenants—
Additional Guarantees.” These Note Guarantees are joint and several obligations of the
Guarantors. The obligations of each Guarantor under its Note Guarantee are limited as
necessary to prevent that Note Guarantee from constituting a fraudulent conveyance under
applicable law. See “Risk Factors—Risks Relating to Our Indebtedness and the Notes—Federal
and state statutes allow courts, under specific circumstances, to void subsidiary guarantees and
require noteholders to return payments received from subsidiary guarantors.”
A Guarantor may not sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of its properties or assets
to, or consolidate with or merge with or into (whether or not such Guarantor is the surviving
Person), another Person, other than the Issuers or another Guarantor, unless:
(1) immediately after giving effect to that transaction, no Default or Event of Default exists;
and
(2) either:
(a)
the Person acquiring the assets in any such sale or other disposition or the Person
formed by or surviving any such consolidation or merger (if other than the Guarantor)
assumes all the obligations of that Guarantor under the Indenture and its Note
Guarantee pursuant to a supplemental indenture substantially in the form specified
in the Indenture; or
(b)
the Net Proceeds of such sale or other disposition are applied in accordance with
the “Asset Sales” provisions of the Indenture.
The Note Guarantee of a Guarantor will be released:
(1) in connection with any sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of the properties
or assets of that Guarantor (including by way of merger or consolidation) to a Person that
is not (either before or after giving effect to such transaction) Sunoco LP or a Restricted
Subsidiary of Sunoco LP, if (for the avoidance of doubt, at the time thereof) the sale or
other disposition does not violate the “Asset Sales” provisions of the Indenture;
(2) in connection with any sale or other disposition of all the Capital Stock of that Guarantor
to a Person that is not (either before or after giving effect to such transaction) Sunoco LP
or a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP, if (for the avoidance of doubt, at the time thereof)
the sale or other disposition does not violate the “Asset Sales” provisions of the
Indenture;
28
Table of Contents
(3) if Sunoco LP designates any Restricted Subsidiary that is a Guarantor to be an
Unrestricted Subsidiary in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Indenture;
(4) at such time as the Guarantor ceases to guarantee any other Indebtedness of an Issuer or
another Guarantor, provided that, if it is also a Domestic Subsidiary, it is then no longer
an obligor with respect to any Indebtedness under any Credit Facility; provided, however,
that if, at any time following such release, that Guarantor incurs a guarantee under a
Credit Facility, then such Guarantor shall be required to provide a Note Guarantee at
such time;
(5) upon legal or covenant defeasance or satisfaction and discharge of the Indenture as
provided below under the captions “—Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance” and
“—Satisfaction and Discharge”; or
(6) the first day on which the notes achieve an Investment Grade Rating.
See “—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Asset Sales.”
Optional Redemption
Except pursuant to this section relating to optional redemption, or as described below in the last
paragraph under “—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Change of Control,” the notes are not
redeemable at the Issuers’ option.
At any time prior to August 1, 2017, the Issuers may, on one or more occasions, redeem up to
35% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes issued under the Indenture at a redemption
price of 105.500% of the principal amount of the notes redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid
interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date (subject to the right of holders of record on
the relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to
the redemption date), in an amount not greater than the net cash proceeds of one or more Equity
Offerings, provided that:
(1) at least 65% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes issued under the Indenture
remains outstanding immediately after the occurrence of such redemption (excluding
notes held by Sunoco LP and its Subsidiaries); and
(2) the redemption occurs within 180 days of the date of the closing of each such Equity
Offering.
On and after August 1, 2017, the Issuers may, on one or more occasions, redeem all or a part of
the notes at the redemption prices (expressed as percentages of principal amount) set forth
below, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the notes redeemed to the applicable
redemption date (subject to the right of holders of record on the relevant record date to receive
interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the redemption date), if redeemed
during the twelve-month period beginning on August 1 of the years indicated below:
Year
2017
2018
2019
Percentages
102.750% 
101.375% 
100.000%
Prior to August 1, 2017, the Issuers may, on one or more occasions, redeem all or part of the
notes at a redemption price equal to the sum of the principal amount thereof, plus the Applicable
Premium at the redemption date, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the
redemption date (subject to the right of holders of record on the relevant record date to receive
interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the redemption date).
Unless the Issuers default in the payment of the redemption price, interest will cease to accrue on
the notes or portions thereof called for redemption on the applicable redemption date.
29
Table of Contents
Selection and Notice
If less than all the notes is to be redeemed at any time, the trustee will select the applicable notes
for redemption as follows:
(1) if the notes are listed on any national securities exchange, in compliance with the
requirements of the principal national securities exchange on which the notes are listed;
or
(2) if the notes are not listed on any national securities exchange, on a pro rata basis, by lot
or by such other method as the trustee deems fair (except that any notes represented by a
note in global form will be selected by such method as The Depository Trust Company
(“DTC”) or its nominee or successor may require or, where such nominee or successor is
the trustee, a method that most nearly approximates pro rata selection as the trustee
deems fair and appropriate unless otherwise required by law).
No notes of $2,000 or less can be redeemed in part. Notices of redemption will be sent at least
30 but not more than 60 days before the redemption date to each holder of notes to be redeemed
at its registered address, except that redemption notices may be sent more than 60 days prior to a
redemption date if the notice is issued in connection with a defeasance of the notes or a
satisfaction and discharge of the Indenture. Any such redemption may, at Sunoco LP’s discretion,
be subject to one or more conditions precedent.
If any note is to be redeemed in part only, the notice of redemption that relates to that note will
state the portion of the principal amount of that note that is to be redeemed. A new note in
principal amount equal to the unredeemed portion of the original note will be issued in the name
of the holder of notes upon cancellation of the original note. Notes called for redemption become
due on the date fixed for redemption. On and after the redemption date, interest ceases to accrue
on notes or portions of notes called for redemption.
Mandatory Redemption
The Issuers are not required to make mandatory redemption or sinking fund payments with
respect to the notes.
Repurchase at the Option of Holders
Change of Control
If a Change of Control occurs, Sunoco LP will make an offer to each holder of notes to
repurchase all or any part (equal to $2,000 or an integral multiple of $1,000 in excess thereof) of
that holder’s notes pursuant to the offer described below (the “Change of Control Offer”) on the
terms set forth in the Indenture. In the Change of Control Offer, Sunoco LP will offer a payment in
cash (the “Change of Control Payment”) equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the
notes repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest on such notes repurchased to, but
excluding, the date of purchase (the “Change of Control Payment Date”), subject to the rights of
holders of notes on the relevant record date to receive interest due on an interest payment date
that is on or prior to the Change of Control Payment Date. Within 30 days following any Change
of Control, Sunoco LP will send a notice to each holder describing the transaction or transactions
that constitute the Change of Control and offering to repurchase the notes on the Change of
Control Payment Date specified in the notice, which date will be no earlier than 30 days and no
later than 60 days from the date such notice is sent, pursuant to the procedures required by the
Indenture and described in such notice. In making the Change of Control Offer, Sunoco LP will
comply with all applicable requirements of Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and other
securities laws and regulations. To the extent that the provisions of any securities laws or
regulations conflict with the “Change of Control” provisions of the Indenture, Sunoco LP will
comply with the applicable securities laws and regulations and will not be deemed to have
breached its obligations under the “Change of Control” provisions of the Indenture by virtue of
such compliance.
Table of Contents
30
Promptly following the expiration of the Change of Control Offer, Sunoco LP will, to the extent
lawful, accept for payment all notes or portions of notes properly tendered pursuant to the
Change of Control Offer. Promptly thereafter on the Change of Control Payment Date, Sunoco LP
will:
(1) deposit with the paying agent an amount equal to the Change of Control Payment in
respect of all notes or portions of notes properly tendered; and
(2) deliver or cause to be delivered to the trustee the notes properly accepted together with
an officers’ certificate stating the aggregate principal amount of notes or portions of notes
being purchased by Sunoco LP.
The paying agent will promptly mail to each holder of notes properly tendered the Change of
Control Payment for such notes (or, to the extent the notes are in global form, make such
payment through the facilities of DTC), and the trustee will promptly authenticate and mail (or
cause to be transferred by book entry) to each holder a new note equal in principal amount to any
unpurchased portion of the notes surrendered; provided, that each new note will be in a principal
amount of $2,000 or an integral multiple of $1,000 in excess thereof. Sunoco LP will publicly
announce the results of the Change of Control Offer on or as soon as practicable after the
Change of Control Payment Date.
These provisions relating to a Change of Control Offer will be applicable whether or not any other
provisions of the Indenture are applicable. Except with respect to a Change of Control, the
Indenture does not contain provisions that permit the holders of notes to require that either of the
Issuers repurchase or redeem the notes in the event of a takeover, recapitalization or similar
transaction.
Sunoco LP will not be required to make a Change of Control Offer upon a Change of Control if
(1) a third party makes the Change of Control Offer in the manner, at the times and otherwise in
compliance with the requirements set forth in the Indenture applicable to a Change of Control
Offer made by Sunoco LP and purchases all notes properly tendered and not withdrawn under
the Change of Control Offer; (2) notice of redemption with respect to all outstanding notes has
been given pursuant to the Indenture as described above under the caption “—Optional
Redemption,” unless and until there is a default in payment of the applicable redemption price; or
(3) in connection with, or in contemplation of, any publicly announced Change of Control,
Sunoco LP has made an offer to purchase (an “Alternate Offer”) any and all notes properly
tendered at a cash price equal to or higher than the Change of Control Payment and has
purchased all notes properly tendered in accordance with the terms of such Alternate Offer.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Indenture, a Change of Control Offer
may be made in advance of a Change of Control, conditioned upon the consummation of such
Change of Control, if a definitive agreement is in place for the Change of Control at the time the
Change of Control Offer is made.
The definition of Change of Control includes a phrase relating to the direct or indirect sale, lease,
transfer, conveyance or other disposition of “all or substantially all” of the properties or assets of
Sunoco LP and its Subsidiaries taken as a whole. Although there is a limited body of case law
interpreting the phrase “substantially all,” there is no precise established definition of the phrase
under applicable law. Accordingly, the ability of a holder of notes to require Sunoco LP to
repurchase its notes as a result of a sale, lease, transfer, conveyance or other disposition of less
than all of the assets of Sunoco LP and its Subsidiaries taken as a whole to another Person or
group may be uncertain.
In the event that holders of not less than 90% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes
accept a Change of Control Offer or Alternate Offer and Sunoco LP purchases all of such notes
held by such holders, Sunoco LP will have the right, upon not less than 15 nor more than
60 days’ prior notice, given not more than 30 days following the purchase pursuant to the
Change of Control Offer or Alternate Offer described above, to redeem all of the notes that remain
outstanding following such purchase at a redemption price equal to the Change of Control
Payment or Alternate Offer price, as applicable, plus, to the extent not included in the Change of
Control Payment or Alternate Offer price, as applicable, accrued and unpaid interest thereon to,
but excluding,
Table of Contents
31
the redemption date (subject to the right of the holders of such notes on the relevant record date
to receive interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the redemption date).
The agreements governing Sunoco LP’s other Indebtedness contain, and future agreements
governing Sunoco LP’s Indebtedness may contain, prohibitions of certain events, including
events that would constitute a Change of Control and including repurchases of or other
prepayments in respect of the notes. The exercise by the holders of notes of their right to require
Sunoco LP to repurchase the notes upon a Change of Control could cause a default under these
other agreements, even if the Change of Control itself does not, due to the financial effect of such
repurchases on Sunoco LP or other circumstances. If a Change of Control occurs at a time when
Sunoco LP is prohibited from purchasing notes, Sunoco LP could seek the consent of the
lenders or counterparties under those agreements or could attempt to repay or refinance such
borrowings. If Sunoco LP does not obtain an appropriate consent or repay those borrowings,
Sunoco LP will remain prohibited from purchasing notes. In that case, Sunoco LP’s failure to
purchase tendered notes would constitute an Event of Default under the Indenture which could,
in all likelihood, constitute a default under the other indebtedness. Finally, Sunoco LP’s ability to
pay cash to the holders of notes upon a repurchase may be limited by Sunoco LP’s then existing
financial resources. See “Risk Factors—Risks Relating to Our Indebtedness and the Notes—We
may not have the funds necessary to finance the repurchase of the notes in connection with a
change of control offer required by the indenture.”
Asset Sales
Sunoco LP will not consummate, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to
consummate, an Asset Sale unless:
(1) Sunoco LP (or the Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be) receives consideration at
the time of the Asset Sale at least equal to the Fair Market Value of the assets or Equity
Interests issued or sold or otherwise disposed of;
(2) such fair market value is determined by the Board of Directors of the General Partner if
the value is $50.0 million or more, as evidenced by a resolution of such Board of
Directors of the General Partner; and
(3) at least 75% of the aggregate consideration received by Sunoco LP and its Restricted
Subsidiaries in the Asset Sale and all other Asset Sales since the 2023 Notes Issue Date
is in the form of cash or Cash Equivalents. For purposes of this provision, each of the
following will be deemed to be cash:
(a) any liabilities, as shown on Sunoco LP’s most recent consolidated balance sheet, of
Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary (other than contingent liabilities and
liabilities that are by their terms subordinated to the notes or any Note Guarantees)
that are assumed by the transferee of any such assets pursuant to a customary
novation or indemnity agreement that releases Sunoco LP or such Restricted
Subsidiary from or indemnifies against further liability;
(b) any securities, notes or other obligations received by Sunoco LP or any such
Restricted Subsidiary from such transferee that are within 180 days after the Asset
Sale (subject to ordinary settlement periods), converted by Sunoco LP or such
Restricted Subsidiary into cash or Cash Equivalents, to the extent of the cash or
Cash Equivalents received in that conversion;
(c) any Capital Stock or assets of the kind referenced in clause (2) or (4) of the next
paragraph; and
(d) any Designated Non-cash Consideration received by Sunoco LP or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries in such Asset Sale having an aggregate fair market value
(as determined in good faith by Sunoco LP), taken together with all other Designated
Non-cash Consideration received pursuant to this clause (d), not to exceed the
greater of (i) $30.0 million and (ii) 2.5% of Sunoco LP’s Consolidated Net Tangible
Assets (with the fair market value of each item of Designated Non-cash
Consideration being measured at the time received and without giving effect to
subsequent changes in value).
32
Table of Contents
Within 365 days after the receipt of any Net Proceeds from an Asset Sale (or within 180 days
after such 365-day period in the event Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary enters into a
binding commitment with respect to such application), Sunoco LP (or any Restricted Subsidiary)
may apply an amount equal to such Net Proceeds:
(1) to repay Senior Indebtedness of Sunoco LP and/or its Restricted Subsidiaries (or to make
an offer to repurchase or redeem such Indebtedness; provided that such repurchase or
redemption closes within 45 days after the end of such 365-day period or any permitted
extension thereof as contemplated by the first sentence of this paragraph);
(2) to acquire all or substantially all of the assets of, or any Capital Stock of, another
Permitted Business, if, after giving effect to any such acquisition of Capital Stock, the
Permitted Business becomes a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP;
(3) to make a capital expenditure; or
(4) to acquire other assets that are not classified as current assets under GAAP and that are
used or useful in a Permitted Business.
Pending the final application of any Net Proceeds, Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary may
temporarily reduce revolving credit borrowings or otherwise invest the Net Proceeds in any
manner that is not prohibited by the Indenture.
Any Net Proceeds from Asset Sales that are not applied or invested as provided in the second
paragraph of this covenant will constitute “Excess Proceeds.” When the aggregate amount of
Excess Proceeds exceeds $30.0 million, within five business days thereof, Sunoco LP will make
an offer (an “Asset Sale Offer”) to all holders of notes and all holders of other Indebtedness that is
pari passu with the notes containing provisions similar to those set forth in the Indenture with
respect to offers to purchase or redeem with the proceeds of sales of assets to purchase the
maximum principal amount of notes and such other pari passu Indebtedness that may be
purchased out of the Excess Proceeds. The offer price in any Asset Sale Offer will be equal to
100% of the principal amount of the notes plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the
date of purchase, subject to the rights of holders of notes on the relevant record date to receive
interest due on an interest payment date that is on or prior to the purchase date, and will be
payable in cash. If any Excess Proceeds remain after consummation of an Asset Sale Offer,
Sunoco LP may use those Excess Proceeds for any purpose not otherwise prohibited by the
Indenture. If the aggregate principal amount of notes and other pari passu Indebtedness tendered
into such Asset Sale Offer exceeds the amount of Excess Proceeds, then notes and such other
pari passu Indebtedness will be purchased on a pro rata basis (except that any notes
represented by a note in global form will be selected by such method as DTC or its nominee or
successor may require or, where such nominee or successor is the trustee, a method that most
nearly approximates pro rata selection as the trustee deems fair and appropriate unless
otherwise required by law). Upon completion of each Asset Sale Offer, the amount of Excess
Proceeds will be reset at zero.
In making an Asset Sale Offer, Sunoco LP will comply with the applicable requirements of
Rule 14e-1 under the Exchange Act and other securities laws and regulations. To the extent that
the provisions of any securities laws or regulations conflict with the “Asset Sales” provisions of
the Indenture, Sunoco LP will comply with the applicable securities laws and regulations and will
not be deemed to have breached its obligations under the “Asset Sales” provisions of the
Indenture by virtue of such compliance.
Table of Contents
33
Certain Covenants
Termination of Covenants
If at any time following the date of the Indenture, the notes achieve an Investment Grade Rating
and no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is then continuing under the Indenture,
Sunoco LP and its Restricted Subsidiaries will no longer be subject to the following provisions of
the Indenture (“Termination Event”):
(1) “—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Asset Sales”;
(2) “—Restricted Payments”;
(3) “—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Disqualified Equity”;
(4) “—Dividend and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Subsidiaries”;
(5) “—Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries”;
(6) “—Transactions with Affiliates”;
(7) “—Business Activities”;
(8) clause (4) of the covenant described below under the caption “—Merger, Consolidation or
Sale of Assets”;
(9) “—Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions”; and
(10)“—Additional Guarantees.”
There can be no assurance that the notes will ever achieve or maintain an Investment Grade
Rating. Following a Termination Event, the foregoing covenants will continue to be terminated
even if the Notes fall below Investment Grade Rating and a Default or Event of Default has
occurred and is then continuing under the Indenture.
Restricted Payments
Sunoco LP will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly:
(1) declare or pay any dividend or make any other payment or distribution on account of its
outstanding Equity Interests (including any payment in connection with any merger or
consolidation involving Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries) or to the direct or
indirect holders of Sunoco LP’s or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries’ Equity Interests in
their capacity as such (other than distributions or dividends payable in Equity Interests,
excluding Disqualified Equity, of Sunoco LP and other than distributions or dividends
payable to Sunoco LP or a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP);
(2) purchase, redeem or otherwise acquire or retire for value (including in connection with
any merger or consolidation involving Sunoco LP) any Equity Interests of Sunoco LP or
any direct or indirect parent of Sunoco LP;
(3) make any payment on or with respect to, or purchase, redeem, defease or otherwise
acquire or retire for value any Indebtedness of Sunoco LP or any Guarantor that is
contractually subordinated to the notes or to any Note Guarantee (excluding
intercompany Indebtedness between or among Sunoco LP and any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries), except a payment of interest or principal within one month of its Stated
Maturity; or
(4) make any Restricted Investment,
34
Table of Contents
(all such payments and other actions set forth in these clauses (1) through (4) above being
collectively referred to as “Restricted Payments”), unless, at the time of and after giving effect to
such Restricted Payment, no Default (except a Reporting Default) or Event of Default has
occurred and is continuing or would occur as a consequence of such Restricted Payment and
either:
(1) if the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for Sunoco LP’s most recently ended four full fiscal
quarters for which internal financial statements are available at the time of such
Restricted Payment is not less than 1.75 to 1.0, such Restricted Payment, together with
the aggregate amount of all other Restricted Payments made by Sunoco LP and its
Restricted Subsidiaries (excluding Restricted Payments permitted by clauses (2), (3), (4),
(5), (6), (7), (8), (9) and (10) of the next succeeding paragraph) during the quarter in which
such Restricted Payment is made, is less than the sum, without duplication, of:
(a) Available Cash from Operating Surplus as of the end of the immediately preceding
quarter; plus
(b) 100% of the aggregate net proceeds received by Sunoco LP (including the Fair
Market Value of any Permitted Business or long-term assets that are used or useful
in a Permitted Business to the extent acquired in consideration of Equity Interests of
Sunoco LP (other than Disqualified Equity)) since the 2023 Notes Issue Date as a
contribution to its common equity capital or from the issue or sale of Equity Interests
of Sunoco LP (other than Disqualified Equity) or from the issue or sale of convertible
or exchangeable Disqualified Equity or convertible or exchangeable debt securities
of Sunoco LP that have been converted into or exchanged for such Equity Interests
(other than Equity Interests (or Disqualified Equity or debt securities) sold to a
Subsidiary of Sunoco LP); plus
(c)
(d)
to the extent that any Restricted Investment that was made after the 2023 Notes
Issue Date is sold for cash or Cash Equivalents or otherwise liquidated or repaid for
cash or Cash Equivalents, the return of capital with respect to such Restricted
Investment (less the cost of disposition, if any); plus
the net reduction in Restricted Investments resulting from dividends, repayments of
loans or advances, or other transfers of assets in each case to Sunoco LP or any of
its Restricted Subsidiaries from any Person (including Unrestricted Subsidiaries) or
from redesignations of Unrestricted Subsidiaries as Restricted Subsidiaries, to the
extent such amounts have not been included in Available Cash from Operating
Surplus for any period commencing on or after the 2023 Notes Issue Date (items (b),
(c) and (d) being referred to as “Incremental Funds”); minus
(e)
the aggregate amount of Incremental Funds previously expended pursuant to this
clause (1) and clause (2) below; or
(2) if the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for Sunoco LP’s most recently ended four full fiscal
quarters for which internal financial statements are available at the time of such
Restricted Payment is less than 1.75 to 1.0, such Restricted Payment, together with the
aggregate amount of all other Restricted Payments made by Sunoco LP and its
Restricted Subsidiaries (excluding Restricted Payments permitted by clauses (2), (3), (4),
(5), (6), (7), (8), (9) and (10) of the next succeeding paragraph) during the quarter in which
such Restricted Payment is made (such Restricted Payments for purposes of this
clause (2) meaning only distributions on common units and subordinated units of
Sunoco LP, plus the related distribution on the general partner interest and any incentive
distribution rights), is less than the sum, without duplication, of:
(a) $200.0 million less the aggregate amount of all prior Restricted Payments made by
Sunoco LP and its Restricted Subsidiaries pursuant to this clause 2(a) since the
2023 Notes Issue Date; plus
(b)
Incremental Funds to the extent not previously expended pursuant to this clause (2)
or clause (1) above.
The preceding provisions will not prohibit:
(1) the payment of any dividend or distribution within 60 days after the date of its declaration,
if at the date of declaration the payment would have complied with the provisions of the
Indenture;
35
Table of Contents
(2) the redemption, repurchase, retirement, defeasance or other acquisition of subordinated
Indebtedness of Sunoco LP or any Guarantor or of any Equity Interests of Sunoco LP in
exchange for, or out of the net cash proceeds of, a substantially concurrent (a) capital
contribution to Sunoco LP from any Person (other than a Restricted Subsidiary of
Sunoco LP) or (b) sale (other than to a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP) of Equity
Interests of Sunoco LP, with a sale being deemed substantially concurrent if such
redemption, repurchase, retirement, defeasance or other acquisition occurs not more than
120 days after such sale; provided that the amount of any such net cash proceeds that
are utilized for any such redemption, repurchase, retirement, defeasance or other
acquisition will be excluded or deducted from the calculation of Available Cash from
Operating Surplus and Incremental Funds;
(3) the defeasance, redemption, repurchase or other acquisition or retirement of any
subordinated Indebtedness of Sunoco LP or any Guarantor with the net cash proceeds
from an incurrence of, or in exchange for, Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness;
(4) the payment of any distribution or dividend by a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP to
the holders of its Equity Interests (other than Disqualified Equity) on a pro rata basis;
(5) so long as no Default (except a Reporting Default) has occurred and is continuing or
would be caused thereby, the repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or retirement
for value of any Equity Interests of Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP
held by any current or former officer, director or employee of the General Partner,
Sunoco LP or any of Sunoco LP’s Restricted Subsidiaries pursuant to any equity
subscription agreement or plan, stock or unit option agreement, shareholders’ agreement
or similar agreement; provided that the aggregate price paid for all such repurchased,
redeemed, acquired or retired Equity Interests may not exceed $2.0 million in any
calendar year (with unused amounts in any calendar year being carried over to
succeeding calendar years); provided further that such amount in any calendar year may
be increased by an amount not to exceed (a) the cash proceeds received by Sunoco LP
from the sale of Equity Interests of Sunoco LP to members of management or directors of
the General Partner, Sunoco LP or its Restricted Subsidiaries that occurs after the 2023
Notes Issue Date (to the extent the cash proceeds from the sale of such Equity Interests
have not otherwise been applied to the payment of Restricted Payments by virtue of
sections 1(b) or 2(b) of the preceding paragraph), plus (b) the cash proceeds of key man
life insurance policies received by Sunoco LP after the 2023 Notes Issue Date;
(6) so long as no Default (except a Reporting Default) has occurred and is continuing or
would be caused thereby, payments of dividends on Disqualified Equity issued pursuant
to the covenant described under “—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of
Disqualified Equity”;
(7) repurchases of Capital Stock deemed to occur upon exercise of stock options, warrants
or other convertible securities if such Capital Stock represents a portion of the exercise
price of such options, warrants or other convertible securities;
(8) cash payments in lieu of the issuance of fractional shares in connection with the exercise
of warrants, options or other securities convertible into or exchangeable for Capital Stock
of Sunoco LP;
(9) any purchases, redemptions or other acquisitions or retirements for value of Equity
Interests made in lieu of withholding taxes in connection with any exercise or exchange
of warrants, options or rights to acquire Equity Interests;
(10)the repurchase, redemption or other acquisition or redemption or other acquisition or
retirement for value of any subordinated Indebtedness pursuant to provisions similar to
those described under “—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Change of Control” and
“—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Asset Sales”; provided that prior to such
repurchase, redemption or other acquisition Sunoco LP (or a third party to the extent
permitted by the Indenture) shall have made a Change of Control Offer or Asset Sale
Offer, as the case may be, with respect to the notes and shall have repurchased all notes
properly tendered and not withdrawn in connection with such Change of Control or Asset
Sale Offer; or
Table of Contents
36
(11)in connection with an acquisition by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, the
return to Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Equity Interests of Sunoco LP
or its Restricted Subsidiaries constituting a portion of the purchase consideration in
settlement of indemnification claims.
The amount of all Restricted Payments (other than cash) will be the Fair Market Value on the
date of the Restricted Payment of the asset(s) or securities proposed to be transferred or issued
by Sunoco LP or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, pursuant to the Restricted
Payment. The Fair Market Value of any assets or securities that are required to be valued by this
covenant will be determined, in the case of amounts $50.0 million or more, by the Board of
Directors of the General Partner, whose resolution with respect thereto shall be delivered to the
trustee. For the purposes of determining compliance with this “Restricted Payments” covenant, if
a Restricted Payment meets the criteria of more than one of the categories of Restricted
Payments described in the preceding clauses (1)—(11), Sunoco LP will be permitted to classify
(or reclassify in whole or in part in its sole discretion) such Restricted Payment in any manner
that complies with this covenant.
Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Disqualified Equity
Sunoco LP will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly,
create, incur, issue, assume, guarantee or otherwise become directly or indirectly liable,
contingently or otherwise, with respect to (collectively, “incur”) any Indebtedness (including
Acquired Debt), and Sunoco LP will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to,
issue any Disqualified Equity; provided, however, that Sunoco LP and any Restricted Subsidiary
may incur Indebtedness (including Acquired Debt) and Sunoco LP and the Restricted
Subsidiaries may issue Disqualified Equity, if the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio for Sunoco LP’s
most recently ended four full fiscal quarters for which internal financial statements are available
immediately preceding the date on which such additional Indebtedness is incurred or such
Disqualified Equity is issued, as the case may be, would have been at least 2.0 to 1.0,
determined on a pro forma basis (including a pro forma application of the net proceeds
therefrom), as if the additional Indebtedness had been incurred or the Disqualified Equity had
been issued, as the case may be, at the beginning of such four-quarter period.
The first paragraph of this covenant will not prohibit the incurrence of any of the following items of
Indebtedness (collectively, “Permitted Debt”) or the issuance of any Disqualified Equity described
in clause (11) below:
(1) the incurrence by Sunoco LP and any Restricted Subsidiary of additional Indebtedness
(including letters of credit) under one or more Credit Facilities, provided that, after giving
effect to such incurrence, the aggregate principal amount of all Indebtedness incurred
under this clause (1) (with letters of credit being deemed to have a principal amount equal
to the maximum potential liability of Sunoco LP and its Restricted Subsidiaries
thereunder) and then outstanding does not exceed the greater of (a) $1,500.0 million and
(b) the sum of $1,200.0 million and 25.0% of Sunoco LP’s Consolidated Net Tangible
Assets;
(2) the incurrence by Sunoco LP and its Restricted Subsidiaries of the Existing
Indebtedness;
(3) the incurrence by Sunoco LP, Finance Corp. and the Guarantors of Indebtedness
represented by the notes issued on the date of the Indenture, any notes issued in
exchange for other notes pursuant to the terms of a registration rights agreement, and the
Note Guarantees;
(4) the incurrence by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Indebtedness
represented by Capital Lease Obligations, mortgage financings or purchase money
obligations, in each case, incurred for the purpose of financing all or any part of the
purchase price or cost of construction or improvement of property, plant or equipment
used in the business of Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, including all
Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness incurred to renew, refund, refinance, replace,
defease or discharge any Indebtedness incurred pursuant to this clause (4), provided that
after giving effect to
37
Table of Contents
such incurrence the aggregate principal amount of all Indebtedness incurred pursuant to
this clause (4) and then outstanding does not exceed the greater of (a) $45.0 million and
(b) 3.5% of Sunoco LP’s Consolidated Net Tangible Assets;
(5) the incurrence by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Permitted
Refinancing Indebtedness in exchange for, or the net proceeds of which are used to
renew, refund, refinance, replace, defease or discharge, any Indebtedness (other than
intercompany Indebtedness) that was permitted by the Indenture to be incurred under the
first paragraph of this covenant or clauses (2) or (3) of this paragraph or this clause (5);
(6) the incurrence by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of intercompany
Indebtedness between or among Sunoco LP and any of its Restricted Subsidiaries;
provided, however, that:
(a)
(b)
if Sunoco LP or any Guarantor is the obligor on such Indebtedness and the payee is
not Sunoco LP or a Guarantor, such Indebtedness must be expressly subordinated
to the prior payment in full in cash of all Obligations then due with respect to the
notes, in the case of Sunoco LP, or the Note Guarantee, in the case of a Guarantor;
and
(i) any subsequent issuance or transfer of Equity Interests that results in any such
Indebtedness being held by a Person other than Sunoco LP or a Restricted
Subsidiary of Sunoco LP and (ii) any sale or other transfer of any such Indebtedness
to a Person that is not either Sunoco LP or a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP,
will be deemed, in each case, to constitute an incurrence of such Indebtedness by
Sunoco LP or such Restricted Subsidiary, as the case may be, that was not
permitted by this clause (6);
(7) the incurrence by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Hedging Obligations
incurred in the ordinary course of business and not for speculative purposes;
(8) the guarantee by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Indebtedness of
Sunoco LP or a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP that was permitted to be incurred by
another provision of this covenant; provided that if the Indebtedness being guaranteed is
subordinated to or pari passu with the notes, then the guarantee shall be subordinated or
pari passu, as applicable, to the same extent as the Indebtedness guaranteed;
(9) the incurrence by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of obligations relating
to net gas balancing positions arising in the ordinary course of business and consistent
with past practice;
(10)the incurrence by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of Acquired Debt in
connection with a transaction meeting either one of the financial tests set forth in
clause (4) under the caption “—Merger, Consolidation or Sale of Assets”;
(11)the issuance by any of Sunoco LP’s Restricted Subsidiaries to Sunoco LP or to any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries of any Disqualified Equity; provided, however, that:
(a) any subsequent issuance or transfer of Equity Interests that results in any such
Disqualified Equity being held by a Person other than Sunoco LP or a Restricted
Subsidiary of Sunoco LP; and
(b) any sale or other transfer of any such Disqualified Equity to a Person that is not
either Sunoco LP or a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP
will be deemed, in each case, to constitute an issuance of such Disqualified Equity by such
Restricted Subsidiary that was not permitted by this clause (11);
(12)the incurrence by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of liability in respect of
the Indebtedness of any Unrestricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP or any Joint Venture but
only to the extent that such liability is the result of Sunoco LP’s or any such Restricted
Subsidiary’s being a general partner of such Unrestricted Subsidiary or Joint Venture and
not as guarantor of such Indebtedness and provided that, after giving effect to any such
incurrence, the aggregate principal amount of all Indebtedness incurred under this
clause (12) and then outstanding does not exceed $50.0 million; and
38
Table of Contents
(13)the incurrence by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries of additional
Indebtedness; provided that, after giving effect to any such incurrence, the aggregate
principal amount of all Indebtedness incurred under this clause (13) and then outstanding
does not exceed the greater of (a) $60.0 million and (b) 5.0% of Sunoco LP’s
Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
Sunoco LP will not incur, and will not permit Finance Corp. or any Guarantor to incur, any
Indebtedness (including Permitted Debt) that is contractually subordinated in right of payment to
any other Indebtedness of Sunoco LP, Finance Corp. or such Guarantor unless such
Indebtedness is also contractually subordinated in right of payment to the notes and the
applicable Note Guarantee on substantially identical terms; provided, however, that no
Indebtedness of a Person will be deemed to be contractually subordinated in right of payment to
any other Indebtedness of such Person solely by virtue of being unsecured or by virtue of being
secured on a first or junior Lien basis.
For purposes of determining compliance with this “—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of
Disqualified Equity” covenant, if an item of proposed Indebtedness meets the criteria of more
than one of the categories of Permitted Debt described in clauses (1) through (13) above, or is
entitled to be incurred pursuant to the first paragraph of this covenant, Sunoco LP will be
permitted to classify such item of Indebtedness on the date of its incurrence, or later reclassify all
or a portion of such item of Indebtedness, in any manner that complies with this covenant.
Indebtedness under Credit Facilities outstanding on the date on which notes are first issued and
authenticated under the Indenture will initially be deemed to have been incurred on such date in
reliance on the exception provided by clause (1) of the definition of Permitted Debt. The accrual
of interest, the accretion or amortization of original issue discount, the payment of interest on any
Indebtedness in the form of additional Indebtedness with the same terms, the reclassification of
preferred stock as Indebtedness due to a change in accounting principles, and the payment of
dividends on Disqualified Equity in the form of additional shares of the same class of Disqualified
Equity will not be deemed to be an incurrence of Indebtedness or an issuance of Disqualified
Equity for purposes of this covenant; provided, however, in each such case, that the amount of
any such accrual, accretion or payment is included in Fixed Charges of Sunoco LP as accrued.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this covenant, the maximum amount of Indebtedness that
Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary may incur pursuant to this covenant shall not be
deemed to be exceeded solely as a result of fluctuations in exchange rates or currency values.
Liens
Sunoco LP will not and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, create, incur, assume
or otherwise cause to exist or become effective any Lien of any kind (other than Permitted Liens)
securing Indebtedness (including any Attributable Debt) upon any of their property or assets, now
owned or hereafter acquired, unless all payments due under the notes and the Note Guarantees
are secured on an equal and ratable basis or on a senior basis with the obligations so secured
until such time as such obligations are no longer secured by a Lien (other than Permitted Liens).
Dividend and Other Payment Restrictions Affecting Subsidiaries
Sunoco LP will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, directly or indirectly,
create or permit to exist or become effective any consensual encumbrance or restriction on the
ability of any Restricted Subsidiary to:
(1) pay dividends or make any other distributions on its Equity Interests to Sunoco LP or any
of its Restricted Subsidiaries or to pay any indebtedness owed to Sunoco LP or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries;
(2) make loans or advances to Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries; or
(3) sell, lease or transfer any of its properties or assets to Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries.
39
Table of Contents
The preceding restrictions will not, however, apply to encumbrances or restrictions existing under
or by reason of:
(1) agreements as in effect on the date of the Indenture and any amendments, restatements,
modifications, renewals, supplements, refundings, replacements or refinancings of those
agreements or the Indebtedness to which they relate; provided that the amendments,
restatements, modifications, renewals, supplements, refundings, replacements or
refinancings are not materially more restrictive, taken as a whole, with respect to such
dividend, distribution and other payment restrictions than those contained in those
agreements on the date of the Indenture;
(2) the Indenture, the notes and the Note Guarantees;
(3) applicable law, rule, regulation, order, licenses, permits or similar governmental, judicial
or regulatory restriction;
(4) any instrument governing Indebtedness or Equity Interests of a Person acquired by
Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries as in effect at the time of such acquisition
(except to the extent such Indebtedness or Equity Interests were incurred in connection
with or in contemplation of such acquisition), which encumbrance or restriction is not
applicable to any Person, or the properties or assets of any Person, other than the
Person, or the property or assets of the Person, so acquired; provided, however, that, in
the case of Indebtedness, the incurrence thereof was otherwise permitted by the terms of
the Indenture;
(5) customary non-assignment provisions in contracts for purchase, gathering, processing,
sale, transportation or exchange of crude oil, natural gas liquids, condensate and natural
gas, natural gas storage agreements, transportation agreements or purchase and sale or
exchange agreements, pipeline or terminaling agreements, or similar operational
agreements or in licenses or leases, in each case entered into in the ordinary course of
business;
(6) purchase money obligations for property acquired in the ordinary course of business and
Capital Lease Obligations that impose restrictions on the property purchased or leased of
the nature described in clause (3) of the preceding paragraph;
(7) any agreement for the sale or other disposition of a Restricted Subsidiary that restricts
distributions by that Restricted Subsidiary pending its sale or other disposition;
(8) Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness; provided that the restrictions contained in the
agreements governing such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness are not materially more
restrictive, taken as a whole, than those contained in the agreements governing the
Indebtedness being refinanced;
(9) Liens permitted to be incurred under the provisions of the covenant described above
under the caption “—Liens” that limit the right of the debtor to dispose of the assets
subject to such Liens;
(10)provisions limiting the disposition or distribution of assets or property in joint venture
agreements, asset sale agreements, sale-leaseback agreements, stock sale agreements,
buy/sell agreements and other similar agreements entered into in the ordinary course of
business;
(11)any agreement or instrument relating to any property or assets acquired after the date of
the Indenture, so long as such encumbrance or restriction relates only to the property or
assets so acquired and is not and was not created in anticipation of such acquisitions;
(12)restrictions on cash or other deposits or net worth imposed by customers under contracts
entered into in the ordinary course of business; and
(13)Hedging Obligations incurred in the ordinary course of business and not for speculative
purposes from time to time.
40
Table of Contents
Merger, Consolidation or Sale of Assets
Neither of the Issuers may, directly or indirectly: (1) consolidate or merge with or into another
Person (whether or not such Issuer is the surviving entity); or (2) sell, assign, transfer, lease,
convey or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of the properties or assets of Sunoco LP
and its Subsidiaries, taken as a whole, in one or more related transactions, to another Person,
unless:
(1) either: (a) such Issuer is the surviving entity; or (b) the Person formed by or surviving any
such consolidation or merger (if other than such Issuer) or to which such sale,
assignment, transfer, lease, conveyance or other disposition has been made is a Person
organized or existing under the laws of the United States, any state of the United States
or the District of Columbia; provided, however, that Finance Corp. may not consolidate or
merge with or into any Person other than a corporation satisfying such requirement so
long as Sunoco LP is not a corporation;
(2) the Person formed by or surviving any such consolidation or merger (if other than such
Issuer) or the Person to which such sale, assignment, transfer, lease, conveyance or
other disposition has been made assumes all the obligations of such Issuer under the
notes and the Indenture pursuant to agreements reasonably satisfactory to the trustee;
(3) immediately after such transaction, no Default or Event of Default exists;
(4) in the case of a transaction involving Sunoco LP and not Finance Corp., Sunoco LP or
the Person formed by or surviving any such consolidation or merger (if other than
Sunoco LP), or to which such sale, assignment, transfer, lease, conveyance or other
disposition has been made will either:
(a) be, on the date of such transaction after giving pro forma effect thereto and any
related financing transactions as if the same had occurred at the beginning of the
applicable four-quarter period, permitted to incur at least $1.00 of additional
Indebtedness pursuant to the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio test set forth in the first
paragraph of the covenant described above under the caption “—Incurrence of
Indebtedness and Issuance of Disqualified Equity”; or
(b) have a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio, on the date of such transaction and after
giving pro forma effect thereto and any related financing transactions as if the same
had occurred at the beginning of the applicable four-quarter period, not less than the
Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of Sunoco LP immediately prior to such transaction;
and
(5) such Issuer has delivered to the trustee an officers’ certificate and an opinion of counsel,
each stating that such consolidation, merger or disposition and such supplemental
indenture (if any) comply with the Indenture and all conditions precedent therein relating
to such transaction have been satisfied;
provided that clauses (3) and (4) shall not apply to any sale of assets of a Restricted Subsidiary
to Sunoco LP or another Restricted Subsidiary or the merger or consolidation of a Restricted
Subsidiary into any Restricted Subsidiary or Sunoco LP.
Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, Sunoco LP is permitted to reorganize as any other
form of entity in accordance with the procedures established in the Indenture; provided that:
(1) the reorganization involves the conversion (by merger, sale, legal conversion,
contribution or exchange of assets or otherwise) of Sunoco LP into a form of entity other
than a limited partnership formed under Delaware law;
(2) the entity so formed by or resulting from such reorganization is an entity organized or
existing under the laws of the United States, any state thereof or the District of Columbia;
(3) the entity so formed by or resulting from such reorganization assumes all the obligations
of Sunoco LP under the notes and the Indenture pursuant to agreements reasonably
satisfactory to the trustee;
(4) immediately after such reorganization no Default or Event of Default exists; and
41
Table of Contents
(5) such reorganization is not materially adverse to the holders of notes (for purposes of this
clause (5) it is stipulated that such reorganization shall not be considered materially
adverse to the holders of notes solely because the successor or survivor of such
reorganization (a) is subject to federal or state income taxation as an entity or (b) is
considered to be an “includible corporation” of an affiliated group of corporations within
the meaning of Section 1504(b)(i) of the Code or any similar state or local law).
Upon compliance with the foregoing requirements with respect to any consolidation or merger or
any sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, lease or other disposition of all or substantially all of
the properties or assets of an Issuer in accordance with the foregoing in which such Issuer is not
the surviving entity, the surviving Person formed by such consolidation or into or with which such
Issuer is merged or to which such sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance, lease or other
disposition is made shall succeed to, and be substituted for, and may exercise every right and
power of, such Issuer under the indenture with the same effect as if such surviving Person had
been named as such Issuer in the indenture, and thereafter (except in the case of a lease of all or
substantially all of such Issuer’s properties or assets), such Issuer will be relieved of all
obligations and covenants under the indenture and the notes.
A Guarantor may not sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of its properties or assets
to, or consolidate with or merge with or into (whether or not such Guarantor is the surviving
Person), another Person, other than Sunoco LP or another Guarantor, unless it complies with the
alternative conditions described above under “—Note Guarantees.”
Although there is a limited body of case law interpreting the phrase “substantially all,” there is no
precise established definition of the phrase under applicable law. Accordingly, there may be
uncertainty as to whether a particular transaction would involve “all or substantially all” of the
properties or assets of a Person.
Transactions with Affiliates
Sunoco LP will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, make any payment
to, or sell, lease, transfer or otherwise dispose of any of its properties or assets to, or purchase
any property or assets from, or enter into or make or amend any transaction, contract, agreement,
understanding, loan, advance or guarantee with, or for the benefit of, any Affiliate of Sunoco LP
(each, an “Affiliate Transaction”), unless:
(1) the Affiliate Transaction is on terms that are no less favorable to Sunoco LP or the
relevant Restricted Subsidiary than those that would have been obtained in a
comparable transaction by Sunoco LP or such Restricted Subsidiary with an unrelated
Person; and
(2) with respect to any Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate Transactions
involving aggregate consideration in excess of $50.0 million, Sunoco LP delivers to the
trustee a resolution of the Board of Directors of the General Partner set forth in an officers’
certificate certifying that such Affiliate Transaction or series of related Affiliate
Transactions complies with clause (1) of this covenant and that such Affiliate Transaction
has been approved by a majority of the members of the Board of Directors of the General
Partner meeting the independence standards prescribed by the exchange upon which
Sunoco LP’s common units representing limited partner interests in Sunoco LP are listed
for trading.
The following items will not be deemed to be Affiliate Transactions and, therefore, will not be
subject to the provisions of the prior paragraph:
(1) any employment agreement, equity award, equity option or equity appreciation
agreement or plan or any similar arrangement entered into by Sunoco LP or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business and payments pursuant
thereto;
(2) transactions between or among Sunoco LP and/or its Restricted Subsidiaries;
(3) transactions with a Person (other than an Unrestricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP) that is
an Affiliate of Sunoco LP solely because Sunoco LP owns, directly or through a
Restricted Subsidiary, an Equity Interest in, or controls, such Person;
42
Table of Contents
(4) any issuance of Equity Interests (other than Disqualified Equity) of Sunoco LP to Affiliates
of Sunoco LP;
(5) Restricted Payments or Permitted Investments that do not violate the provisions of the
Indenture described above under the caption “—Restricted Payments”;
(6) customary compensation, indemnification and other benefits made available to officers,
directors or employees of Sunoco LP, a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP or the
General Partner, including reimbursement or advancement of out-of-pocket expenses
and provisions of officers’ and directors’ liability insurance;
(7) in the case of contracts for purchase, sale, transportation and marketing of crude oil,
natural gas, condensate and natural gas liquids, hedging agreements, and handling,
storage, or other operational contracts, any such contracts are entered into in the ordinary
course of business on terms substantially similar to those contained in similar contracts
entered into by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries and third parties, or if
neither Sunoco LP nor any of its Restricted Subsidiaries has entered into a similar
contract with a third party, that the terms are no less favorable than those available from
third parties on an arm’s length basis, as determined by the Board of Directors of the
General Partner;
(8) loans or advances to employees in the ordinary course of business not to exceed
$2.5 million in the aggregate at any one time outstanding;
(9) transactions effected in accordance with the terms of (a) the Partnership Agreement, (b)
the Contribution Agreement, dated September 25, 2012, by and among Susser
Petroleum Partners LP, Susser Petroleum Partners GP LLC, Susser Holdings
Corporation, Susser Holdings, L.L.C., Stripes LLC and Susser Petroleum Company LLC,
(c) the Omnibus Agreement, dated September 25, 2012, by and among Susser Petroleum
Partners LP, Susser Petroleum Partners GP LLC and Susser Holdings Corporation, (d)
the Transportation Agreement, dated September 25, 2012, between Susser Petroleum
Operating Company LLC and Susser Petroleum Company LLC, (e) the Fuel Distribution
Agreement, dated September 25, 2012, by and among Susser Petroleum Operating
Company LLC, Susser Holdings Corporation, Stripes LLC and Susser Petroleum
Company LLC, and (f) each other agreement in effect on the date of the Indenture that is
described in the final Offering Memorandum of the Issuers dated July 15, 2015 (the
“Offering Memorandum”), as each such agreement is in effect on the date of the
Indenture, and any amendment or extension of such agreement so long as the terms of
such amendment or extension, taken as a whole, are not less advantageous to
Sunoco LP or the relevant Restricted Subsidiary (as determined by the Board of Directors
of the General Partner in its reasonable good faith judgment) in any material respect than
the agreement so amended or extended; and
(10)any transaction with respect to which Sunoco LP has obtained an opinion from an
independent accounting, appraisal or investment banking firm of national standing to the
effect that such transaction is fair from a financial point of view to Sunoco LP and its
Restricted Subsidiaries, as applicable.
Business Activities
Sunoco LP will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, engage in any
business other than Permitted Businesses, except to such extent as would not be material to
Sunoco LP and its Restricted Subsidiaries taken as a whole.
Finance Corp. will not hold any material assets, become liable for any material obligations or
engage in any significant business activities; provided that Finance Corp. may be a co-obligor or
guarantor with respect to Indebtedness if Sunoco LP is an obligor on such Indebtedness and the
net proceeds of such Indebtedness are received by Sunoco LP, Finance Corp. or one or more
Guarantors. At any time after Sunoco LP is a corporation, Finance Corp. may consolidate or
merge with or into Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary.
Table of Contents
Additional Guarantees
43
If, after the date of the Indenture, any Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP that is not already a
Guarantor guarantees any Indebtedness of either of the Issuers or any Guarantor under a Credit
Facility, or any Domestic Subsidiary, if not then a Guarantor, incurs any Indebtedness under any
Credit Facility, then in either case that Subsidiary will become a Guarantor by executing a
supplemental indenture and delivering it to the trustee within 20 business days of the date on
which it guaranteed or incurred such Indebtedness, as the case may be; provided, however, that
the preceding shall not apply to Subsidiaries of Sunoco LP that have been properly designated
as Unrestricted Subsidiaries in accordance with the Indenture for so long as they continue to
constitute Unrestricted Subsidiaries. Notwithstanding the preceding, any Note Guarantee of a
Restricted Subsidiary that was incurred pursuant to this paragraph as a result of its guarantee of
any Indebtedness shall provide by its terms that it shall be automatically and unconditionally
released upon the release or discharge of the guarantee that resulted in the creation of such
Restricted Subsidiary’s Note Guarantee, except a discharge or release by, or as a result of
payment under, such guarantee.
Designation of Restricted and Unrestricted Subsidiaries
The Board of Directors of the General Partner may designate any Restricted Subsidiary to be an
Unrestricted Subsidiary if that designation would not cause a Default. If a Restricted Subsidiary is
designated as an Unrestricted Subsidiary, the aggregate Fair Market Value of all outstanding
Investments owned by Sunoco LP and its Restricted Subsidiaries in the Subsidiary designated
as an Unrestricted Subsidiary will be deemed to be either an Investment made as of the time of
the designation that will reduce the amount available for Restricted Payments under the
covenant described above under the caption “—Restricted Payments” or a Permitted Investment
under one or more clauses of the definition of Permitted Investments, as determined by
Sunoco LP; provided that any designation will only be permitted if the Investment would be
permitted at that time and if the Restricted Subsidiary otherwise meets the definition of an
Unrestricted Subsidiary.
Any designation of a Subsidiary of Sunoco LP as an Unrestricted Subsidiary will be evidenced to
the trustee by filing with the trustee a copy of a resolution of the Board of Directors of the General
Partner giving effect to such designation and an officers’ certificate certifying that such
designation complied with the preceding conditions and was permitted by the covenant
described above under the caption “—Restricted Payments.” If, at any time, any Unrestricted
Subsidiary would fail to meet the preceding requirements as an Unrestricted Subsidiary, it will
thereafter cease to be an Unrestricted Subsidiary for purposes of the Indenture and any
Indebtedness of such Subsidiary will be deemed to be incurred by a Restricted Subsidiary of
Sunoco LP as of such date and, if such Indebtedness is not permitted to be incurred as of such
date under the covenant described under the caption “—Incurrence of Indebtedness and
Issuance of Disqualified Equity,” Sunoco LP will be in default of such covenant.
The Board of Directors of the General Partner may at any time designate any Unrestricted
Subsidiary to be a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP; provided that such designation will be
deemed to be an incurrence of Indebtedness by a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP of any
outstanding Indebtedness of such Unrestricted Subsidiary, and such designation will only be
permitted if (1) such Indebtedness is permitted under the covenant described under the caption
“—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Disqualified Equity,” calculated on a pro forma
basis as if such designation had occurred at the beginning of the four-quarter reference period;
and (2) no Default or Event of Default would be in existence following such designation.
Limitation on Sale and Leaseback Transactions
Sunoco LP will not, and will not permit any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to, enter into any sale
and leaseback transaction; provided that Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary may enter into
a sale and leaseback transaction if the transfer of assets in that sale and leaseback transaction is
permitted by, and Sunoco LP or such Restricted Subsidiary applies the proceeds of such
transaction in compliance with, the covenant described above under the caption “—Repurchase
at the Option of Holders—Asset Sales.”
Table of Contents
Reports
44
Whether or not required by the rules and regulations of the SEC, so long as any notes are
outstanding, Sunoco LP will furnish (whether through hard copy or internet access) to the holders
of notes or cause the trustee to furnish to the holders of notes, within the time periods specified in
the SEC’s rules and regulations:
(1) all quarterly and annual reports that would be required to be filed with the SEC on
Forms 10-Q and 10-K if Sunoco LP were required to file such reports as a non-
accelerated filer; and
(2) all current reports that would be required to be filed with the SEC on Form 8-K if
Sunoco LP were required to file such reports.
All such reports will be prepared in all material respects in accordance with all of the rules and
regulations applicable to such reports, including Section 3-10 of Regulation S-X. Each annual
report on Form 10-K will include a report on Sunoco LP’s consolidated financial statements by
Sunoco LP’s independent registered public accounting firm. In addition, Sunoco LP will file a
copy of each of the reports referred to in clauses (1) and (2) above with the SEC for public
availability within the time periods specified in the rules and regulations applicable to such
reports (unless the SEC will not accept such a filing) and will post the reports on its website
within those time periods.
If, at any time Sunoco LP is no longer subject to the periodic reporting requirements of the
Exchange Act for any reason, Sunoco LP will nevertheless continue filing the reports specified in
the preceding paragraphs of this covenant with the SEC within the time periods specified above
unless the SEC will not accept such a filing; provided that, for so long as Sunoco LP is not
subject to the periodic reporting requirements of the Exchange Act for any reason, the time period
for filing reports on Form 8-K shall be 5 business days after the event giving rise to the obligation
to file such report. Sunoco LP will not take any action for the purpose of causing the SEC not to
accept any such filings. If, notwithstanding the foregoing, the SEC will not accept Sunoco LP’s
filings for any reason, Sunoco LP will post the reports referred to in the preceding paragraphs on
its website within the time periods that would apply if Sunoco LP were required to file those
reports with the SEC.
Sunoco LP will be deemed to have furnished such reports to the trustee and the holders of notes
if it has filed such reports with the SEC using the EDGAR filing system and such reports are
publicly available.
Events of Default and Remedies
Each of the following is an “Event of Default”:
(1) default for 30 days in the payment when due of interest on the notes;
(2) default in the payment when due (at maturity, upon redemption or otherwise) of the
principal of, or premium, if any, on, the notes;
(3) failure by Sunoco LP or any Guarantor to (a) make a Change of Control Offer within the
time periods set forth, or to consummate a purchase of the notes when required pursuant
to the terms described, under the caption “—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—
Change of Control,” (b) make an Asset Sale Offer within the time periods set forth, or to
consummate a purchase of the notes when required pursuant to the terms described,
under the caption “—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Asset Sales” or (c) comply
with the provisions described under the caption “—Certain Covenants—Merger,
Consolidation or Sale of Assets”; provided that, with respect to (b) and (c), such failure
will not constitute an Event of Default for 30 days if such failure is capable of cure;
(4) failure by Sunoco LP for 180 days after notice by the trustee or holders of 25% in
aggregate principal amount of notes outstanding to comply with the provisions described
under “—Reports”;
(5) failure by Sunoco LP or any Guarantor for 60 days after written notice by the trustee or
holders of 25% in aggregate principal amount of notes outstanding to comply with any of
its other agreements in the Indenture;
45
Table of Contents
(6) default under any mortgage, indenture or instrument under which there may be issued or
by which there may be secured or evidenced any Indebtedness for money borrowed by
Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries (or the payment of which is guaranteed
by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries), whether such Indebtedness or
guarantee now exists, or is created after the date of the Indenture, if that default:
(a)
is caused by a failure to pay principal of, or interest or premium, if any, on
Indebtedness prior to the expiration of the grace period provided in such
Indebtedness on the date of such default (a “Payment Default”); or
(b)
results in the acceleration of such Indebtedness prior to its express maturity, and
in each case, the principal amount of any such Indebtedness, together with the principal amount
of any other such Indebtedness under which there has been a Payment Default or the maturity of
which has been so accelerated, aggregates $50.0 million or more, provided, however, that if,
prior to any acceleration of notes, (i) any such Payment Default is cured or waived, (ii) any such
acceleration is rescinded, or (iii) such Indebtedness is repaid during the 10 business day period
commencing upon the end of any applicable grace period for such Payment Default or the
occurrence of such acceleration, as applicable, any Default or Event of Default (but not any
acceleration of notes) caused by such Payment Default or acceleration shall automatically be
rescinded, so long as such rescission does not conflict with any judgment, decree or applicable
law;
(7) failure by an Issuer or any of Sunoco LP’s Restricted Subsidiaries to pay final judgments
entered by a court or courts of competent jurisdiction aggregating in excess of
$50.0 million, which judgments are not paid, discharged or stayed for a period of 60 days;
(8) except as permitted by the Indenture, any Note Guarantee is held in any judicial
proceeding to be unenforceable or invalid or ceases for any reason to be in full force and
effect, or any Guarantor, or any Person acting on behalf of any Guarantor, denies or
disaffirms its Obligations under its Note Guarantee; and
(9) certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency described in the Indenture with respect to
Finance Corp., Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries that is a Significant
Subsidiary or any group of its Restricted Subsidiaries that, taken together, would
constitute a Significant Subsidiary.
In the case of an Event of Default arising from certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency, with
respect to Finance Corp., Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP that is a
Significant Subsidiary or any group of Restricted Subsidiaries of Sunoco LP that, taken together,
would constitute a Significant Subsidiary, all outstanding notes will become due and payable
immediately without further action or notice. If any other Event of Default occurs and is
continuing, the trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the then
outstanding notes may declare all the notes to be due and payable immediately.
Subject to certain limitations, holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then
outstanding notes may direct the trustee in its exercise of any trust or power. The trustee may
withhold from holders of notes notice of any continuing Default or Event of Default known to it if it
determines that withholding notice is in their interest, except a Default or Event of Default relating
to the payment of principal, interest or premium, if any.
Subject to the provisions of the Indenture relating to the duties of the trustee, in case an Event of
Default occurs and is continuing, the trustee will be under no obligation to exercise any of the
rights or powers under the Indenture at the request or direction of any holders of notes unless
such holders have offered to the trustee indemnity or security satisfactory to the trustee in its sole
discretion against any loss, liability or expense. No holder of a note may pursue any remedy with
respect to the Indenture unless:
(1) such holder has previously given the trustee notice that an Event of Default is continuing;
(2) holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding notes have
requested the trustee to pursue the remedy;
46
Table of Contents
(3) such holders have offered the trustee security or indemnity satisfactory to the trustee in its
sole discretion against any loss, liability or expense;
(4) the trustee has not complied with such request within 60 days after the receipt of the
request and the offer of security or indemnity; and
(5) holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding notes have
not given the trustee a direction inconsistent with such request within such 60-day period.
The holders of a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding notes by notice to
the trustee may, on behalf of the holders of all of the notes, rescind an acceleration or waive any
existing Default or Event of Default and its consequences under the Indenture except a
continuing Default or Event of Default in the payment of interest or premium, if any, on, or the
principal of, notes.
The Issuers and the Guarantors are required to deliver to the trustee annually a statement
regarding compliance with the Indenture. Within ten business days of becoming aware of any
Default or Event of Default, the Issuers and the Guarantors are required to deliver to the trustee a
statement specifying such Default or Event of Default.
No Recourse to Trustee, General Partner or Personal Liability of Directors, Officers,
Employees and Stockholders
None of the trustee, the General Partner or any director, officer, partner, member, employee,
incorporator, manager or unit holder or other owner of any Equity Interest of the trustee, General
Partner, the Issuers or any Guarantor, as such, will have any liability for any obligations of the
Issuers or the Guarantors under the notes, the Indenture, the Note Guarantees or for any claim
based on, in respect of, or by reason of, such obligations or their creation. Each holder of notes
by accepting a note waives and releases all such liability. The waiver and release are part of the
consideration for issuance of the notes and the Note Guarantees. The waiver may not be
effective to waive liabilities under the federal securities laws.
Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance
The Issuers may, at their option and at any time, elect to have all of the Issuers’ obligations
discharged with respect to the outstanding notes and all Obligations of the Guarantors
discharged with respect to their Note Guarantees (“Legal Defeasance”) except for:
(1) the rights of holders of outstanding notes to receive payments in respect of the principal
of, or interest or premium, if any, on, such notes when such payments are due from the
trust referred to below;
(2) the Issuers’ obligations with respect to the notes concerning issuing temporary notes,
registration of notes, mutilated, destroyed, lost or stolen notes and the maintenance of an
office or agency for payment and money for security payments held in trust;
(3) the rights, powers, trusts, duties and immunities of the trustee, and the Issuers’ and the
Guarantors’ Obligations in connection therewith; and
(4) the “Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance” provisions of the Indenture.
In addition, Sunoco LP may, at its option and at any time, elect to have the obligations of the
Issuers released with respect to certain covenants (including Sunoco LP’s obligation to make
Change of Control Offers and Asset Sale Offers) that are described in the Indenture (“Covenant
Defeasance”) and all Obligations of the Guarantors with respect to their Note Guarantees
discharged, and thereafter any omission to comply with those covenants or Note Guarantees will
not constitute a Default or Event of Default. If Covenant Defeasance occurs, certain events (not
including non-payment and bankruptcy, receivership, rehabilitation and insolvency events
relating to Sunoco LP) described under “—Events of Default and Remedies” will no longer
constitute an Event of Default.
47
Table of Contents
In order to exercise either Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance:
(1) the Issuers must irrevocably deposit with the trustee, in trust, for the benefit of the holders
of notes, cash in U.S. dollars, non-callable Government Securities, or a combination of
cash in U.S. dollars and non-callable Government Securities, in amounts as will be
sufficient, in the opinion of a nationally recognized investment bank, appraisal firm or firm
of independent public accountants, to pay the principal of, or interest and premium, if any,
on the outstanding notes on the stated date for payment thereof or on the applicable
redemption date, as the case may be, and the Issuers must specify whether the notes are
being defeased to such stated date for payment or to a particular redemption date;
(2) in the case of Legal Defeasance, the Issuers must deliver to the trustee an opinion of
counsel reasonably acceptable to the trustee confirming that (a) the Issuers have
received from, or there has been published by, the Internal Revenue Service a ruling or
(b) since the date of the Indenture, there has been a change in the applicable federal
income tax law, in either case to the effect that, and based thereon such opinion of
counsel will confirm that, the holders of the outstanding notes will not recognize income,
gain or loss for federal income tax purposes as a result of such Legal Defeasance and
will be subject to federal income tax on the same amounts, in the same manner and at the
same times as would have been the case if such Legal Defeasance had not occurred;
(3) in the case of Covenant Defeasance, the Issuers must deliver to the trustee an opinion of
counsel reasonably acceptable to the trustee confirming that the holders of the
outstanding notes will not recognize income, gain or loss for federal income tax purposes
as a result of such Covenant Defeasance and will be subject to federal income tax on the
same amounts, in the same manner and at the same times as would have been the case
if such Covenant Defeasance had not occurred;
(4) no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing on the date of such deposit
(other than a Default or Event of Default resulting from the borrowing of funds to be
applied to such deposit);
(5) such Legal Defeasance or Covenant Defeasance will not result in a breach or violation
of, or constitute a default under, any material agreement or instrument (other than the
Indenture) to which Sunoco LP or any of its Subsidiaries is a party or by which
Sunoco LP or any of its Subsidiaries is bound;
(6) the Issuers must deliver to the trustee an officers’ certificate stating that the deposit was
not made by the Issuers with the intent of preferring the holders of notes over the other
creditors of the Issuers with the intent of defeating, hindering, delaying or defrauding any
creditors of the Issuers or others; and
(7) the Issuers must deliver to the trustee an officers’ certificate and an opinion of counsel,
each stating that all conditions precedent relating to the Legal Defeasance or the
Covenant Defeasance have been complied with.
Amendment, Supplement and Waiver
Except as provided in the next two succeeding paragraphs, the Indenture, the notes or the related
Note Guarantees may be amended or supplemented with the consent of the holders of at least a
majority in aggregate principal amount of the notes then outstanding (including consents
obtained in connection with a purchase of, or tender offer or exchange offer for, notes), and any
existing Default or Event of Default or compliance with any provision of the Indenture or the notes
or the Note Guarantees may be waived with the consent of the holders of a majority in aggregate
principal amount of the then outstanding notes (including consents obtained in connection with a
purchase of, or tender offer or exchange offer for, notes).
Without the consent of each holder of notes affected, an amendment, supplement or waiver may
not (with respect to any notes held by a non-consenting holder):
(1) reduce the principal amount of notes whose holders must consent to an amendment,
supplement or waiver;
48
Table of Contents
(2) reduce the principal of or change the fixed maturity of any note or alter the provisions with
respect to the redemption or repurchase of the notes (other than provisions relating to the
covenants described above under the caption “—Repurchase at the Option of Holders”);
(3) reduce the rate of or change the time for payment of interest, including default interest, on
any note;
(4) waive a Default or Event of Default in the payment of principal of, or interest or premium, if
any, on, the notes (except a rescission of acceleration of the notes by the holders of at
least a majority in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding notes and a waiver
of the payment default that resulted from such acceleration);
(5) make any note payable in money other than that stated in the notes;
(6) make any change in the provisions of the Indenture relating to waivers of past Defaults or
the rights of holders of notes to receive payments of principal of, or interest or premium, if
any, on, the notes (other than as permitted by clause (7) below);
(7) waive a redemption or repurchase payment with respect to any note (other than a
payment required by one of the covenants described above under the caption “—
Repurchase at the Option of Holders”);
(8) release any Guarantor from any of its obligations under its Note Guarantee or the
Indenture, except in accordance with the terms of the Indenture; or
(9) make any change in the preceding amendment, supplement and waiver provisions.
Notwithstanding the preceding, without the consent of any holder of notes, the Issuers, the
Guarantors and the trustee may amend or supplement the Indenture, the notes or the Note
Guarantees:
(1) to cure any ambiguity, defect or inconsistency;
(2) to provide for uncertificated notes in addition to or in place of certificated notes;
(3) to provide for the assumption of an Issuer’s or a Guarantor’s obligations to holders of
notes and Note Guarantees in the case of a merger or consolidation or sale of all or
substantially all of such Issuer’s or such Guarantor’s assets, as applicable;
(4) to make any change that would provide any additional rights or benefits to the holders of
notes or that does not adversely affect the legal rights under the Indenture of any such
holder;
(5) to comply with requirements of the SEC in order to effect or maintain the qualification of
the Indenture under the Trust Indenture Act;
(6) to conform the text of the Indenture or the Note Guarantees to any provision of the section
entitled “Description of Notes” in the Offering Memorandum, to the extent that such text of
the Indenture or Note Guarantee was intended to reflect such provision of such section;
(7) to provide for the issuance of additional notes in accordance with the limitations set forth
in the Indenture;
(8) to allow any Guarantor to execute a supplemental indenture and/or a notation of a Note
Guarantee with respect to the notes or to reflect the addition or release of a Note
Guarantee in accordance with the Indenture;
(9) to secure the notes and/or the Note Guarantees; or
(10)to provide for the reorganization of Sunoco LP as any other form of entity, in accordance
with the provisions described under “—Certain Covenants—Merger, Consolidation or
Sale of Assets.”
Table of Contents
49
Satisfaction and Discharge
The Indenture will be discharged and will cease to be of further effect as to all notes issued
thereunder (except as to surviving rights of transfer or exchange of the notes and as otherwise
specified in the Indenture), when:
(1) either:
(a) all notes that have been authenticated, except lost, stolen or destroyed notes that
have been replaced or paid and notes for whose payment money has been
deposited in trust and thereafter repaid to the Issuers, have been delivered to the
trustee for cancellation; or
(b) all notes that have not been delivered to the trustee for cancellation have become
due and payable or will become due and payable within one year by reason of the
mailing of a notice of redemption or otherwise and the Issuers or any Guarantor has
irrevocably deposited or caused to be deposited with the trustee as trust funds in
trust solely for the benefit of the holders, cash in U.S. dollars, non-callable
Government Securities, or a combination of cash in U.S. dollars and non-callable
Government Securities, in amounts as will be sufficient, without consideration of any
reinvestment of interest, in the opinion of a nationally recognized investment bank,
appraisal firm or firm of independent public accountants, to pay and discharge the
entire Indebtedness on the notes not delivered to the trustee for cancellation for
principal and premium, if any, and accrued interest to the date of fixed maturity or
redemption;
(2) no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing on the date of the deposit
(other than a Default or Event of Default resulting from the borrowing of funds to be
applied to such deposit) and the deposit will not result in a breach or violation of, or
constitute a default under, any other instrument to which Sunoco LP or any Guarantor is a
party or by which Sunoco LP or any Guarantor is bound;
(3) the Issuers or any Guarantor has paid or caused to be paid all sums payable by it under
the Indenture; and
(4) the Issuers have delivered irrevocable instructions to the trustee under the Indenture to
apply the deposited money toward the payment of the notes at fixed maturity or on the
redemption date, as the case may be.
In addition, the Issuers must deliver an officers’ certificate and an opinion of counsel to the trustee
stating that all conditions precedent to satisfaction and discharge have been satisfied.
Concerning the Trustee
If the trustee becomes a creditor of the Issuers or any Guarantor, the Indenture limits the right of
the trustee to obtain payment of claims in certain cases, or to realize on certain property received
in respect of any such claim as security or otherwise. The trustee is permitted to engage in other
transactions; however, if it acquires any conflicting interest (as defined in the Trust Indenture Act)
after a Default has occurred and is continuing, it must eliminate such conflict within 90 days,
apply to the SEC for permission to continue as trustee or resign.
The Indenture provides that in case an Event of Default occurs and is continuing, the trustee will
exercise such of the rights and powers vested in it by the Indenture, and use the same degree of
care and skill in its exercise, as a prudent man would exercise or use under the circumstances in
the conduct of his own affairs.
Governing Law
The Indenture, the notes and the Note Guarantees are governed by, and construed in
accordance with, the laws of the State of New York.
Table of Contents
50
Additional Information
Anyone who receives this prospectus may obtain a copy of the Indenture and the Partnership
Agreement without charge by writing to Sunoco LP at 8020 Park Lane, Suite 200, Dallas, Texas
75231, Attention: Chief Financial Officer.
Book-Entry, Delivery and Form
The notes will be issued in registered global form (the “Global Notes”). The Global Notes will be
deposited upon issuance with the trustee as custodian for DTC and registered in the name of
DTC’s nominee, Cede & Co., in each case for credit to an account of a direct or indirect
participant in DTC as described below. Beneficial interests in the Global Notes may be held
through the Euroclear System (“Euroclear”) and Clearstream Banking, S.A. (“Clearstream”) (as
indirect participants in DTC).
The Global Notes may be transferred, in whole but not in part, only to another nominee of DTC or
to a successor of DTC or its nominee. Beneficial interests in the Global Notes may not be
exchanged for notes in registered, certificated form (“Certificated Notes”) except in the limited
circumstances described below. Read “—Exchange of Global Notes for Certificated Notes.”
In addition, transfers of beneficial interests in the Global Notes will be subject to the applicable
rules and procedures of DTC and its direct or indirect participants (including, if applicable, those
of Euroclear and Clearstream), which may change from time to time.
Depository Procedures
The following description of the operations and procedures of DTC, Euroclear and Clearstream
are provided solely as a matter of convenience. These operations and procedures are solely
within the control of the respective settlement systems and are subject to changes by them. The
Issuers take no responsibility for these operations and procedures and urge investors to contact
the system or their participants directly to discuss these matters.
DTC has advised the Issuers that DTC is a limited-purpose trust company created to hold
securities for its participating organizations (collectively, the “Participants”) and to facilitate the
clearance and settlement of transactions in those securities between the Participants through
electronic book-entry changes in accounts of its Participants. The Participants include securities
brokers and dealers (including the initial purchasers), banks, trust companies, clearing
corporations and certain other organizations. Access to DTC’s system is also available to other
entities such as banks, brokers, dealers and trust companies that clear through or maintain a
custodial relationship with a Participant, either directly or indirectly (collectively, the “Indirect
Participants”). Persons who are not Participants may beneficially own securities held by or on
behalf of DTC only through the Participants or the Indirect Participants. The ownership interests
in, and transfers of ownership interests in, each security held by or on behalf of DTC are recorded
on the records of the Participants and Indirect Participants.
DTC has also advised the Issuers that, pursuant to procedures established by it:
(1) upon deposit of the Global Notes, DTC will credit the accounts of the Participants by or
through whom purchases are made with portions of the principal amount of the Global
Notes; and
(2) ownership of these interests in the Global Notes will be shown on, and the transfer of
ownership of these interests will be effected only through, records maintained by DTC
(with respect to the Participants) or by the Participants and the Indirect Participants (with
respect to other owners of beneficial interests in the Global Notes).
Investors in the Global Notes who are Participants in DTC’s system may hold their interests
therein directly through DTC. Investors in the Global Notes who are not Participants may hold
their interests therein indirectly
Table of Contents
51
through organizations (including Euroclear and Clearstream) which are Participants in such
system. Euroclear and Clearstream may hold interests in the Global Notes on behalf of their
participants through customers’ securities accounts in their respective names on the books of
their respective depositories, which are Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V., as operator of Euroclear, and
Citibank, N.A., as operator of Clearstream. All interests in a Global Note, including those held
through Euroclear or Clearstream, may be subject to the procedures and requirements of DTC.
Those interests held through Euroclear or Clearstream may also be subject to the procedures
and requirements of such systems. The laws of some states require that certain Persons take
physical delivery in definitive form of securities that they own. Consequently, the ability to transfer
beneficial interests in a Global Note to such Persons will be limited to that extent. Because DTC
can act only on behalf of the Participants, which in turn act on behalf of the Indirect Participants,
the ability of a Person having beneficial interests in a Global Note to pledge such interests to
Persons that do not participate in the DTC system, or otherwise take actions in respect of such
interests, may be affected by the lack of a physical certificate evidencing such interests.
Except as described below, owners of interests in the Global Notes will not have notes registered
in their names, will not receive physical delivery of notes in certificated form and will not be
considered the registered owners or “holders” thereof under the Indenture for any purpose.
Payments in respect of the principal of, and interest and premium, if any, on, a Global Note
registered in the name of DTC or its nominee will be payable to DTC in its capacity as the
registered holder under the Indenture. Under the terms of the Indenture, the Issuers and the
trustee will treat the Persons in whose names the notes, including the Global Notes, are
registered as the owners of the notes for the purpose of receiving payments and for all other
purposes. Consequently, neither the Issuers, the trustee nor any agent of the Issuers or the
trustee has or will have any responsibility or liability for:
(1) any aspect of DTC’s records or any Participant’s or Indirect Participant’s records relating
to or payments made on account of beneficial ownership interests in the Global Notes or
for maintaining, supervising or reviewing any of DTC’s records or any Participant’s or
Indirect Participant’s records relating to the beneficial ownership interests in the Global
Notes; or
(2) any other matter relating to the actions and practices of DTC or any of its Participants or
Indirect Participants.
DTC has advised the Issuers that its current practice, at the due date of any payment in respect of
securities such as the notes (including principal and interest), is to credit the accounts of the
relevant Participants with the payment on the payment date unless DTC has reason to believe
that it will not receive payment on such payment date. Each relevant Participant is credited with
an amount proportionate to its beneficial ownership of an interest in the principal amount of the
relevant security as shown on the records of DTC. Payments by the Participants and the Indirect
Participants to the beneficial owners of notes will be governed by standing instructions and
customary practices and will be the responsibility of the Participants or the Indirect Participants
and will not be the responsibility of DTC, the trustee or the Issuers. Neither the Issuers nor the
trustee will be liable for any delay by DTC or any of the Participants or the Indirect Participants in
identifying the beneficial owners of the notes, and the Issuers and the trustee may conclusively
rely on and will be protected in relying on instructions from DTC or its nominee for all purposes.
Transfers between the Participants in DTC will be effected in accordance with DTC’s
procedures, and will be settled in same-day funds, and transfers between participants in
Euroclear and Clearstream will be effected in accordance with their respective rules and
operating procedures. Subject to compliance with the transfer restrictions applicable to the notes
described herein, cross-market transfers between the Participants in DTC, on the one hand, and
Euroclear or Clearstream participants, on the other hand, will be effected through DTC in
accordance with DTC’s rules on behalf of Euroclear or Clearstream, as the case may be, by its
depository; however, such cross-market transactions will require delivery of instructions to
Euroclear or Clearstream, as the case may be, by the counterparty in such system in accordance
with the rules and procedures and within the
52
Table of Contents
established deadlines (Brussels time) of such system. Euroclear or Clearstream, as the case may
be, will, if the transaction meets its settlement requirements, deliver instructions to its depository
to take action to effect final settlement on its behalf by delivering or receiving interests in the
relevant Global Note in DTC, and making or receiving payment in accordance with normal
procedures for same-day funds settlement applicable to DTC. Euroclear participants and
Clearstream participants may not deliver instructions directly to the depositories for Euroclear or
Clearstream.
DTC has advised the Issuers that it will take any action permitted to be taken by a holder of notes
only at the direction of one or more Participants to whose account DTC has credited the interests
in the Global Notes and only in respect of such portion of the aggregate principal amount of the
notes as to which such Participant or Participants has or have given such direction. However, if
there is an Event of Default under the notes, DTC reserves the right to exchange the Global
Notes for notes in certificated form, and to distribute such notes to its Participants.
Although DTC, Euroclear and Clearstream have agreed to the foregoing procedures to facilitate
transfers of interests in the Global Notes among participants in DTC, Euroclear and Clearstream,
they are under no obligation to perform or to continue to perform such procedures, and may
discontinue such procedures at any time. Neither the Issuers nor the trustee nor any of their
respective agents will have any responsibility for the performance by DTC, Euroclear or
Clearstream or their respective participants or indirect participants of their respective obligations
under the rules and procedures governing their operations.
Exchange of Global Notes for Certificated Notes
A Global Note is exchangeable for Certificated Notes if:
(1) DTC (a) notifies the Issuers that it is unwilling or unable to continue as depositary for the
Global Note or (b) has ceased to be a clearing agency registered under the Exchange Act
and, in either case, the Issuers fail to appoint a successor depositary within 90 days; or
(2) there has occurred and is continuing an Event of Default and DTC notifies the trustee of
its decision to exchange the Global Note for Certificated Notes.
Beneficial interests in a Global Note may also be exchanged for Certificated Notes in the other
limited circumstances permitted by the indenture, including if an affiliate of ours acquires such
interests. In all cases, Certificated Notes delivered in exchange for any Global Note or beneficial
interests in Global Notes will be registered in the names, and issued in any approved
denominations, requested by or on behalf of the depositary (in accordance with its customary
procedures).
Exchange of Certificated Notes for Global Notes
Certificated Notes may not be exchanged for beneficial interests in any Global Note.
Certain Definitions
Set forth below are certain defined terms used in the Indenture. Reference is made to the
Indenture for a full disclosure of all defined terms used therein, as well as any other capitalized
terms used herein for which no definition is provided.
“2023 Notes Issue Date” means April 1, 2015, the date of original issue of the Issuers’ 6.375%
Senior Notes due 2023.
“Acquired Debt” means, with respect to any specified Person:
(1) Indebtedness of any other Person existing at the time such other Person is merged with
or into or becomes a Subsidiary of such specified Person, whether or not such
Indebtedness is incurred in connection with, or in contemplation of, such other Person
merging with or into, or becoming a
53
Table of Contents
Subsidiary of, such specified Person, but excluding Indebtedness which is extinguished,
retired or repaid in connection with such Person merging with or becoming a Subsidiary
of such specified Person; and
(2) Indebtedness secured by a Lien encumbering any asset acquired by such specified
Person.
“Affiliate” of any specified Person means any other Person directly or indirectly controlling or
controlled by or under direct or indirect common control with such specified Person. For purposes
of this definition, “control,” as used with respect to any Person, means the possession, directly or
indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management or policies of such
Person, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by agreement or otherwise; provided
that beneficial ownership of 10% or more of the Voting Stock of a Person will be deemed to be
control. For purposes of this definition, the terms “controlling,” “controlled by” and “under common
control with” have correlative meanings.
“Applicable Premium” means with respect to any note on any redemption date, an amount equal
to the greater of:
(1) 1.0% of the principal amount of the note; or
(2) the excess of:
(a)
the present value at such redemption date of (i) the redemption price of the note at
August 1, 2017 (such redemption price being set forth in the table under the caption
“—Optional Redemption”) plus (ii) all required interest payments due on the note
through August 1, 2017 (in each case excluding accrued but unpaid interest to the
redemption date), computed using a discount rate equal to the Treasury Rate as of
such redemption date plus 50 basis points; over
(b)
the principal amount of the note.
“Asset Sale” means:
(1) the sale, lease, conveyance or other disposition of any properties or assets; provided,
however, that the sale, lease, conveyance or other disposition of all or substantially all of
the properties or assets of Sunoco LP and its Subsidiaries taken as a whole will be
governed by the provisions of the Indenture described above under the caption “—
Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Change of Control” and/or the provisions
described above under the caption “—Certain Covenants—Merger, Consolidation or
Sale of Assets” and not by the provisions of the Asset Sale covenant; and
(2) the issuance of Equity Interests in any of Sunoco LP’s Restricted Subsidiaries or the sale
of Equity Interests in any of its Restricted Subsidiaries.
Notwithstanding the preceding, none of the following items will be deemed to be an Asset Sale:
(1) any single transaction or series of related transactions that involves properties or assets
having a Fair Market Value of less than $25.0 million;
(2) a transfer of properties or assets between or among Sunoco LP and its Restricted
Subsidiaries;
(3) an issuance or sale of Equity Interests by a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP to
Sunoco LP or to a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP;
(4) the sale or lease of products, services or accounts receivable in the ordinary course of
business and any sale or other disposition of damaged, worn-out or obsolete properties
or assets in the ordinary course of business;
(5) the sale or other disposition of cash or Cash Equivalents, Hedging Obligations or other
financial instruments in the ordinary course of business;
54
Table of Contents
(6) a Restricted Payment that does not violate the covenant described above under the
caption “—Certain Covenants—Restricted Payments” or a Permitted Investment;
(7) any trade or exchange by Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP of
properties or assets of any type for properties or assets of any type owned or held by
another Person, including any disposition of some but not all of the Equity Interests of a
Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP in exchange for assets or properties and after which
the Person whose Equity Interests have been so disposed of continues to be a Restricted
Subsidiary, provided that the Fair Market Value of the properties or assets traded or
exchanged by Sunoco LP or such Restricted Subsidiary (together with any cash or Cash
Equivalents and liabilities assumed) is reasonably equivalent to the Fair Market Value of
the properties or assets (together with any cash or Cash Equivalents and liabilities
assumed) to be received by Sunoco LP or such Restricted Subsidiary; and provided
further that any cash received must be applied in accordance with the provisions
described above under the caption “—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Asset
Sales”; and
(8) the creation or perfection of a Lien that is not prohibited by the covenant described above
under the caption “—Certain Covenants—Liens,” and any disposition in connection with
a Permitted Lien.
“Asset Sale Offer” has the meaning assigned to that term under “—Repurchase at the Option of
Holders—Asset Sales.”
“Attributable Debt” in respect of a sale and leaseback transaction means, at the time of
determination, the present value of the obligation of the lessee for net rental payments during the
remaining term of the lease included in such sale and leaseback transaction including any period
for which such lease has been extended or may, at the option of the lessor, be extended. Such
present value shall be calculated using a discount rate equal to the rate of interest implicit in such
transaction, determined in accordance with GAAP; provided, however, that, if such sale and
leaseback transaction results in a Capital Lease Obligation, the amount of Indebtedness
represented thereby will be determined in accordance with the definition of “Capital Lease
Obligation.”
“Available Cash” has the meaning assigned to such term in the Partnership Agreement, as in
effect on the date of the Indenture.
“Beneficial Owner” has the meaning assigned to such term in Rule 13d-3 and Rule 13d-5 under
the Exchange Act, except that, in calculating the beneficial ownership of any particular “person”
(as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act), such “person” will be deemed to
have beneficial ownership of all securities that such “person” has the right to acquire by
conversion or exercise of other securities, whether such right is currently exercisable or is
exercisable only after the passage of time. The terms “Beneficially Owns” and “Beneficially
Owned” have a corresponding meaning.
“Board of Directors” means:
(1) with respect to a corporation, the board of directors of the corporation or any committee
thereof duly authorized to act on behalf of such board;
(2) with respect to a partnership, the board of directors or board of managers of the general
partner of the partnership or, if such general partner is itself a limited partnership, then the
board of directors or board of managers of its general partner;
(3) with respect to a limited liability company, the managing member or members or any
controlling committee of managing members thereof; and
(4) with respect to any other Person, the board or committee of such Person serving a similar
function.
“Capital Lease Obligation” means, at the time any determination is to be made, the amount of the
liability in respect of a capital lease that would at that time be required to be capitalized on a
balance sheet prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Table of Contents
“Capital Stock” means:
55
(1) in the case of a corporation, corporate stock;
(2) in the case of an association or business entity, any and all shares, interests,
participations, rights or other equivalents (however designated) of corporate stock;
(3) in the case of a partnership or limited liability company, partnership interests (whether
general or limited) or membership interests; and
(4) any other interest or participation that confers on a Person the right to receive a share of
the profits and losses of, or distributions of assets of, the issuing Person,
but excluding from all of the foregoing any debt securities convertible into Capital Stock, whether
or not such debt securities include any right of participation with Capital Stock.
“Cash Equivalents” means:
(1) United States dollars or, in an amount up to the amount necessary or appropriate to fund
local operating expenses, other currencies;
(2) securities issued or directly and fully guaranteed or insured by the United States
government or any agency or instrumentality of the United States government (provided
that the full faith and credit of the United States is pledged in support of those securities)
having maturities of not more than one year from the date of acquisition;
(3) certificates of deposit and eurodollar time deposits with maturities of six months or less
from the date of acquisition, bankers’ acceptances with maturities not exceeding six
months and overnight bank deposits, in each case, with any domestic commercial bank
having capital and surplus in excess of $250.0 million and a Thomson Bank Watch
Rating of “B” or better;
(4) repurchase obligations with a term of not more than seven days for underlying securities
of the types described in clauses (2) and (3) above entered into with any financial
institution meeting the qualifications specified in clause (3) above;
(5) commercial paper having one of the two highest ratings obtainable from Moody’s or S&P
and, in each case, maturing within six months after the date of acquisition; and
(6) money market funds at least 95% of the assets of which constitute Cash Equivalents of
the kinds described in clauses (1) through (5) of this definition.
“Change of Control” means the occurrence of any of the following:
(1) the direct or indirect sale, lease, transfer, conveyance or other disposition (other than by
way of merger or consolidation), in one or a series of related transactions, of all or
substantially all of the properties or assets of Sunoco LP and its Subsidiaries taken as a
whole to any “person” (as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act), other
than a Qualified Owner, which occurrence is followed by a Ratings Decline within
90 days; or
(2) the adoption of a plan relating to the liquidation or dissolution of Sunoco LP or the
removal of the General Partner by the limited partners of Sunoco LP; or
(3) the consummation of any transaction (including any merger or consolidation), the result of
which is that any “person” (as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act),
other than a Qualified Owner, becomes the Beneficial Owner, directly or indirectly, of
more than 50% of the Voting Stock of the General Partner or of Sunoco LP, measured by
voting power rather than number of shares, which occurrence is followed by a Ratings
Decline within 90 days.
56
Table of Contents
Notwithstanding the preceding, a conversion of Sunoco LP from a limited partnership to a
corporation, limited liability company or other form of entity or an exchange of all of the
outstanding limited partnership interests for capital stock in a corporation, for member interests in
a limited liability company or for Equity Interests in such other form of entity shall not constitute a
Change of Control, so long as immediately following such conversion or exchange either (i) the
“persons” (as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act) who Beneficially Owned
the Capital Stock of Sunoco LP immediately prior to such transactions continue to Beneficially
Own in the aggregate more than 50% of the Voting Stock of such entity, or continue to
Beneficially Own sufficient Equity Interests in such entity to elect a majority of its directors,
managers, trustees or other persons serving in a similar capacity for such entity, and, in either
case no “person” (as that term is used in Section 13(d)(3) of the Exchange Act), excluding any
Qualified Owner, Beneficially Owns more than 50% of the Voting Stock of such entity or (ii) one
or more Qualified Owners in the aggregate own more than 50% of the Voting Stock of such entity.
“Change of Control Offer” has the meaning assigned to that term under “—Repurchase at the
Option of Holders—Change of Control.”
“Consolidated Cash Flow” means, with respect to any specified Person for any period, the
Consolidated Net Income of such Person for such period plus, without duplication:
(1) an amount equal to (i) any extraordinary loss plus (ii) any net loss realized by such
Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in connection with an Asset Sale or the
disposition of any securities by such Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries or the
extinguishment of any Indebtedness of such Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries,
in each case, to the extent such losses were deducted in computing such Consolidated
Net Income; plus
(2) provision for taxes based on income or profits of such Person and its Restricted
Subsidiaries for such period, to the extent that such provision for taxes was deducted in
computing such Consolidated Net Income; plus
(3) the consolidated interest expense of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries for such
period, whether paid or accrued (including amortization of debt issuance costs and
original issue discount, non-cash interest payments, the interest component of any
deferred payment obligations, the interest component of all payments associated with
Capital Lease Obligations, imputed interest with respect to Attributable Debt,
commissions, discounts and other fees and charges incurred in respect of letter of credit
or bankers’ acceptance financings, and net of all payments, if any, pursuant to Hedging
Obligations), to the extent that any such expense was deducted in computing such
Consolidated Net Income; plus
(4) depreciation, amortization (including amortization of intangibles but excluding
amortization of prepaid cash expenses that were paid in a prior period) and other non-
cash expenses, charges or losses (excluding any such non-cash expense, charge or loss
to the extent that it represents an accrual of or reserve for cash expenses, charges or
losses in any future period or amortization of a prepaid cash expense, charge or loss that
was paid in a prior period) of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries for such period
to the extent that such depreciation, amortization and other non-cash expenses, charges
or losses were deducted in computing such Consolidated Net Income; plus
(5) unrealized non-cash losses resulting from foreign currency balance sheet adjustments
required by GAAP to the extent such losses were deducted in computing such
Consolidated Net Income; plus
(6) all extraordinary or non-recurring items of gain or loss, or revenue or expense; minus
(7) non-cash items increasing such Consolidated Net Income for such period, other than the
accrual of revenue in the ordinary course of business,
in each case, on a consolidated basis and determined in accordance with GAAP.
Table of Contents
57
“Consolidated Net Income” means, with respect to any specified Person for any period, the
aggregate of the Net Income of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries for such period, on a
consolidated basis, determined in accordance with GAAP; provided that:
(1) the aggregate Net Income (but not loss) of any Person that is not a Restricted Subsidiary
or that is accounted for by the equity method of accounting will be included only to the
extent of the amount of dividends or similar distributions paid in cash to the specified
Person or a Restricted Subsidiary of the Person;
(2) the Net Income of any Restricted Subsidiary will be excluded to the extent that the
declaration or payment of dividends or similar distributions by that Restricted Subsidiary
of that Net Income is not at the date of determination permitted without any prior
governmental approval (that has not been obtained) or, directly or indirectly, by operation
of the terms of its charter or any agreement, instrument, judgment, decree, order, statute,
rule or governmental regulation applicable to that Restricted Subsidiary or its
stockholders, partners or members;
(3) the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principles will be excluded;
(4) unrealized losses and gains under derivative instruments included in the determination of
Consolidated Net Income, including those resulting from the application of Financial
Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 815 will be
excluded; and
(5) any nonrecurring charges relating to any premium or penalty paid, write off of deferred
finance costs or other charges in connection with redeeming or retiring any Indebtedness
prior to its Stated Maturity will be excluded.
“Consolidated Net Tangible Assets” means, with respect to any Person at any date of
determination, the aggregate amount of total assets included in such Person’s most recent
quarterly or annual consolidated balance sheet prepared in accordance with GAAP less
applicable reserves reflected in such balance sheet, after (i) adding the aggregate incremental
amount of total assets that would have resulted from an acquisition of assets from an Affiliate that
is accounted for as a pooling had it been accounted for using purchase accounting and
(ii) deducting the following amounts: (a) all current liabilities reflected in such balance sheet, and
(b) all goodwill, trademarks, patents, unamortized debt discounts and expenses and other like
intangibles reflected in such balance sheet.
“Credit Agreement” means that certain Credit Agreement, dated as of September 25, 2014, by
and among Sunoco LP (f/k/a/ Susser Petroleum Partners LP), the guarantors party thereto, the
lenders party thereto and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent for the lenders and
collateral agent, including any related notes, guarantees, collateral documents, instruments and
agreements executed in connection therewith, and, in each case, as amended, restated,
modified, renewed, refunded, replaced or refinanced in whole or in part from time to time
(including increasing the amount of available borrowings thereunder).
“Credit Facilities” means, one or more debt facilities (including the Credit Agreement) or
commercial paper facilities, in each case, with banks or other institutional lenders providing for
revolving credit loans, term loans, accounts receivable financing (including through the sale of
accounts receivable to such lenders or to special purpose entities formed to borrow from such
lenders against such accounts receivable) or letters of credit, in each case, as amended,
restated, modified, renewed, refunded, replaced or refinanced (including by means of sales of
debt securities to institutional investors) in whole or in part from time to time (including increasing
the amount of available borrowings thereunder).
“Default” means any event that is, or with the passage of time or the giving of notice or both would
be, an Event of Default.
“Designated Non-cash Consideration” means the fair market value (as determined in good faith
by Sunoco LP) of non-cash consideration received by Sunoco LP or a Restricted Subsidiary in
connection with an
Table of Contents
58
Asset Sale that is so designated as Designated Non-cash Consideration pursuant to an officers’
certificate, less the amount of Cash Equivalents received in connection with a subsequent sale of
such Designated Non-cash Consideration.
“Disqualified Equity” means any Equity Interest that, by its terms (or by the terms of any security
into which it is convertible, or for which it is exchangeable, in each case, at the option of the
holder of the Equity Interest), or upon the happening of any event, matures or is mandatorily
redeemable, pursuant to a sinking fund obligation or otherwise, or redeemable at the option of
the holder of the Equity Interest, in whole or in part, on or prior to the date that is 91 days after the
date on which the notes mature. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any Equity Interest that
would constitute Disqualified Equity solely because the holders of the Equity Interest have the
right to require Sunoco LP to repurchase or redeem such Equity Interest upon the occurrence of a
change of control or an asset sale will not constitute Disqualified Equity if the terms of such
Equity Interest provide that Sunoco LP may not repurchase or redeem any such Equity Interest
pursuant to such provisions unless such repurchase or redemption complies with the covenant
described above under the caption “—Certain Covenants—Restricted Payments.”
“Domestic Subsidiary” means any Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP that was formed under the
laws of the United States or any state of the United States or the District of Columbia.
“Equity Interests” means Capital Stock and all warrants, options or other rights to acquire Capital
Stock (but excluding any debt security that is convertible into, or exchangeable for, Capital
Stock).
“Equity Offering” means any public or private sale of Equity Interests (other than Disqualified
Equity and other than to a Subsidiary) made for cash on a primary basis by Sunoco LP after the
date of the Indenture.
“Existing Indebtedness” means the aggregate principal amount of Indebtedness of Sunoco LP
and its Subsidiaries (other than Indebtedness under the Credit Agreement) in existence on the
date of the Indenture, until such amounts are repaid.
“Fair Market Value” means the value that would be paid by a willing buyer to an unaffiliated
willing seller in a transaction not involving distress or necessity of either party, determined in
good faith by the Board of Directors of the General Partner (unless otherwise provided in the
Indenture).
“Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio” means with respect to any specified Person for any four-quarter
reference period, the ratio of the Consolidated Cash Flow of such Person for such period to the
Fixed Charges of such Person for such period. If the specified Person or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries incurs, assumes, guarantees, repays, repurchases, redeems, defeases or otherwise
discharges any Indebtedness (other than ordinary working capital borrowings) or issues,
repurchases or redeems Disqualified Equity subsequent to the commencement of the applicable
four-quarter reference period and on or prior to the date on which the event for which the
calculation of the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio is made (the “Calculation Date”), then the Fixed
Charge Coverage Ratio will be calculated giving pro forma effect to such incurrence, assumption,
guarantee, repayment, repurchase, redemption, defeasance or other discharge of Indebtedness,
or such issuance, repurchase or redemption of Disqualified Equity, and the use of the proceeds
therefrom, as if the same had occurred at the beginning of such period.
In addition, for purposes of calculating the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio:
(1) acquisitions that have been made by the specified Person or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries, including through mergers or consolidations and including any related
financing transactions during the four-quarter reference period or subsequent to such
reference period and on or prior to the Calculation Date will be given pro forma effect as if
they had occurred on the first day of the four-quarter reference period, including any
Consolidated Cash Flow and any pro forma expense and cost reductions that
Table of Contents
59
have occurred or are reasonably expected to occur, in the reasonable judgment of the
chief financial or accounting officer of Sunoco LP (regardless of whether those cost
savings or operating improvements could then be reflected in pro forma financial
statements in accordance with Regulation S-X promulgated under the Securities Act or
any other regulation or policy of the SEC related thereto);
(2) the Consolidated Cash Flow attributable to discontinued operations, as determined in
accordance with GAAP, and operations or businesses (and ownership interests therein)
disposed of prior to the Calculation Date, will be excluded;
(3) the Fixed Charges attributable to discontinued operations, as determined in accordance
with GAAP, and operations or businesses (and ownership interests therein) disposed of
prior to the Calculation Date, will be excluded, but only to the extent that the obligations
giving rise to such Fixed Charges will not be obligations of the specified Person or any of
its Restricted Subsidiaries following the Calculation Date;
(4) interest income reasonably anticipated by such Person to be received during the
applicable four quarter period from cash or Cash Equivalents held by such Person or any
Restricted Subsidiary of such Person, which cash or Cash Equivalents exist on the
Calculation Date or will exist as a result of the transaction giving rise to the need to
calculate the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio, will be included;
(5) if any Indebtedness bears a floating rate of interest, the interest expense on such
Indebtedness will be calculated as if the average rate in effect from the beginning of the
applicable period to the Calculation Date had been the applicable rate for the entire
period (taking into account any Hedging Obligation applicable to such Indebtedness if
such Hedging Obligation has a remaining term as at the Calculation Date in excess of
12 months); and
(6) if any Indebtedness is incurred under a revolving credit facility and is being given pro
forma effect, the interest on such Indebtedness shall be calculated based on the average
daily balance of such Indebtedness for the four fiscal quarters subject to the pro forma
calculation.
“Fixed Charges” means, with respect to any specified Person for any period, (A) the sum, without
duplication, of:
(1) the consolidated interest expense of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries for such
period, whether paid or accrued, including amortization of debt issuance costs and
original issue discount, non-cash interest payments, the interest component of any
deferred payment obligations, the interest component of all payments associated with
Capital Lease Obligations, imputed interest with respect to Attributable Debt,
commissions, discounts and other fees and charges incurred in respect of letter of credit
or bankers’ acceptance financings, and net of the effect of all payments made or received
pursuant to Hedging Obligations in respect of interest rates; plus
(2) the consolidated interest expense of such Person and its Restricted Subsidiaries that
was capitalized during such period; plus
(3) any interest on Indebtedness of another Person that is guaranteed by such Person or one
of its Restricted Subsidiaries or secured by a Lien on assets of such Person or one of its
Restricted Subsidiaries, whether or not such guarantee or Lien is called upon; plus
(4) all dividends, whether paid or accrued and whether or not in cash, on any series of
Disqualified Equity of such Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries, other than
dividends on Equity Interests payable solely in Equity Interests of Sunoco LP (other than
Disqualified Equity) or to Sunoco LP or a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP; minus
(B) to the extent included in (A) above, write-offs of deferred financing costs of such Person and
its Restricted Subsidiaries during such period and any charge related to, or any premium or
penalty paid in connection with, paying any such Indebtedness of such Person and its Restricted
Subsidiaries prior to its Stated Maturity.
Table of Contents
60
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, as in effect on the
date of the Indenture.
“General Partner” means Sunoco GP LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, and its
successors and permitted assigns as general partner of Sunoco LP or as the business entity with
the ultimate authority to manage the business and operations of Sunoco LP.
“Government Securities” means direct obligations of, or obligations guaranteed by, the United
States of America for the payment of which guarantee or obligations the full faith and credit of the
United States of America is pledged.
“guarantee” means a guarantee other than by endorsement of negotiable instruments for
collection in the ordinary course of business, direct or indirect, in any manner including by way of
a pledge of assets or through letters of credit or reimbursement agreements in respect thereof, of
all or any part of any Indebtedness.
“Guarantors” means each of:
(1) the Subsidiaries of Sunoco LP executing the Indenture as initial Guarantors; and
(2) any other Subsidiary of Sunoco LP that becomes a Guarantor in accordance with the
provisions of the Indenture,
and their respective successors and assigns, in each case, until the Note Guarantee of such
Person has been released in accordance with the provisions of the Indenture.
“Hedging Obligations” means, with respect to any specified Person, the obligations of such
Person under:
(1) interest rate swap agreements (whether from fixed to floating or from floating to fixed),
interest rate cap agreements and interest rate collar agreements entered into with one or
more financial institutions and designed to reduce costs of borrowing or to protect the
Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries entering into the agreement against
fluctuations in interest rates with respect to Indebtedness incurred;
(2) other agreements or arrangements designed to manage interest rates or interest rate risk;
(3) foreign exchange contracts and currency protection agreements entered into with one of
more financial institutions and designed to protect the Person or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries entering into the agreement against fluctuations in currency exchanges
rates with respect to Indebtedness incurred;
(4) any commodity futures contract, commodity option or other similar agreement or
arrangement designed to protect against fluctuations in the price of Hydrocarbons used,
produced, processed or sold by that Person or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries at the
time; and
(5) other agreements or arrangements designed to protect such Person or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries against fluctuations in currency exchange rates or commodity
prices.
“Hydrocarbons” means crude oil, natural gas, natural gas liquids, casinghead gas, drip gasoline,
condensate, distillate, liquid hydrocarbons, gaseous hydrocarbons and all constituents, elements
or compounds thereof and products refined or processed therefrom.
“Indebtedness” means, with respect to any specified Person, any indebtedness of such Person,
whether or not contingent:
(1) in respect of borrowed money;
(2) evidenced by bonds, notes, debentures or similar instruments or letters of credit (or
reimbursement agreements in respect thereof);
61
Table of Contents
(3) in respect of bankers’ acceptances;
(4) representing Capital Lease Obligations or Attributable Debt in respect of sale and
leaseback transactions;
(5) representing the balance deferred and unpaid of the purchase price of any property or
services due more than six months after such property is acquired or such services are
completed; or
(6) representing any Hedging Obligations,
if and to the extent any of the preceding items (other than letters of credit, Attributable Debt and
Hedging Obligations) would appear as a liability upon a balance sheet of the specified Person
prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, the term “Indebtedness” includes all
Indebtedness of others secured by a Lien on any asset of the specified Person (whether or not
such Indebtedness is assumed by the specified Person) and, to the extent not otherwise
included, the guarantee by the specified Person of any Indebtedness of any other Person.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following shall not constitute “Indebtedness”:
(1) accrued expenses and trade accounts payable arising in the ordinary course of business;
(2) any obligation of Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries in respect of bid,
performance, surety and similar bonds issued for the account of Sunoco LP and any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business, including guarantees and
obligations of Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries with respect to letters of
credit supporting such obligations (in each case other than an obligation for money
borrowed);
(3) any Indebtedness that has been defeased in accordance with GAAP or defeased
pursuant to the deposit of cash or Government Securities (in an amount sufficient to
satisfy all such Indebtedness at fixed maturity or redemption, as applicable, and all
payments of interest and premium, if any) in a trust or account created or pledged for the
sole benefit of the holders of such Indebtedness and subject to no other Liens, and the
other applicable terms of the instrument governing such Indebtedness;
(4) any obligation arising from the honoring by a bank or other financial institution of a check,
draft or similar instrument drawn against insufficient funds in the ordinary course of
business; provided, however, that such obligation is extinguished within five business
days of its incurrence; and
(5) any obligation arising from any agreement providing for indemnities, guarantees,
purchase price adjustments, holdbacks, contingency payment obligations based on the
performance of the acquired or disposed assets or similar obligations (other than
guarantees of Indebtedness) incurred by any Person in connection with the acquisition or
disposition of assets.
“Investment Grade Rating” means a rating equal to or higher than Baa3 by Moody’s or BBB- by
S&P (or, if either such entity ceases to rate the notes for reasons outside of the control of
Sunoco LP, the equivalent investment grade credit rating from any other “nationally recognized
statistical rating organization” registered under Section 15E of the Exchange Act selected by
Sunoco LP as a replacement agency).
“Investments” means, with respect to any Person, all direct or indirect investments by such
Person in other Persons (including Affiliates) in the forms of loans (including guarantees or other
obligations), advances or capital contributions (excluding (1) commission, travel and similar
advances to officers and employees made in the ordinary course of business and (2) advances to
customers in the ordinary course of business that are recorded as accounts receivable on the
balance sheet of the lender), purchases or other acquisitions for consideration of Indebtedness,
Equity Interests or other securities, together with all items that are or would be classified as
investments on a balance sheet prepared in accordance with GAAP. If Sunoco LP or any
Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP sells or otherwise disposes of any Equity Interests of any
direct or indirect Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP such that, after giving effect to any such sale
or disposition, such Person is no longer a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP, Sunoco LP will
be deemed to have made an Investment on the date of any such sale or
Table of Contents
62
disposition equal to the Fair Market Value of Sunoco LP’s Investments in such Restricted
Subsidiary that were not sold or disposed of in an amount determined as provided in the final
paragraph of the covenant described above under the caption “—Certain Covenants—Restricted
Payments.”
“Joint Venture” means any Person that is not a direct or indirect Subsidiary of Sunoco LP in
which Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries makes any Investment.
“Lien” means, with respect to any asset, any mortgage, lien, pledge, charge, security interest or
encumbrance of any kind in respect of such asset, whether or not filed, recorded or otherwise
perfected under applicable law, including any conditional sale or other title retention agreement,
any lease in the nature thereof, any option or other agreement to sell or give a security interest in
and any filing of or agreement to give any financing statement under the Uniform Commercial
Code (or equivalent statutes) of any jurisdiction other than a precautionary financing statement
respecting a lease not intended as a security agreement. In no event shall a right of first refusal
be deemed to constitute a Lien.
“Moody’s” means Moody’s Investors Service, Inc., or any successor to the rating agency business
thereof.
“Net Income” means, with respect to any specified Person, the net income (loss) of such Person,
determined in accordance with GAAP and before any reduction in respect of preferred stock
dividends, excluding, however:
(1) any gain (but not loss), together with any related provision for taxes on such gain (but not
loss), realized in connection with: (a) any Asset Sale; or (b) the disposition of any
securities by such Person or the extinguishment of any Indebtedness of such Person; and
(2) any extraordinary gain (but not loss), together with any related provision for taxes on such
extraordinary gain (but not loss).
“Net Proceeds” means the aggregate cash proceeds received by Sunoco LP or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries in respect of any Asset Sale (including any cash received upon the sale
or other disposition of any non-cash consideration received in any Asset Sale), net of:
(1) the direct costs relating to such Asset Sale, including legal, accounting and investment
banking fees, and sales commissions, and any relocation expenses incurred as a result
of the Asset Sale,
(2) taxes paid or payable as a result of the Asset Sale, in each case, after taking into account
any available tax credits or deductions and any tax sharing arrangements,
(3) amounts required to be applied to the repayment of Indebtedness, other than revolving
credit Indebtedness except to the extent resulting a permanent reduction in availability of
such Indebtedness under a Credit Facility, secured by a Lien on the properties or assets
that were the subject of such Asset Sale and all distributions and payments required to be
made to minority interest holders in Restricted Subsidiaries as a result of such Asset
Sale, and
(4) any amounts to be set aside in any reserve established in accordance with GAAP or any
amount placed in escrow, in either case for adjustment in respect of the sale price of such
properties or assets or for liabilities associated with such Asset Sale and retained by
Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries until such time as such reserve is
reversed or such escrow arrangement is terminated, in which case Net Proceeds shall
include only the amount of the reserve so reversed or the amount returned to Sunoco LP
or its Restricted Subsidiaries from such escrow arrangement, as the case may be.
“Non-Recourse Debt” means Indebtedness:
(1) as to which neither Sunoco LP nor any of its Restricted Subsidiaries (a) provides credit
support of any kind (including any undertaking, agreement or instrument that would
constitute Indebtedness), (b) is directly or indirectly liable as a guarantor or otherwise or
(c) is the lender;
63
Table of Contents
(2) no default with respect to which (including any rights that the holders of the Indebtedness
may have to take enforcement action against an Unrestricted Subsidiary) would permit
upon notice, lapse of time or both any holder of any other Indebtedness of Sunoco LP or
any of its Restricted Subsidiaries to declare a default on such other Indebtedness or
cause the payment of the Indebtedness to be accelerated or payable prior to its Stated
Maturity; and
(3) as to which the lenders have been notified in writing that they will not have any recourse
to the stock or assets of Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries except as
contemplated by clause (10) of the definition of Permitted Liens.
For purposes of determining compliance with the covenant described under “—Certain
Covenants—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Disqualified Equity” above, if any Non-
Recourse Debt of any of Sunoco LP’s Unrestricted Subsidiaries ceases to be Non-Recourse
Debt of such Unrestricted Subsidiary, such event will be deemed to constitute an incurrence of
Indebtedness by a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP.
“Note Guarantee” means the guarantee by each Guarantor of the Issuers’ obligations under the
Indenture and the notes, pursuant to the provisions of the Indenture.
“Obligations” means any principal, interest, penalties, fees, indemnifications, reimbursements,
damages and other liabilities payable under the documentation governing any Indebtedness.
“Operating Surplus” has the meaning assigned to such term in the Partnership Agreement as in
effect on the date of the Indenture.
“Partnership Agreement” means the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited
Partnership of Sunoco LP (f/k/a/ Susser Petroleum Partners LP), dated as of September 25,
2012, as amended as of the date of Indenture, and as such may be further amended, modified or
supplemented from time to time.
“Permitted Business” means either (1) gathering, transporting, treating, processing, marketing,
distributing, storing or otherwise handling Hydrocarbons, or activities or services reasonably
related, ancillary or complementary thereto, or a reasonable extension or expansion thereof
including entering into Hedging Obligations to support these businesses, (2) any other business
that generates gross income that constitutes “qualifying income” under Section 7704(d) of the
Code, or (3) the retail sale of motor fuel and the operation of convenience stores or activities or
services reasonably related, ancillary or complementary thereto, or a reasonable extension or
expansion thereof.
“Permitted Business Investments” means Investments by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries in any Unrestricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP or in any Joint Venture, provided that:
(1) either (a) at the time of such Investment and immediately thereafter, Sunoco LP could
incur $1.00 of additional Indebtedness under the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio test set
forth in the first paragraph of the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—
Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Disqualified Equity” above or (b) such
Investment does not exceed the aggregate amount of Incremental Funds (as defined in
the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—Restricted Payments”) not
previously expended at the time of making such Investment;
(2) if such Unrestricted Subsidiary or Joint Venture has outstanding Indebtedness at the time
of such Investment, either (a) all such Indebtedness is Non-Recourse Debt or (b) any
such Indebtedness of such Unrestricted Subsidiaries or Joint Venture that is recourse to
Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries (which shall include all Indebtedness of
such Unrestricted Subsidiary or Joint Venture for which Sunoco LP or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries may be directly or indirectly, contingently or otherwise, obligated
to pay, whether pursuant to the terms of such Indebtedness, by law or pursuant to any
guarantee, including any “claw-back,” “make-well” or “keepwell” arrangement) could, at
the time
64
Table of Contents
such Investment is made, be incurred at that time by Sunoco LP and its Restricted
Subsidiaries under the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio test set forth in the first paragraph
of the covenant described under “—Certain Covenants—Incurrence of Indebtedness and
Issuance of Disqualified Equity”; and
(3) such Unrestricted Subsidiary’s or Joint Venture’s activities are not outside the scope of
the Permitted Business.
“Permitted Investments” means:
(1) any Investment in Sunoco LP or in a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP;
(2) any Investment in Cash Equivalents;
(3) any Investment by Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP in a Person, if
as a result of such Investment:
(a) such Person becomes a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP; or
(b) such Person is merged, consolidated or amalgamated with or into, or transfers or
conveys substantially all of its properties or assets to, or is liquidated into,
Sunoco LP or a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP;
(4) any Investment made as a result of the receipt of non-cash consideration from:
(a) an Asset Sale that was made pursuant to and in compliance with the covenant
described above under the caption “—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Asset
Sales”; or
(b) pursuant to clause (7) of the items deemed not to be Asset Sales under the definition
of “Asset Sale”;
(5) any Investment in any Person solely in exchange for the issuance of Equity Interests
(other than Disqualified Equity) of Sunoco LP;
(6) any Investments received in compromise or resolution of (A) obligations of trade creditors
or customers that were incurred in the ordinary course of business of Sunoco LP or any of
its Restricted Subsidiaries, including pursuant to any plan of reorganization or similar
arrangement upon the bankruptcy or insolvency of any trade creditor or customer, or as a
result of a foreclosure by Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries with respect to
any secured Investment in default; or (B) litigation, arbitration or other disputes with
Persons who are not Affiliates;
(7) Investments represented by Hedging Obligations permitted to be incurred;
(8) loans or advances to employees made in the ordinary course of business of Sunoco LP
or any Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP in an aggregate principal amount not to
exceed $2.0 million at any one time outstanding;
(9) repurchases of the notes;
(10)any Investments in prepaid expenses, negotiable instruments held for collection and
lease, utility, workers’ compensation and performance and other similar deposits and
prepaid expenses made in the ordinary course of business;
(11)Permitted Business Investments;
(12)Investments owned by any Person at the time such Person merges with Sunoco LP or
any Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP, provided such Investments (a) are not incurred
in contemplation of such merger or acquisition and (b) are, in the good faith determination
of Sunoco LP, incidental to such merger or acquisition, and in each case renewals or
extensions thereof in amounts not greater than the amount of such Investment;
(13)Investments existing on the date hereof; and
65
Table of Contents
(14)other Investments in any Person having an aggregate Fair Market Value (measured on
the date each such Investment was made and without giving effect to subsequent
changes in value), when taken together with all other Investments made pursuant to this
clause (14) that are at the time outstanding not to exceed the greater of (a) $60.0 million
and (b) 5.0% of Sunoco LP’s Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
“Permitted Liens” means:
(1) Liens securing any Indebtedness under any Credit Facilities and all Obligations and
Hedging Obligations relating to such Indebtedness;
(2) Liens in favor of Sunoco LP or the Guarantors;
(3) Liens on property of a Person existing at the time such Person is merged with or into or
consolidated with Sunoco LP or any Subsidiary of Sunoco LP; provided that such Liens
were in existence prior to such merger or consolidation and do not extend to any assets
other than those of the Person merged into or consolidated with Sunoco LP or the
Subsidiary;
(4) Liens on property existing at the time of acquisition of the property by Sunoco LP or any
Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP; provided that such Liens were in existence prior to,
such acquisition, and not incurred in contemplation of, such acquisition;
(5) Liens to secure the performance of statutory obligations, surety or appeal bonds,
performance bonds or other obligations of a like nature incurred in the ordinary course of
business;
(6) Liens to secure Indebtedness (including Capital Lease Obligations) permitted by
clause (4) of the second paragraph of the covenant entitled “—Certain Covenants—
Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Disqualified Equity” covering only the assets
acquired with or financed by such Indebtedness;
(7) Liens existing on the date of the Indenture (other than Liens securing the Credit
Facilities);
(8) Liens created for the benefit of (or to secure) the notes (or the Note Guarantees);
(9) Liens on any property or asset acquired, constructed or improved by Sunoco LP or any of
its Restricted Subsidiaries (a “Purchase Money Lien”), which (a) are in favor of the seller
of such property or assets, in favor of the Person developing, constructing, repairing or
improving such asset or property, or in favor of the Person that provided the funding for
the acquisition, development, construction, repair or improvement cost, as the case may
be, of such asset or property, (b) are created within 360 days after the acquisition,
development, construction, repair or improvement, (c) secure the purchase price or
development, construction, repair or improvement cost, as the case may be, of such asset
or property in an amount up to 100% of the Fair Market Value of such acquisition,
construction or improvement of such asset or property, and (d) are limited to the asset or
property so acquired, constructed or improved (including the proceeds thereof,
accessions thereto and upgrades thereof);
(10)Liens on and pledges of the Equity Interests of any Unrestricted Subsidiary or any Joint
Venture owned by Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP to the extent
securing Non-Recourse Debt or other Indebtedness of such Unrestricted Subsidiary or
Joint Venture;
(11)Liens in favor of collecting or payor banks having a right of setoff, revocation, refund or
chargeback with respect to money or instruments of Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries on deposit with or in possession of such bank;
(12)Liens to secure performance of Hedging Obligations of Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries incurred in the ordinary course of business and not for speculative
purposes;
(13)Liens arising under construction contracts, interconnection agreements, operating
agreements, joint venture agreements, partnership agreements, oil and gas leases,
farmout agreements, division orders,
66
Table of Contents
contracts for purchase, gathering, processing, sale, transportation or exchange of crude
oil, natural gas liquids, condensate and natural gas, natural gas storage agreements,
unitization and pooling declarations and agreements, area of mutual interest agreements,
real property leases and other agreements arising in the ordinary course of business of
Sunoco LP and its Restricted Subsidiaries that are customary in the Permitted Business;
(14)Liens upon specific items of inventory, receivables or other goods or proceeds of
Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries securing such Person’s obligations in
respect of bankers’ acceptances or receivables securitizations issued or created for the
account of such Person to facilitate the purchase, shipment or storage of such inventory,
receivables or other goods or proceeds and permitted by the covenant described under
“—Certain Covenants—Incurrence of Indebtedness and Issuance of Disqualified Equity”;
(15)Liens securing any Indebtedness equally and ratably with all Obligations due under the
notes or any Note Guarantee pursuant to a contractual covenant that limits Liens in a
manner substantially similar to the covenant described above under “—Certain
Covenants—Liens”;
(16)Liens incurred in the ordinary course of business of Sunoco LP or any Restricted
Subsidiary of Sunoco LP; provided, however, that, after giving effect to any such
incurrence, the aggregate principal amount of all Indebtedness then outstanding and
secured by any Liens pursuant to this clause (16) does not exceed the greater of
(a) $60.0 million or (b) 5.0% of Sunoco LP’s Consolidated Net Tangible Assets at such
time; and
(17)any Lien renewing, extending, refinancing or refunding a Lien permitted by clauses (3),
(4), (6), (7) or (9) above; provided that (a) the principal amount of Indebtedness secured
by such Lien does not exceed the principal amount of such Indebtedness outstanding
immediately prior to the renewal, extension, refinance or refund of such Lien, plus all
accrued interest on the Indebtedness secured thereby and the amount of all fees,
expenses and premiums incurred in connection therewith, and (b) no assets encumbered
by any such Lien other than the assets permitted to be encumbered immediately prior to
such renewal, extension, refinance or refund are encumbered thereby.
After termination of the covenants referred to in the first paragraph of “—Certain Covenants—
Termination of Covenants,” for purposes of complying with the “Liens” covenant, the Liens
described in clauses (1) and (16) of this definition of “Permitted Liens” will be Permitted Liens
only to the extent those Liens secure Indebtedness not exceeding, at the time of determination,
15% of the Consolidated Net Tangible Assets of Sunoco LP. Once effective, this 15% limitation
on Permitted Liens will continue to apply during any later period in which the notes do not have
an Investment Grade Rating by both Rating Agencies.
“Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness” means any Indebtedness of Sunoco LP or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries issued in exchange for, or the net proceeds of which are used to renew,
refund, refinance, replace, defease or discharge, other Indebtedness of Sunoco LP or any of its
Restricted Subsidiaries (other than intercompany Indebtedness); provided that:
(1) the principal amount of such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness does not exceed the
principal amount of the Indebtedness renewed, refunded, refinanced, replaced, defeased
or discharged (plus all accrued interest on the Indebtedness and the amount of all fees
and expenses, including premiums, incurred in connection therewith);
(2) such Permitted Refinancing Indebtedness has a final maturity date no earlier than the
final maturity date of, and has a Weighted Average Life to Maturity equal to or greater
than the Weighted Average Life to Maturity of, the Indebtedness being renewed,
refunded, refinanced, replaced, defeased or discharged;
(3) if the Indebtedness being renewed, refunded, refinanced, replaced, defeased or
discharged is subordinated in right of payment to the notes or the Note Guarantees, such
Permitted Refinancing
67
Table of Contents
Indebtedness is subordinated in right of payment to, the notes or the Note Guarantees, on
terms at least as favorable to the holders of notes as those contained in the
documentation governing the Indebtedness being renewed, refunded, refinanced,
replaced, defeased or discharged; and
(4) such Indebtedness is not incurred (other than by way of a guarantee) by a Restricted
Subsidiary (other than Finance Corp. or a Guarantor) if Sunoco LP is the issuer or other
primary obligor on the Indebtedness being renewed, refunded, refinanced, replaced,
defeased or discharged.
“Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, association, joint-stock
company, trust, unincorporated organization, limited liability company or government or other
entity.
“Qualified Owner” means any of (i) LE GP, LLC, Energy Transfer Equity, L.P. and Energy
Transfer Partners, L.P., (ii) any Person who Beneficially Owns more than 50% of the Voting Stock
of any entity specified in clause (i) above or who Beneficially Owns sufficient Equity Interests in
such entity to elect a majority of its directors, managers, trustees or other persons serving in a
similar capacity for such entity and (iii) any Subsidiary or Affiliate of any entity specified in either
clause (i) or clause (ii) above.
“Rating Agencies” means Moody’s and S&P.
“Ratings Categories” means:
(1) with respect to S&P, any of the following categories: AAA, AA, A, BBB, BB, B, CCC, CC,
C and D (or equivalent successor categories); and
(2) with respect to Moody’s, any of the following categories: Aaa, Aa, A, Baa, Ba, B, Caa, Ca,
C and D (or equivalent successor categories).
“Ratings Decline” means a decrease in the rating of the notes by both Moody’s and S&P by one
or more gradations (including gradations within Rating Categories as well as between Rating
Categories). In determining whether the rating of the notes has decreased by one or more
gradations, gradations within Ratings Categories, namely + or - for S&P, and 1, 2 and 3 for
Moody’s, will be taken into account; for example, in the case of S&P, a ratings decline either from
BB+ to BB or BB to BB- will constitute a decrease of one gradation.
“Reporting Default” means a Default described in clause (4) under “—Events of Default and
Remedies.”
“Restricted Investment” means an Investment other than a Permitted Investment.
“Restricted Subsidiary” of a Person means any Subsidiary of the referent Person that is not an
Unrestricted Subsidiary. Unless specified otherwise, references to a Restricted Subsidiary refer
to a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP. Notwithstanding anything in the Indenture to the
contrary, Finance Corp. shall be a Restricted Subsidiary of Sunoco LP.
“S&P” means Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies,
Inc., or any successor to the rating agency business thereof.
“SEC” means the Securities and Exchange Commission.
“Senior Indebtedness” means with respect to any Person, Indebtedness of such Person (other
than Indebtedness owed to an Affiliate), unless the instrument creating or evidencing such
Indebtedness provides that such Indebtedness is subordinate in right of payment to the notes or
the Note Guarantee of such Person, as the case may be.
“Significant Subsidiary” means any Subsidiary that would be a “significant subsidiary” as defined
in Article 1, Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X, promulgated pursuant to the Securities Act, as such
Regulation is in effect on the date of the Indenture.
Table of Contents
68
“Stated Maturity” means, with respect to any installment of interest or principal on any series of
Indebtedness, the date on which the payment of interest or principal was scheduled to be paid in
the original documentation governing such Indebtedness, and will not include any contingent
obligations to repay, redeem or repurchase any such interest or principal prior to the date
originally scheduled for the payment thereof.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any specified Person:
(1) any corporation, association or other business entity (other than a partnership or limited
liability company) of which more than 50% of the total voting power of the Voting Stock is
at the time owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by that Person or one or more of the
other Subsidiaries of that Person (or a combination thereof); and
(2) any partnership (whether general or limited) or limited liability company (a) the sole
general partner or member of which is such Person or a Subsidiary of such Person, or
(b) if there is more than a single general partner or member, either (x) the only managing
general partners or managing members of which are such Person or one or more
Subsidiaries of such Person (or any combination thereof) or (y) such Person owns or
controls, directly or indirectly, a majority of the outstanding general partner interests,
member interests or other Voting Stock of such partnership or limited liability company,
respectively.
“Treasury Rate” means, with respect to any redemption date, the yield to maturity at the time of
computation of United States Treasury securities with a constant maturity (as compiled and
published in the most recent Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15 (519) that has become
publicly available at least two business days prior to the redemption date (or, if such Statistical
Release is no longer published, any publicly available source of similar market data)) most
nearly equal to the period from the redemption date to August 1, 2017; provided, however, that if
such period is not equal to the constant maturity of a United States Treasury security for which a
weekly average yield is given, Sunoco LP shall obtain the Treasury Rate by linear interpolation
(calculated to the nearest one twelfth of a year) from the weekly average yields of United States
Treasury securities for which such yields are given, except that if the period from the redemption
date to August 1, 2017 is less than one year, the weekly average yield on actually traded United
States Treasury securities adjusted to a constant maturity of one year will be used. Sunoco LP
will (a) calculate the Treasury Rate on the second business day preceding the applicable
redemption date and (b) prior to such redemption date file with the trustee an officers’ certificate
setting forth the Applicable Premium and the Treasury Rate and showing the calculation of each
in reasonable detail.
“Unrestricted Subsidiary” means any Subsidiary of Sunoco LP (other than Finance Corp. or any
successor to it) that is designated by the Board of Directors of the General Partner as an
Unrestricted Subsidiary pursuant to a resolution of the Board of Directors, but only to the extent
that such Subsidiary:
(1) except to the extent permitted by subclause (2)(b) of the definition of “Permitted Business
Investments,” has no Indebtedness other than Non-Recourse Debt;
(2) except as permitted by the covenant described above under the caption “—Certain
Covenants—Transactions with Affiliates,” is not party to any agreement, contract,
arrangement or understanding with Sunoco LP or any Restricted Subsidiary of
Sunoco LP unless the terms of any such agreement, contract, arrangement or
understanding are no less favorable to Sunoco LP or such Restricted Subsidiary than
those that might be obtained at the time from Persons who are not Affiliates of
Sunoco LP;
(3) is a Person with respect to which neither Sunoco LP nor any of its Restricted
Subsidiaries has any direct or indirect obligation (a) to subscribe for additional Equity
Interests or (b) to maintain or preserve such Person’s financial condition or to cause such
Person to achieve any specified levels of operating results; and
(4) has not guaranteed or otherwise directly or indirectly provided credit support for any
Indebtedness of Sunoco LP or any of its Restricted Subsidiaries.
69
Table of Contents
All Subsidiaries of an Unrestricted Subsidiary shall be also Unrestricted Subsidiaries.
“Voting Stock” of any specified Person as of any date means the Capital Stock of such Person
that is at the time entitled (without regard to the occurrence of any contingency) to vote in the
election of the Board of Directors of such Person.
“Weighted Average Life to Maturity” means, when applied to any Indebtedness at any date, the
number of years obtained by dividing:
(1) the sum of the products obtained by multiplying (a) the amount of each then remaining
installment, sinking fund, serial maturity or other required payments of principal, including
payment at final maturity, in respect of the Indebtedness, by (b) the number of years
(calculated to the nearest one-twelfth) that will elapse between such date and the making
of such payment; by
(2) the then outstanding principal amount of such Indebtedness.
70
Table of Contents
CERTAIN FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES
The following discussion summarizes the material U.S. federal income tax consequences of the
exchange of the private notes for the exchange notes pursuant to the exchange offer, but does
not purport to be a complete analysis of all potential tax effects relating thereto. The effects of
other U.S. federal tax laws, such as estate and gift tax laws, and any applicable state, local or
foreign tax laws are not discussed. This discussion is based on the U.S. Internal Revenue Code
of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), Treasury Regulations promulgated thereunder, judicial
decisions, and published rulings and administrative pronouncements of the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service (the “IRS”), in each case in effect as of the date hereof. These authorities may
change or be subject to differing interpretations. Any such change or differing interpretation may
be applied retroactively in a manner that could adversely affect a holder of the private notes or
the exchange notes. We have not sought and will not seek any rulings from the IRS regarding the
matters discussed below. There can be no assurance the IRS or a court will not take a contrary
position to that discussed below regarding the tax consequences of the exchange of the private
notes for the exchange notes pursuant to the exchange offer.
This discussion does not address all U.S. federal income tax consequences relevant to a
holder’s particular circumstances. In addition, it does not address consequences relevant to
holders subject to special rules, including, without limitation:
•
U.S. expatriates and former citizens or long-term residents of the United States;
•
persons subject to the alternative minimum tax;
•
•
United States persons (as defined in the Code) whose functional currency is not the U.S.
dollar;
persons holding the private notes or exchange notes as part of a hedge, straddle or other
risk reduction strategy or as part of a conversion transaction or other integrated
investment;
•
banks, insurance companies, and other financial institutions;
•
REITs or regulated investment companies;
•
brokers, dealers or traders in securities;
•
•
“controlled foreign corporations,” “passive foreign investment companies,” and
corporations that accumulate earnings to avoid U.S. federal income tax;
S corporations, partnerships or other entities or arrangements treated as partnerships for
U.S. federal income tax purposes (and investors therein);
•
tax-exempt organizations or governmental organizations; and
•
persons deemed to sell the private notes or exchange notes under the constructive sale
provisions of the Code.
THIS DISCUSSION IS FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY AND IS NOT TAX
ADVICE. INVESTORS SHOULD CONSULT THEIR TAX ADVISORS WITH RESPECT TO
THE APPLICATION OF THE U.S. FEDERAL INCOME TAX LAWS TO THEIR PARTICULAR
SITUATIONS AS WELL AS ANY TAX CONSEQUENCES OF THE EXCHANGE OF THE
PRIVATE NOTES FOR THE EXCHANGE NOTES ARISING UNDER OTHER U.S. FEDERAL
TAX LAWS (INCLUDING ESTATE AND GIFT TAX LAWS), UNDER THE LAWS OF ANY
STATE, LOCAL OR NON-U.S. TAXING JURISDICTION OR UNDER ANY APPLICABLE TAX
TREATY.
Exchange Pursuant to the Exchange Offer
The exchange of private notes for exchange notes pursuant to the exchange offer will not be
treated as an “exchange” for U.S. federal income tax purposes, because the exchange notes will
not be considered to differ materially in kind or extent from the private notes. Accordingly, the
exchange of private notes for exchange notes will not be a taxable event to holders for U.S.
federal income tax purposes. Moreover, the exchange notes will have the same tax attributes as
the private notes exchanged therefor and the same tax consequences to holders as the private
notes have to holders, including without limitation, the same issue price, tax basis and holding
period.
Table of Contents
71
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION
Each broker-dealer that receives exchange notes for its own account pursuant to the exchange
offer must acknowledge that it will deliver a prospectus in connection with any resale of such
exchange notes. This prospectus, as it may be amended or supplemented from time to time, may
be used by a broker-dealer in connection with resales of exchange notes received in exchange
for private notes where such private notes were acquired as a result of market-making activities
or other trading activities. We have agreed that, starting on the expiration date for each exchange
offer and ending on the close of business 180 days after such expiration date, we will make this
prospectus, as amended or supplemented, available to any broker-dealer for use in connection
with any such resale.
We will not receive any proceeds from any sale of the exchange notes by brokers-dealers.
Exchange notes received by broker-dealers for their own account pursuant to the exchange offer
may be sold from time to time in one or more transactions in the over-the-counter market, in
negotiated transactions, through the writing of options on the exchange notes or a combination of
such methods of resale, at market prices prevailing at the time of resale, at prices related to such
prevailing market prices or negotiated prices. Any such resale may be made directly to
purchasers or to or through brokers or dealers who may receive compensation in the form of
commissions or concessions from any such broker-dealer and/or the purchasers of any such
exchange notes. Any broker-dealer that resells exchange notes that were received by it for its
own account pursuant to the exchange offer and any broker or dealer that participates in a
distribution of such exchange notes may be deemed to be an “underwriter” within the meaning of
the Securities Act and any profit of any such resale of exchange notes and any commissions or
concessions received by any such persons may be deemed to be underwriting compensation
under the Securities Act. The letter of transmittal states that by acknowledging that it will deliver
and by delivering a prospectus, a broker-dealer will not be deemed to admit that it is an
“underwriter” within the meaning of the Securities Act.
For such period of time as any broker-dealer subject to the prospectus delivery requirements of
the Securities Act must comply with such requirements, from the date on which the exchange
offer is consummated, we will promptly send additional copies of this prospectus and any
amendment or supplement to this prospectus to any broker-dealer that requests such documents
in the letter of transmittal. We have agreed to pay all expenses incident to the exchange offer
(including the expenses of one counsel for the holder of the securities) other than commissions or
concessions of any brokers or dealers and will indemnify the holders of the securities (including
any broker-dealers) against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act.
Table of Contents
72
LEGAL MATTERS
The validity of the exchange notes and the guarantees thereof will be passed upon for us by
Latham & Watkins LLP, Houston, Texas.
EXPERTS
The consolidated financial statements of Sunoco LP and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2015,
and for the year then ended, and management’s assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015, incorporated by reference in this
prospectus and elsewhere in the registration statement have been so incorporated by reference
in reliance upon the reports of Grant Thornton LLP, independent registered public accountants,
upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The consolidated balance sheet of Sunoco LP at December 31, 2014, and the related
consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income, partners’ equity and cash
flows for the periods from September 1, 2014 through December 31, 2014 and January 1, 2014
through August 31, 2014, and for the year ended December 31, 2013, appearing in Sunoco LP’s
Current Report on Form 8-K dated July 15, 2016, have been audited by Ernst & Young LLP,
independent registered public accounting firm, as set forth in their report thereon, included
therein, and incorporated herein by reference which, as to December 31, 2014 and for the period
from September 1, 2014 through December 31, 2014, are based in part on the report of Grant
Thornton LLP, independent registered public accounting firm. Such consolidated financial
statements are incorporated herein by reference in reliance upon such reports given on the
authority of such firms as experts in accounting and auditing.
The report of Grant Thornton LLP, independent registered public accountants, with respect to the
combined financial statements of the Sunoco Retail Businesses as of December 31, 2014 and
for the period from September 1, 2014 through December 31, 2014, is incorporated herein by
reference in reliance upon such firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The consolidated financial statements of Mid-Atlantic Convenience Stores, LLC (successor) and
subsidiaries and MACS Holdings, LLC (predecessor) and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2013
(successor) and for the period from October 3, 2013 to December 31, 2013 (successor) and the
period from January 1, 2013 to October 2, 2013 (predecessor), incorporated by reference in this
prospectus and elsewhere in the registration statement have been so incorporated by reference
in reliance upon the report of Grant Thornton LLP, independent certified public accountants, upon
the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The consolidated and combined financial statements of Sunoco, LLC as of December 31, 2014
and 2013 and for the years then ended, incorporated by reference in this prospectus and
elsewhere in the registration statement have been so incorporated by reference in reliance upon
the report of Grant Thornton LLP, independent certified public accountants, upon the authority of
said firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The consolidated financial statements of Susser Holdings Corporation as of December 29, 2013
and December 31, 2014, and for the periods from September 1, 2014 through December 31,
2014 and December 30, 2013 through August 31, 2014, and for the years ended December 29,
2013 and December 30, 2012, appearing in Sunoco LP’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated July
15, 2015, have been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, independent auditors, as set forth in their
report thereon, included therein, and incorporated herein by reference. Such consolidated
financial statements are incorporated herein by reference in reliance upon such report given on
the authority of such firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
The combined financial statements of the Sunoco Retail Businesses as of December 31, 2015
and 2014 and for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2015, incorporated
by reference in this prospectus and elsewhere in the registration statement have been so
incorporated by reference in reliance upon the report of Grant Thornton LLP, independent
certified public accountants, upon the authority of said firm as experts in accounting and auditing.
Table of Contents
73
ANNEX A:
LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
TO TENDER
5.500% SENIOR NOTES DUE 2020 (CUSIP NOS. 86765L AB3 and U86795 AB0)
OF
SUNOCO LP AND
SUNOCO FINANCE CORP.
PURSUANT TO THE EXCHANGE OFFER AND PROSPECTUS
DATED                     , 2016
THE EXCHANGE OFFER AND WITHDRAWAL RIGHTS WILL EXPIRE AT 5:00 P.M.,
NEW YORK CITY TIME, ON                     , 2016 (THE “EXPIRATION DATE”),
UNLESS THE EXCHANGE OFFER IS EXTENDED BY THE ISSUERS.
The Exchange Agent for the Exchange Offer is:
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
By First Class Mail:
By Courier or Overnight Delivery:
U.S. Bank National Association
U.S. Bank National Association
Attn: Specialized Finance
Attn: Specialized Finance
111 Fillmore Avenue
111 Fillmore Avenue
St. Paul, MN 55107-1402
St. Paul, MN 55107-1402
Phone: (713)-235-9206
Phone: (713)-235-9206
For Facsimile Transmission (eligible institutions only):
(651) 495-8158
Attn: Specialized Finance
Confirm via email:
escrowexchangepayments@usbank.com
If you wish to exchange your issued and outstanding (i) 5.500% Senior Notes due 2020 (CUSIP
Nos. 86765L AB3 and/or U86795 AB0) (the “Private Notes”), for an equal aggregate principal
amount of newly issued (ii) 5.500% Senior Notes due 2020 (CUSIP No. 86765L AC1) (the
“Exchange Notes”), with materially identical terms that have been registered under the
Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), pursuant to the exchange offer, you
must validly tender (and not withdraw) your Private Notes to the Exchange Agent prior to the
Expiration Date.
We refer you to the Prospectus, dated                     , 2016 (the “Prospectus”), of Sunoco LP (the
“Partnership”) and Sunoco Finance Corp. (“Finance Corp.” and, together with the Partnership,
the “Issuers”) and this Letter of Transmittal (the “Letter of Transmittal”), which together describe
the Issuers’ offer (the “Exchange Offer”) to exchange the Private Notes for a like aggregate
principal amount of Exchange Notes. Capitalized terms used but not defined herein have the
respective meaning given to them in the Prospectus.
The Issuers reserve the right, at any time or from time to time, to extend the Exchange Offer at
their discretion, in which event the term “Expiration Date” shall mean the latest date to which the
Exchange Offer is extended. The Issuers shall notify the Exchange Agent and each registered
holder of the Private Notes of any extension by oral (promptly followed in writing) or written notice
prior to 9:00 a.m., New York City time, on the next business day after the previously scheduled
Expiration Date.
Table of Contents
A-1
This Letter of Transmittal is to be used by holders of the Private Notes. Tender of Private Notes is
to be made according to the Automated Tender Offer Program (“ATOP”) of The Depository Trust
Company (“DTC”) pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Prospectus under the caption
“Exchange Offer—Procedures for Tendering.” DTC participants that are accepting the Exchange
Offer must transmit their acceptance to DTC, which will verify the acceptance and execute a
book-entry delivery to the Exchange Agent’s DTC account. DTC will then send a computer
generated message known as an “agent’s message” to the Exchange Agent for its acceptance.
For you to validly tender your Private Notes in the Exchange Offer, the Exchange Agent must
receive, prior to the Expiration Date, an agent’s message under the ATOP procedures that
confirms that:
•  DTC has received your instructions to tender your Private Notes; and
•  you agree to be bound by the terms of this Letter of Transmittal.
IMPORTANT: BY USING THE ATOP PROCEDURES TO TENDER PRIVATE NOTES, YOU
WILL NOT BE REQUIRED TO DELIVER THIS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL TO THE
EXCHANGE AGENT. HOWEVER, YOU WILL BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS, AND YOU WILL
BE DEEMED TO HAVE MADE THE ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND THE
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES IT CONTAINS, JUST AS IF YOU HAD SIGNED
IT.
Table of Contents
A-2
PLEASE READ THE ACCOMPANYING INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
1. By tendering Private Notes in the Exchange Offer, you acknowledge receipt of the
Prospectus and this Letter of Transmittal.
2. By tendering Private Notes in the Exchange Offer, you represent and warrant that you have
full authority to tender the Private Notes described above and will, upon request, execute and
deliver any additional documents deemed by the Issuers to be necessary or desirable to
complete the tender of your Private Notes.
3. You understand that the tender of the Private Notes pursuant to all of the procedures set forth
in the Prospectus will constitute an agreement between you and the Issuers as to the terms
and conditions set forth in the Prospectus.
4. By tendering Private Notes in the Exchange Offer, you acknowledge that the Exchange Offer
is being made in reliance upon interpretations contained in no-action letters issued to third
parties by the staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), including Exxon
Capital Holdings Corp., SEC No-Action Letter (April 13, 1989), Morgan Stanley & Co., Inc.,
SEC No-Action Letter (June 5, 1991) and Shearman & Sterling, SEC No-Action Letter (July
2, 1993), and that the Exchange Notes issued in exchange for the Private Notes pursuant to
the Exchange Offer may be offered for resale, resold or otherwise transferred by holders
thereof without compliance with the registration and prospectus delivery provisions of the
Securities Act (other than a broker-dealer who purchased Private Notes directly from the
Issuers to resell pursuant to Rule 144A or any other available exemption under the Securities
Act, and any such holder that is an “affiliate” of the Issuers within the meaning of Rule 405
under the Securities Act), provided that such Exchange Notes are acquired in the ordinary
course of such holders’ business and such holders are not participating in, and have no
arrangement with any other person to participate in, the distribution of such Exchange Notes.
5. By tendering Private Notes in the Exchange Offer, you represent and warrant that:
(a) the Exchange Notes acquired pursuant to the Exchange Offer are being obtained in the
ordinary course of your business, whether or not you are the holder;
(b) you are not engaging, do not intend to engage and have no arrangement or
understanding with any person to participate, in the distribution of Private Notes or
Exchange Notes within the meaning of the Securities Act;
(c) you are not an “affiliate,” as such term is defined under Rule 405 promulgated under the
Securities Act, of the Issuers;
(d) if you are a broker-dealer, that you will receive the Exchange Notes for your own account
in exchange for Private Notes that were acquired as a result of market-making activities
or other trading activities and that you acknowledge that you will deliver a prospectus (or,
to the extent permitted by law, make available a prospectus) in connection with any
resale of such Exchange Notes and that you cannot rely on the position of the staff of the
SEC set forth in certain no-action letters; and
(e) you understand that a secondary resale transaction described in clause 5(d) above and
any resales of the Exchange Notes obtained in exchange for the Private Notes originally
acquired from the Issuers should be covered by an effective registration statement
containing the selling noteholder information required by Item 507 or Item 508, as
applicable, of Regulation S-K.
You may, if you are unable to make all of the representations and warranties contained in Item 5
above and as otherwise permitted in the Registration Rights Agreement (as defined below), elect
to have your Private Notes registered in the shelf registration statement described in the
Registration Rights Agreement, dated July 20, 2015 (the “Registration Rights Agreement”).
Such election may be made by notifying the Issuers in writing at 8020 Park Lane, Suite 200,
Dallas, Texas 75231, Attention: Chief Financial Officer. By making such election, you
Table of Contents
A-3
agree, as a holder of Private Notes participating in a shelf registration, to indemnify and hold
harmless the Issuers, each of the directors of the Issuers, each of the officers of the Issuers who
signs such shelf registration statement, each other selling holder of Private Notes, and each
person, if any, who controls the Issuers, the initial purchasers of the Private Notes, as applicable,
and any other selling holder of Private Notes within the meaning of either the Securities Act or
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), from and against any
and all losses, claims, damages or liabilities that arise out of, or are based upon, (1) any untrue
statement or alleged untrue statement of a material fact contained in any shelf registration
statement or any omission or alleged omission to state therein a material fact required to be
stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in the light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not misleading, or (2) any untrue statement or
alleged untrue statement of a material fact contained in any prospectus or any free writing
prospectus, or any “issuer information” filed or required to be filed pursuant to Rule 433(d) under
the Securities Act (“issuer information”), or any omission or alleged omission to state therein a
material fact required to be stated therein or necessary in order to make the statements therein, in
the light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading, in each case made in
reliance upon and in conformity with any information relating to you furnished to the Issuers in
writing by you expressly for use in any shelf registration statement, any prospectus, any free
writing prospectus and any issuer information. Any such indemnification shall be governed by the
terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement, including,
without limitation, the provisions regarding notice, retention of counsel, contribution and payment
of expenses set forth therein. The above summary of the indemnification provision of the
Registration Rights Agreement is not intended to be exhaustive and is qualified in its entirety by
the Registration Rights Agreement.
6.
7.
If you are a broker-dealer that will receive Exchange Notes for your own account in exchange
for Private Notes that were acquired as a result of market-making activities or other trading
activities, you acknowledge by tendering Private Notes in the Exchange Offer, that you will
deliver a prospectus meeting the requirements of the Securities Act in connection with any
resale of such Exchange Notes; however, by so acknowledging and by delivering a
prospectus, you will not be deemed to admit that you are an “underwriter” within the meaning
of the Securities Act.
If you are a broker-dealer and Private Notes held for your own account were not acquired as
a result of market-making or other trading activities, such Private Notes cannot be exchanged
pursuant to the Exchange Offer.
8. Any of your obligations hereunder shall be binding upon your successors, assigns,
executors, administrators, trustees in bankruptcy and legal and personal representatives.
Table of Contents
A-4
INSTRUCTIONS FORMING PART OF THE
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE EXCHANGE OFFER
1. Book-Entry Confirmations.
Any confirmation of a book-entry transfer to the Exchange Agent’s account at DTC of Private
Notes tendered by book-entry transfer (a “Book-Entry Confirmation”), as well as Agent’s
Message and any other documents required by this Letter of Transmittal, must be received by the
Exchange Agent at its address set forth herein prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the
Expiration Date.
2. Partial Tenders.
Tenders of the Private Notes will be accepted only in minimum denominations of $2,000 and
integral multiples of $1,000 in excess thereof. The entire principal amount of Private Notes
delivered to the Exchange Agent will be deemed to have been tendered unless otherwise
communicated to the Exchange Agent. If the entire principal amount of all Private Notes is not
tendered, then Private Notes for the principal amount of Private Notes not tendered and
Exchange Notes issued in exchange for any Private Notes accepted will be delivered to the
holder via the facilities of DTC promptly after the Private Notes are accepted for exchange.
3. Validity of Tenders.
All questions as to the validity, form, eligibility (including time of receipt), acceptance, and
withdrawal of tendered Private Notes will be determined by the Issuers, in their sole discretion,
which determination will be final and binding. The Issuers reserve the absolute right to reject any
or all tenders not in proper form or the acceptance for exchange of which may, in the opinion of
counsel for the Issuers, be unlawful. The Issuers also reserve the absolute right to waive any of
the conditions of the Exchange Offer or any defect or irregularity in the tender of any Private
Notes. The Issuers’ interpretation of the terms and conditions of the Exchange Offer (including
the instructions on the Letter of Transmittal) will be final and binding on all parties. Unless
waived, any defects or irregularities in connection with tenders of Private Notes must be cured
within such time as the Issuers shall determine. Although the Issuers intend to notify holders of
defects or irregularities with respect to tenders of Private Notes, neither the Issuers, the
Exchange Agent, nor any other person shall be under any duty to give notification of any defects
or irregularities in tenders or incur any liability for failure to give such notification. Tenders of
Private Notes will not be deemed to have been made until such defects or irregularities have
been cured or waived. Any Private Notes received by the Exchange Agent that are not properly
tendered and as to which the defects or irregularities have not been cured or waived will be
returned by the Exchange Agent to the tendering holders, unless otherwise provided in the Letter
of Transmittal, promptly following the Expiration Date.
4. Waiver of Conditions.
The Issuers reserve the absolute right to waive, in whole or part, up to the expiration of the
Exchange Offer, any of the conditions to the Exchange Offer set forth in the Prospectus or in this
Letter of Transmittal.
5. No Conditional Tender.
No alternative, conditional, irregular or contingent tender of Private Notes will be accepted.
6. Request for Assistance or Additional Copies.
Requests for assistance or for additional copies of the Prospectus or this Letter of Transmittal
may be directed to the Exchange Agent at the address or telephone number set forth on the cover
page of this Letter of Transmittal. Holders may also contact their broker, dealer, commercial bank,
trust company or other nominee for assistance concerning the Exchange Offer.
Table of Contents
7. Withdrawal.
A-5
Tenders may be withdrawn only pursuant to the limited withdrawal rights set forth in the
Prospectus under the caption “Exchange Offer—Withdrawal of Tenders.”
8. No Guarantee of Late Delivery.
There is no procedure for guarantee of late delivery in the Exchange Offer.
IMPORTANT: BY USING THE ABOVE PROCEDURES TO TENDER PRIVATE NOTES, YOU
WILL NOT BE REQUIRED TO DELIVER THIS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL TO THE
EXCHANGE AGENT. HOWEVER, YOU WILL BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS, AND YOU WILL
BE DEEMED TO HAVE MADE THE ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND THE
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES IT CONTAINS, JUST AS IF YOU HAD SIGNED
IT.
A-6
Table of Contents
SUNOCO LP
SUNOCO FINANCE CORP.
OFFER TO EXCHANGE
$600,000,000 of 5.500% Senior Notes due 2020 and Related Guarantees
That Have Not Been Registered Under the Securities Act of 1933
For
$600,000,000 of 5.500% Senior Notes due 2020 and Related Guarantees
That Have Been Registered Under the Securities Act of 1933
, 2016
Table of Contents
PART II
INFORMATION NOT REQUIRED IN PROSPECTUS
Item 20. Indemnification of Directors and Officers.
Sunoco LP
Under our partnership agreement, in most circumstances, we will indemnify the following
persons, to the fullest extent permitted by law, from and against all losses, claims, damages or
similar events:
•
our general partner;
•
any departing general partner;
•
•
any person who is or was an affiliate of a general partner or any departing general
partner;
any person who is or was a manager, managing member, general partner, director,
officer, employee, agent, fiduciary or trustee of our partnership, our subsidiaries, our
general partner, any departing general partner or any of their affiliates;
•
any person who is or was serving at the request of our general partner, any departing
general partner or any of their affiliates as an officer, director, manager, managing
member, general partner, employee, agent, fiduciary or trustee of another person owing a
fiduciary duty to us or our subsidiaries;
•
any person who controls our general partner or any departing general partner; and
•
any person designated by our general partner.
Any indemnification under these provisions will only be out of our assets. We also have
indemnification agreements with certain of our directors. Pursuant to such indemnification
agreements, we have agreed to indemnify them against certain liabilities. Unless it otherwise
agrees, our general partner will not be personally liable for, or have any obligation to contribute
or loan funds or assets to us to enable us to effectuate, indemnification. We may purchase
insurance against liabilities asserted against and expenses incurred by persons for our activities,
regardless of whether we would have the power to indemnify the person against liabilities under
our partnership agreement. Subject to any terms, conditions or restrictions set forth in our
partnership agreement, Section 17-108 of the Delaware Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act
empowers a Delaware limited partnership to indemnify and hold harmless any partner or other
persons from and against all claims and demands whatsoever.
Sunoco Finance Corp.
Sunoco Finance Corp. (“Sunoco Finance”) is a Delaware corporation. Section 145(a) of the
General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (the “DGCL”) provides that a corporation may
indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any
threatened, pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal,
administrative or investigative (other than an action by or in the right of the corporation) by reason
of the fact that the person is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation, or is
or was serving at the request of the corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of
another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise, against expenses
(including attorneys’ fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and
reasonably incurred by the person in connection with such action, suit or proceeding if the person
acted in good faith and in a manner the person reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to
the best interests of the corporation, and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had
no reasonable cause to believe the person’s conduct was unlawful. Section 145(b) of the DGCL
provides that a corporation may indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be
made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action or suit by or in the right of the
corporation to procure a judgment in its favor by reason of the fact that the person is or was a
director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation, or is or was serving at the request of the
corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of another corporation, partnership, joint
venture, trust or other enterprise against expenses (including
II-1
Table of Contents
attorneys’ fees) actually and reasonably incurred by the person in connection with the defense or
settlement of such action or suit if the person acted in good faith and in a manner the person
reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the corporation and except
that no indemnification will be made in respect of any claim, issue or matter as to which such
person has been adjudged to be liable to the corporation unless and only to the extent that the
Court of Chancery or the court in which such action or suit was brought determines upon
application that, despite the adjudication of liability but in view of all the circumstances of the
case, such person is fairly and reasonably entitled to indemnity for such expenses which the
Court of Chancery or such other court deems proper. To the extent that a present or former
director or officer of a corporation has been successful on the merits or otherwise in defense of
any action, suit or proceeding referred to in subsections (a) and (b) of Section 145 of the DGCL,
or in defense of any claim, issue or matter therein, such person will be indemnified against
expenses (including attorneys’ fees) actually and reasonably incurred by such person in
connection therewith.
Any indemnification under subsections (a) and (b) of Section 145 of the DGCL (unless ordered
by a court) will be made by the corporation only as authorized in the specific case upon a
determination that indemnification of the present or former director, officer, employee or agent is
proper in the circumstances because the person has met the applicable standard of conduct set
forth in subsections (a) and (b) of Section 145. Such determination will be made, with respect to a
person who is a director or officer at the time of such determination, (1) by a majority vote of the
directors who are not parties to such action, suit or proceeding, even though less than a quorum,
or (2) by a committee of such directors designated by majority vote of such directors, even though
less than a quorum, or (3) if there are no such directors, or if such directors so direct, by
independent legal counsel in a written opinion, or (4) by the stockholders. Expenses (including
attorneys’ fees) incurred by an officer or director in defending any civil, criminal, administrative or
investigative action, suit or proceeding may be paid by the corporation in advance of the final
disposition of such action, suit or proceeding upon receipt of an undertaking by or on behalf of
such director or officer to repay such amount if it is ultimately determined that such person is not
entitled to be indemnified by the corporation as authorized in this section. Such expenses
(including attorneys’ fees) incurred by former directors and officers or other employees and
agents may be so paid upon such terms and conditions, if any, as the corporation deems
appropriate. The indemnification and advancement of expenses provided by, or granted pursuant
to, Section 145 will not be deemed exclusive of any other rights to which those seeking
indemnification or advancement of expenses may be entitled under any bylaw, agreement, vote
of stockholders or disinterested directors or otherwise, both as to action in such person’s official
capacity and as to action in another capacity while holding such office.
Section 145 of the DGCL also empowers a corporation to purchase and maintain insurance on
behalf of any person who is or was a director, officer, employee or agent of the corporation, or is
or was serving at the request of the corporation as a director, officer, employee or agent of
another corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust or other enterprise against any liability
asserted against such person and incurred by such person in any such capacity, or arising out of
such person’s status as such, whether or not the corporation would have the power to indemnify
such person against such liability under Section 145.
Sunoco Finance’s certificate of incorporation and bylaws provide that current and former
directors and officers, or directors and officers serving at the request of Sunoco Finance in
additional capacities, will be indemnified to the fullest extent permitted under the DGCL. Sunoco
Finance may also indemnify any employee or agent to the fullest extent permitted by the DGCL.
Subsidiary Guarantors
Delaware
Susser Holdings Corporation (“Susser Holdings”) is a Delaware corporation. The indemnification
provisions of the DGCL described in “Sunoco Finance Corp.” above also relate to the directors
and officers of Susser Holdings. The certificate of incorporation and bylaws of Susser Holdings
provide generally that each person who was or is made a party or is threatened to be made a
party to or is involved in any action, suit or
Table of Contents
II-2
proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative, by reason of the fact that such
person is the legal representative of, is or was or has agreed to be become a director or officer of
Susser Holdings or otherwise is or was serving or has agreed to serve as a director, officer,
employee or agent will be indemnified and held harmless to the fullest extent of the DGCL.
Each of Aloha Petroleum LLC, Mid-Atlantic Convenience Stores, LLC, Sunoco, LLC, Stripes
Holdings LLC, Stripes LLC, Susser Holdings L.L.C., Susser Petroleum Operating Company LLC
and Susser Petroleum Property Company LLC is a Delaware limited liability company (each, a
“Delaware LLC”). Section 18-108 of the Delaware Limited Liability Company Act provides that a
limited liability company may, subject to such standards and restrictions, if any, as are set forth in
its limited liability company agreement, and has the power to, indemnify and hold harmless any
member or manager or other person from and against any and all claims and demands
whatsoever. The limited liability company agreement of each Delaware LLC contains
indemnification provisions that generally provide that such Delaware LLC will indemnify any
person against any losses, damages, claims or liabilities to which they may become subject or
which the Delaware LLC may incur as a result of being or having been a member, director or
officer of the Delaware LLC or an officer, director, stockholder, manager, member or partner of the
Delaware LLC’s member, or while serving in a similar capacity at the request of the Delaware
LLC, and may advance to them or reimburse them for expenses incurred in connection therewith.
Hawaii
Aloha Petroleum, Ltd. (“APL”) is a Hawaii corporation. Section 414-242 of the Hawaii Business
Corporation Act (the “HBCA”) provides that a corporation may indemnify an individual who is a
party to a proceeding because the individual is a director against liability incurred in the
proceeding if:
•
the individual conducted himself or herself in good faith and the individual reasonably
•
•
believed (i) in the case of conduct in the individual’s official capacity, that the individual’s
conduct was in the best interests of the corporation, and (ii) in all other cases, that the
individual’s conduct was at least not opposed to the best interests of the corporation;
in the case of any criminal proceeding, the individual had no reasonable cause to believe
the individual’s conduct was unlawful; or
the individual engaged in conduct for which broader indemnification has been made
permissible or obligatory under a provision of the articles of incorporation.
To the extent that a director is wholly successful in the defense of any proceeding to which the
director was a party because the director was a director of the corporation, the corporation is
required by Section 414-243 of the HBCA to indemnify such director for reasonable expenses
incurred thereby.
Under Section 414-244 of the HBCA, a corporation, before final disposition of a proceeding, may
advance funds to pay for or reimburse the reasonable expenses incurred by a director who is a
party to a proceeding because the director is a director of the corporation if the director delivers
certain written affirmations and certain undertakings. Under certain circumstances, under Section
414-245 of the HBCA a director may apply for and obtain indemnification or an advance for
expenses to the court conducting the proceeding or to another court of competent jurisdiction.
Further, under Section 414-246 of the HBCA, indemnification may be made only as authorized in
a specific case upon a determination that indemnification is proper in the circumstances because
a director has met the applicable standard, with such determination to be made:
•
by the board of directors by a majority vote of a quorum consisting of directors who were
not parties to the proceeding or who do not have a familial, financial, professional or
employment relationship with the director whose indemnification is the subject of the
decision being made, which relationship would reasonably be expected to influence the
director’s judgment when voting on the decision being made;
II-3
Table of Contents
•
by special legal counsel; or
•
by a majority vote of the shareholders.
Under Section 414-247 of the HBCA, a corporation may indemnify and advance expenses to an
officer who is a party to a proceeding because the officer is an officer of the corporation:
•
to the same extent as a director; and
•
if the person is an officer but not a director, to such further extent as may be provided by
the articles of incorporation, the bylaws, a resolution of the board of directors, or contract
except for liability in connection with a proceeding by or in the right of the corporation
other than for reasonable expenses incurred in connection with the proceeding, or liability
arising out of conduct that constitutes (i) receipt by the officer of a financial benefit to
which the officer is not entitled, (ii) an intentional infliction of harm on the corporation or
the shareholders or (iii) an intentional violation of criminal law.
The above-described provision applies to an officer who is also a director if the basis on which
the officer is made a party to the proceeding is an act or omission solely as an officer. Further, an
officer of a corporation who is not a director is entitled to mandatory indemnification under
Section 414-243 of the HBCA and may apply to a court under Section 414-245 of the HBCA for
indemnification or an advance for expenses, in each case to the same extent to which a director
may be entitled to indemnification or advance for expenses.
The HBCA also provides that a corporation may include indemnification provisions in its articles
of incorporation that are broader than the foregoing provisions, except as limited by Section 414-
32 of the HBCA
APL’s articles of incorporation and bylaws provide that current and former directors and officers,
or directors and officers serving at the request of APL in additional capacities, will be indemnified
to the fullest extent permitted under the HBCA. APL may also indemnify any employee or agent
to the fullest extent permitted by the HBCA.
Texas
Each of Sunoco Energy Services LLC (“SES”) and Stripes LLC (each a “Texas Guarantor”) is a
Texas limited liability company. Sections 8.101 and 8.102 of the Texas Business Organizations
Code (“TBOC”) provide that any governing person, former governing person or delegate of a
Texas enterprise may be indemnified against judgments and reasonable expenses actually
incurred by the person in connection with a proceeding, in which he was, is, or is threatened to
be made a respondent if: (i) he acted in good faith, (ii) he reasonably believed (a) in the case of
conduct in the person’s official capacity, that the person’s conduct was in the enterprise’s best
interests or (b) in any other case, that the person’s conduct was not opposed to the enterprise’s
best interests, and (iii) in the case of a criminal proceeding, he did not have reasonable cause to
believe that his conduct was unlawful. In connection with any proceeding in which the person is
(x) found liable because the person improperly received a personal benefit or (y) found liable to
the enterprise, indemnification is limited to reasonable expenses actually incurred by the person
in connection with the proceeding and will not include a judgment, penalty, fine, or an excise or
similar tax. Indemnification may not be made in relation to a proceeding in which the person has
been found liable for willful or intentional misconduct in the performance of the person’s duty to
the enterprise, breach of the person’s duty of loyalty owed to the enterprise or an act or omission
not committed in good faith that constitutes a breach of a duty owed by the person to the
enterprise. To limit indemnification, liability must be established by an order and all appeals of
the order must be exhausted or foreclosed by law.
Under Section 8.051 of the TBOC, a limited liability company will indemnify a director or officer
against reasonable expenses incurred by such director or officer, in connection with a
proceeding in which such director or officer is named defendant or respondent because they are
or were a director or officer, if they have been wholly successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the
defense of the proceeding. In addition, such indemnification may be ordered in a proper case by
a court of law under Section 8.052 of the TBOC.
Table of Contents
II-4
The limited liability company agreement of each Texas Guarantor generally provides that each
Texas Guarantor will indemnify its present and former directors, officers, employees or agents, or
any person who, while serving in such capacity, serves as a director, officer, partner, venturer,
proprietor, trustee, employee, agent or similar functionary of another corporation, partnership,
joint venture or similar entity at the request of the Texas Guarantor. Indemnitees are entitled to
advancement of expenses and indemnification to the fullest extent permitted by the TBOC.
Virginia
Each of MACS Retail LLC and Southside Oil, LLC (each a “Virginia LLC Guarantor”) is a Virginia
limited liability company. Section 13.1-1009.16 of the Virginia Limited Liability Company Act (the
“VLLCA”) provides that the articles of organization or operating agreement of a limited liability
company may indemnify and hold harmless any member or manager or other person from and
against any and all claims and demands whatsoever, and to pay for or reimburse any member or
manager or other person for reasonable expenses incurred by such a person who is a party to a
proceeding in advance of final disposition of the proceeding. Section 13.1-1025 of the VLLCA
provides for a limitation on the amount of damages that can be assessed against a member of
manager to the lesser of (i) the monetary amount, including the elimination of liability, provided
for in the articles of organization or operating agreement or (ii) the greater of $100,000 or the
amount of certain cash compensation specified under the VLLCA provided to the member or
manager by the limited liability company in the twelve months immediately preceding the act or
omission for which liability was imposed. However, under the VLLCA, the liability of a manager
or member will not be limited if the manager or member engaged in willful misconduct or a
knowing violation of criminal law.
The limited liability company agreement of each Virginia LLC Guarantor generally provides that
each Virginia LLC Guarantor, as applicable, will indemnify its present and former directors,
officers, employees or agents, or any person who, while serving in such capacity, serves as a
director, officer, partner, venturer, proprietor, trustee, employee, agent or similar functionary of
another corporation, partnership, joint venture or similar entity at the request of the Virginia LLC
Guarantor. Indemnitees are entitled to advancement of expenses and indemnification to the
fullest extent permitted by the VLLCA.
Pennsylvania
Sunoco Retail LLC (“SUN Retail”) is a Pennsylvania limited liability company. Section 8945 of
the Pennsylvania Limited Liability Company Law of 1994 (the “PLLCL”) provides that, subject to
standards and limitations set forth in the operating agreement, a limited liability company may
and shall have the power to indemnify and hold harmless any member or manager or other
person from and against any and all claims and demands whatsoever, and to pay for or
reimburse any member or manager or other person in defending any action or proceeding
against which indemnification may be made in advance of final disposition of the proceeding.
Section 8945(b) of the PLLCL prohibits indemnification in cases where the act giving rise to the
claim for indemnification is determined by a court to have constituted willful misconduct or
recklessness, and the certificate of organization or operating agreement may not provide for
indemnification in the case of willful misconduct or recklessness.
The operating agreement of SUN Retail generally provides that SUN Retail will indemnify its
sole member, managers, officers or authorized representatives (the “Covered Persons”) to the
fullest extent permitted law against any loss, liability, damage, judgment, demand, claim, cost or
expense incurred by or asserted against the Covered Person (including without limitation,
reasonable attorneys’ fees and disbursements incurred in the defense thereof) arising out of any
act or omission of the Covered Person in connection with SUN Retail, unless such act or
omission constitutes bad faith, gross negligence or willful misconduct on the part of the Covered
Person.
Table of Contents
Item 21. Exhibits.
II-5
(a) See the Exhibit Index on the page immediately preceding the exhibits for a list of exhibits
filed as part of this registration statement on Form S-4, which Exhibit Index is incorporated
herein by reference.
(b) Not applicable.
(c) Not applicable.
Item 22. Undertakings.
Each registrant hereby undertakes:
(a)(1) To file, during any period in which offers or sales are being made, a post-effective
amendment to this registration statement:
(i) to include any prospectus required by section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act of 1933;
(ii) to reflect in the prospectus any facts or events arising after the effective date of the registration
statement (or the most recent post-effective amendment thereof) which, individually or in the
aggregate, represent a fundamental change in the information set forth in the registration
statement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase or decrease in volume of securities
offered (if the total dollar value of securities offered would not exceed that which was registered)
and any deviation from the low or high end of the estimated maximum offering range may be
reflected in the form of prospectus filed with the Commission pursuant to Rule 424(b) if, in the
aggregate, the changes in volume and price represent no more than 20% change in the
maximum aggregate offering price set forth in the “Calculation of Registration Fee” table in the
effective registration statement; and
(iii) to include any material information with respect to the plan of distribution not previously
disclosed in the registration statement or any material change to such information in the
registration statement.
(2) That, for the purpose of determining any liability under the Securities Act of 1933, each such
post-effective amendment shall be deemed to be a new registration statement relating to the
securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities at that time shall be deemed to be
the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(3) To remove from registration by means of a post-effective amendment any of the securities
being registered which remain unsold at the termination of the offering.
(4) That, for the purpose of determining liability under the Securities Act of 1933 to any purchaser,
if such registrant is subject to Rule 430C, each prospectus filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) as part of
a registration statement relating to an offering, other than registration statements relying on Rule
430B or other than prospectuses filed in reliance on Rule 430A, shall be deemed to be part of
and included in the registration statement as of the date it is first used after effectiveness.
Provided, however, that no statement made in a registration statement or prospectus that is part
of the registration statement or made in a document incorporated or deemed incorporated by
reference into the registration statement or prospectus that is part of the registration statement
will, as to a purchaser with a time of contract of sale prior to such first use, supersede or modify
any statement that was made in the registration statement or prospectus that was part of the
registration statement or made in any such document immediately prior to such date of first use.
(5) That, for the purpose of determining liability of such registrant under the Securities Act of 1933
to any purchaser in the initial distribution of the securities, in a primary offering of securities of
such registrant pursuant to this registration statement, regardless of the underwriting method
used to sell the securities to the purchaser, if the securities are offered or sold to such purchaser
by means of any of the following communications, the undersigned registrant will be a seller to
the purchaser and will be considered to offer or sell such securities to such purchaser:
(i) any preliminary prospectus or prospectus of the undersigned registrants relating to the offering
required to be filed pursuant to Rule 424;
Table of Contents
II-6
(ii) any free writing prospectus relating to the offering prepared by or on behalf of such registrant
or used or referred to by the undersigned registrants;
(iii) the portion of any other free writing prospectus relating to the offering containing material
information about the undersigned registrants or their securities provided by or on behalf of such
registrant; and
(iv) any other communication that is an offer in the offering made by such registrant to the
purchaser.
(b) Each registrant hereby undertakes that, for purposes of determining any liability under the
Securities Act of 1933, each filing of the registrant’s annual report pursuant to Section 13(a) or
15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (and, where applicable, each filing of an employee
benefit plan’s annual report pursuant to Section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934)
that is incorporated by reference in the registration statement shall be deemed to be a new
registration statement relating to the securities offered therein, and the offering of such securities
at that time shall be deemed to be the initial bona fide offering thereof.
(c) Each registrant hereby undertakes to respond to requests for information that is incorporated
by reference into the prospectus pursuant to Items 4, 10(b), 11, or 13 of this form, within one
business day of receipt of such request, and to send the incorporated documents by first class
mail or other equally prompt means. This includes information contained in documents filed
subsequent to the effective date of the registration statement through the date of responding to
the request.
(d) Each registrant hereby undertakes to supply by means of a post-effective amendment all
information concerning a transaction, and the company being acquired involved therein, that was
not the subject of and included in the registration statement when it became effective.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act of 1933 may be permitted
to directors, officers and controlling persons of each registrant pursuant to the foregoing
provisions, or otherwise, each registrant has been advised that in the opinion of the Securities
and Exchange Commission such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Act
and is, therefore, unenforceable. In the event that a claim for indemnification against such
liabilities (other than the payment by the registrant of expenses incurred or paid by a director,
officer or controlling person of the registrant in the successful defense of any action, suit or
proceeding) is asserted by such director, officer or controlling person in connection with the
securities being registered, the registrant will, unless in the opinion of its counsel the matter has
been settled by controlling precedent, submit to a court of appropriate jurisdiction the question
whether such indemnification by it is against public policy as expressed in the Act and will be
governed by the final adjudication of such issue.
Table of Contents
II-7
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the Registrant has duly caused this
Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized,
in the City of Dallas, State of Texas, on August 16, 2016.
SUNOCO LP
By:        
Sunoco GP LLC, its general
 
partner
By:
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
 Name: Thomas R. Miller
 Title: Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been
signed by the following persons in the capacities indicated, which are with Sunoco GP LLC, the
general partner of Sunoco LP, on the dates indicated:
Signature
Title
*
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
Robert W. Owens
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial
Officer)
*
Leta McKinley
Vice President, Controller and Principal
Accounting
Officer
*
Chairman of the Board
Matthew S. Ramsey
*
Director
James W. Bryant
Date
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
Date
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
II-8
Table of Contents
Signature
Title
*
Director
Christopher R. Curia
*
Director
Thomas E. Long
*
Director
W. Brett Smith
*
Director
K. Rick Turner
* By:
/s/  Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
Attorney-in-Fact
Table of Contents
II-9
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the Registrant has duly caused this
Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized,
in the City of Dallas, State of Texas, on August 16, 2016.
SUNOCO FINANCE CORP.
By:         /s/ Thomas R. Miller
Name: Thomas R. Miller
 Title: Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Registration Statement has been
signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the date indicated:
* By:
Signature
Title
*
Robert W. Owens
President, Chief Executive Officer and
Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial
Thomas R. Miller
Officer)
/s/ Leta McKinley
Leta McKinley
Vice President and Controller (Principal
Accounting Officer)
Date
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
Attorney-in-Fact
Table of Contents
II-10
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the Registrant has duly caused this
Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized,
in the City of Dallas, State of Texas, on August 16, 2016.
SUSSER PETROLEUM
OPERATING COMPANY LLC
By:       /s/ Thomas R. Miller
Name: Thomas R. Miller
 Title: Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Registration Statement has been
signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the date indicated:
Signature
Title
*
President and Chief Executive Officer
Date
August 16, 2016
*
Robert W. Owens
*
Robert W. Owens
President and Chief Executive Officer
(Principal
Executive Officer)
President and Chief Executive Officer of
Sunoco
GP LLC, in its capacity as the general partner
of
Sunoco LP, the sole member of Susser
Petroleum
Operating Company LLC
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
/s/ Leta McKinley
Leta McKinley
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial
Officer)
Vice President and Controller (Principal
Accounting Officer)
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
* By:
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
Attorney-in-Fact
Table of Contents
II-11
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the Registrant has duly caused this
Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized,
in the City of Dallas, State of Texas, on August 16, 2016.
ALOHA PETROLEUM LLC
SOUTHSIDE OIL, LLC
SUNOCO ENERGY SERVICES LLC
SUSSER PETROLEUM PROPERTY
COMPANY LLC
SUNOCO, LLC
MID-ATLANTIC CONVENIENCE
STORES, LLC
SUSSER HOLDINGS
CORPORATION
MACS RETAIL LLC
SUNOCO RETAIL LLC
STRIPES HOLDINGS LLC
SUSSER HOLDINGS, L.L.C.
By:     /s/ Thomas R. Miller
Name: Thomas R. Miller
 Title: Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Registration Statement has been
signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the date indicated:
Signature
Title
*
President and Chief Executive Officer
Robert W. Owens
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Chief Financial Officer
Thomas R. Miller
(Principal Financial Officer)
/s/ Leta McKinley
Leta McKinley
Vice President and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
II-12
Table of Contents
Signature
Title
*
Robert W. Owens
President and Chief Executive Officer
of Susser Petroleum Operating
Company LLC, the sole member of
each of Southside Oil, LLC, Sunoco
Energy Services LLC, Susser
Date
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
Date
August 16, 2016
Petroleum Property Company LLC,
Sunoco, LLC and Aloha Petroleum
LLC
President and Chief Executive Officer
of Susser Petroleum Property
Company LLC, the sole member of
Mid-Atlantic Convenience Stores LLC
and Sunoco Retail LLC
Director of Susser Holdings
Corporation
President and Chief Executive Officer
of Mid-Atlantic Convenience Stores,
LLC, the sole member of MACS
Retail LLC
Chief Executive Officer of Susser
Holdings Corporation, the sole
member of Stripes Holdings LLC
President and Chief Executive Officer
of Stripes Holdings LLC, the sole
  
member of Susser Holdings, L.L.C.
* By:
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
Attorney-in-Fact
Table of Contents
II-13
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the Registrant has duly caused this
Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized,
in the City of Dallas, State of Texas, on August 16, 2016.
ALOHA PETROLEUM, LTD.
By:       /s/ Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
Name:
 
 
Title:
Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this registration statement has been
signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the date indicated:
Date
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
Signature
Title
*
Richard M. Parry
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
/s/ Leta McKinley
Leta McKinley
President and Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
Chief Financial Officer (Principal Financial
Officer)
Vice President and Controller (Principal
Accounting Officer)
*
Chairman of the Board of Directors
Robert W. Owens
*
Director
Richard M. Parry
*
Director
Robert Bradley Williams
* By:
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
Attorney-in-Fact
II-14
Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act, the Registrant has duly caused this
Registration Statement to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized,
in the City of Dallas, State of Texas, on August 16, 2016.
STRIPES LLC
By:       /s/ Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
Name:
 
 
Title:
Chief Financial Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, this Registration Statement has been
signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the date indicated:
Date
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
August 16, 2016
Signature
*
Robert W. Owens
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Title
President and Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
  
Chief Financial Officer
Thomas R. Miller
(Principal Financial Officer)
/s/ Leta McKinley
Leta McKinley
Vice President and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
*
Manager
Jack Whitney
*
Manager
Robert Bradley Williams
* By:
/s/ Thomas R. Miller
Thomas R. Miller
Attorney-in-Fact
II-15
Table of Contents
Exhibit No.  
  2.1
2.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
INDEX TO EXHIBITS
Description
Contribution Agreement, dated as of March 23, 2015, by and among Sunoco,
LLC, ETP Retail Holdings, LLC, Sunoco LP and Energy Transfer Partners,
L.P.(1)
Contribution Agreement, dated as of July 14, 2015, by and among Susser
Holdings Corporation, Heritage Holdings, Inc., ETP Holdco Corporation,
Sunoco LP, Sunoco GP LLC and Energy Transfer Partners, L.P.(2)
Contribution Agreement, dated as of November 15, 2015, by and among
Sunoco, LLC, Sunoco, Inc., ETP Retail Holdings, LLC, Sunoco LP, Sunoco
GP LLC and, solely with respect to limited provisions therein, Energy Transfer
Partners, L.P.(3)
Amended and Restated Certificate of Limited Partnership of Sunoco LP, dated
June 6, 2016(4)
First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited Partnership of Susser
Petroleum Partners LP, dated September 25, 2012(5)
Amendment No. 1 to the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited
Partnership of Susser Petroleum Partners LP, dated October 27, 2014(6)
Amendment No. 2 to the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited
Partnership of Sunoco LP, dated July 31, 2015(7)
Amendment No. 3 to the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited
Partnership of Sunoco LP, dated January 1, 2016(8)
Amendment No. 4 to the First Amended and Restated Agreement of Limited
Partnership of Sunoco LP, dated June 6, 2016(4)
Indenture, dated as of April 1, 2015, by and among Sunoco LP, Sunoco
Finance Corp., the guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National
Association, as Trustee(9)
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 14, 2015, among
Sunoco LP, Sunoco Finance Corp., the guarantors party thereto and U.S.
Bank national Association, as Trustee+
Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 7, 2016, among Sunoco
LP, Sunoco Finance Corp., the guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank
national Association, as Trustee(10)
Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of April 1, 2015, among Sunoco LP,
Sunoco Finance Corp., the guarantors party thereto, ETP Retail Holdings,
LLC and Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, as representative
of the Initial Purchasers named therein(9)
Indenture, dated as of July 20, 2015, by and among Sunoco LP, Sunoco
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
Finance Corp., the guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank National
Association, as Trustee(11)
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 14, 2015, among
Sunoco LP, Sunoco Finance Corp., the guarantors party thereto and U.S.
Bank national Association, as Trustee+
Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 7, 2016, among Sunoco
LP, Sunoco Finance Corp., the guarantors party thereto and U.S. Bank
national Association, as Trustee(10)
Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of July 20, 2015, among Sunoco LP,
Sunoco Finance Corp., the guarantors party thereto and Credit Suisse
Securities (USA) LLC, as representative of the Initial Purchasers named
therein(11)
Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of December 3, 2015, by and among
Sunoco LP and the purchasers named on Schedule A thereto(12)
Indenture, dated as of April 7, 2016, by and among Sunoco LP, Sunoco
Finance Corp., the guarantors party thereto and U. S. Bank National
Association, as Trustee(10)
Table of Contents
Exhibit No.  
  4.11
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
Description
Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of April 7, 2016, by and among
Sunoco LP, Sunoco Finance Corp., the guarantors party thereto, ETP Retail
Holdings, LLC and Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC, as representatives of
the Initial Purchasers named therein(10)
Opinion of Latham & Watkins LLP+
Opinion of Cades Schutte LLP+
Opinion of Williams Mullen+
Opinion of Drinker Biddle & Reath LLP+
Omnibus Agreement, dated September 25, 2012, by and among Susser
Petroleum Partners LP, Susser Petroleum Partners GP LLC and Susser
Holdings Corporation(5)
Transportation Agreement, dated September 25, 2012, between Susser
Petroleum Operating Company LLC and Susser Petroleum Company LLC(5)
Fuel Distribution Agreement, dated September 25, 2012, by and among
Susser Petroleum Operating Company LLC, Susser Holdings Corporation,
Stripes LLC and Susser Petroleum Company LLC, dated September 25,
2012(5)
Credit Agreement, dated September 25, 2014, among Susser Petroleum
Partners LP, as the Borrower, the lenders from time to time party thereto and
Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent, Collateral Agent, Swingline
Lender and an LC Issuer(13)
First Amendment to Credit Agreement and Increase Agreement, dated April
10, 2015, by and among Sunoco LP, Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative
Agent, Collateral Agent, Swingline Lender and an LC Issuer, and the financial
institutions parties thereto(14)
Second Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated as of December 2, 2015, by
and among Sunoco LP, Bank of America, N.A. and the financial institutions
parties thereto as Lenders(12)
Third Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated as of August 1, 2016, by and
among Sunoco LP, Bank of America, N.A. and the financial institutions parties
thereto as Lenders(24)
Senior Secured Term Loan Agreement, entered into as of March 31, 2016, by
and among Sunoco LP, Credit Suisse AG Cayman Island Branch, as
Administrative Agent and other lenders party thereto(15)
Contribution Agreement, dated September 25, 2012, by and among Susser
Petroleum Partners LP, Susser Petroleum Partners GP LLC, Susser Holdings
Corporation, Susser Holdings, L.L.C., Stripes LLC and Susser Petroleum
Company LLC (5)
Contribution Agreement, dated as of September 25, 2014, by and among Mid-
Atlantic Convenience Stores, LLC, ETC M-A Acquisition LLC, Susser
Petroleum Partners LP and Energy Transfer Partners, L.P.(13)
Purchase and Sale Agreement, entered into as of September 25, 2014, by and
among Susser Petroleum Property Company LLC, Susser Petroleum Partners
LP and Henger BV Inc.(13)
Amendment No. 1, entered into as of December 16, 2014, to Purchase and
Sale Agreement, dated as of December 16, 2014, by and among Susser
Petroleum Property Company LLC, Susser Petroleum Partners LP and
Henger BV Inc.(16)
Susser Petroleum Partners LP 2012 Long-Term Incentive Plan, dated August
28, 2012(17)
First Amendment to Susser Petroleum Partners LP 2012 Long Term Incentive
Plan, dated November 4, 2014(18)
Form of Director Indemnification Agreement, dated March 14, 2014 (19)
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.15
Table of Contents
Exhibit No.  
10.16
10.17
10.18
Description
Non-Solicit / Non-Hire Agreement and Full Release of Claims by and between
Sunoco LP and its and their subsidiaries and affiliates and Claire P. McGrory
dated as of September 21, 2015(20)
Form of Phantom Unit Award Agreement, dated August 28, 2012(17)
Form of Restricted Phantom Unit Agreement, dated November 14, 2014(21)
Form of Lease Agreement (Stripes LLC), dated March 29, 2013(22)
Guarantee of Collection, made as of April 1, 2015, by ETP Retail Holdings,
LLC to Sunoco LP and Sunoco Finance Corp(10)
Support Agreement, made as of April 1, 2015, by and among Sunoco, Inc.
(R&M), Sunoco LP, Sunoco Finance Corp. and ETP Retail Holdings, LLC(10)
Support Agreement, made as of April 1, 2015, by and among Atlantic Refining
& Marketing Corp., Sunoco LP, Sunoco Finance Corp. and ETP Retail
Holdings, LLC(10)
Guarantee of Collection, made as of March 31, 2016, by ETP Retail Holdings,
LLC to Sunoco LP and Sunoco Finance Corp(23)
Support Agreement, made as of March 31, 2016, by and among Sunoco, Inc.
(R&M), Sunoco LP, Sunoco Finance Corp. and ETP Retail Holdings, LLC(23)
Support Agreement, made as of March 31, 2016, by and among Atlantic
Refining & Marketing Corp., Sunoco LP, Sunoco Finance Corp. and ETP
Retail Holdings, LLC(23)
Common Unit Purchase Agreement, dated as of November 15, 2015, by and
between Sunoco LP and Energy Transfer Equity, L.P.(3)
Common Unit Purchase Agreement, dated as of November 15, 2015 by and
among Sunoco LP and the Purchasers named therein(3)
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges of Sunoco LP*
Consent of Grant Thornton LLP, independent registered public accounting
firm*
Consent of Ernst and Young, independent registered public accounting firm*
Consent of Grant Thornton LLP, independent registered public accounting
firm*
Consent of Grant Thornton LLP, independent certified public accountants*
Consent of Grant Thornton LLP, independent certified public accountants*
Consent of Ernst & Young LLC, Independent Auditors*
Consent of Grant Thornton LLP, independent certified public accountants*
Consent of Latham & Watkins LLP (included in Exhibit 5.1)
Consent of Cades Schutte LLP (included in Exhibit 5.2)
Consent of Williams Mullen (included in Exhibit 5.3)
Consent of Drinker Biddle & Reath LLP (included in Exhibit 5.4)
Power of Attorney (included on signature pages)
Power of Attorney of Leta McKinley*
Statement of Eligibility and Qualification under the Trust Indenture Act of 1939
of the trustee under the indenture for the 5.500% Senior Notes due 2020+
10.19
10.20
10.21
10.22
10.23
10.24
10.25
10.26
10.27
12.1
23.1
23.2
23.3
23.4
23.5
23.6
23.7
23.8
23.9
23.10
23.11
24.1
24.2
25.1
* Filed herewith.
 + Previously filed.
(1) Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on March 23, 2015.
Table of Contents
(2) Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on July 15, 2015.
(3) Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on November 16, 2015.
(4) Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on June 8, 2016.
(5) Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
356531) filed on September 25, 2012.
(6) Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on October 28, 2014.
(7) Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on August 6, 2015.
(8) Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on January 5, 2016.
(9) Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on April 2, 2015.
(10)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on April 8, 2016.
(11)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on July 21, 2015.
(12)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on December 8, 2015.
(13)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K(File Number 001-
35653) filed on October 1, 2014.
(14)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on April 13, 2015.
(15)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on April 1, 2016.
(16)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on December 19, 2014.
(17)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s registration statement on Form S-1 (File Number
333-182276), as amended, originally filed on June 22, 2012.
(18)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2014 (File Number 001-35653) filed on February 27, 2015.
(19)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2013 (File Number 001-35653) filed on March 14, 2014.
(20)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s quarterly report on Form 10-Q (File Number 001-
35653) filed on November 6, 2015.
(21)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on November 14, 2014.
(22)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2012 (File Number 001-35653) filed on March 29, 2013.
(23)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on April 1, 2016.
(24)Incorporated by reference to Sunoco LP’s current report on Form 8-K (File Number 001-
35653) filed on August 3, 2016.